Spotlight
Synthetic biology for
Taxol biosynthesis and
sustainable production
Linfeng Xie
(解林峰)1,2,
Jiaoqi Gao
(高教琪)1,3,4, and
Yongjin J. Zhou
(周雍进)1,3,4,*
Incomplete understanding of the
biosynthetic pathway of the anti-
cancer compound Taxol hinders its
production by metabolic engineer-
ing. Recent reports by Jiang et al.
and other groups now describe the
missing steps in Taxol biosynthesis,
notably including oxetane ring for-
mation. These ﬁndings will promote
the sustainable production of Taxol
through synthetic biology.
Paclitaxel (the generic name of Taxol) is an
important natural secondary metabolite iso-
lated and puriﬁed from the bark of plants of
the genus Taxus. Paclitaxel and its analogs
are some of the most successful natural
anticancer drugs due to their low toxicity,
high potency, and broad-spectrum anti-
cancer activity [1]. Despite many clinical
successes, the most important problem
for expanded use of paclitaxel is the limited
availability of sufﬁcient quantities for
treatment due to the extremely low yields
from plants and the high cost of chemical
synthesis. An alternative method based
on a semi-synthetic approach uses 10-
deacetylbaccatin III isolated from Taxus
needles as a starting material for chemical
synthesis [2]. Plant cell cultures derived
from several Taxus species are also em-
ployed for commercial paclitaxel produc-
tion. However, the problems of supply
shortage and the high cost of production
cannot be ignored.
Synthetic biology and metabolic engineer-
ing have recently become attractive and
promising ways to synthesize valuable
products such as another anticancer drug,
vinblastine [3]. Nevertheless, elucidation of
the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway, a pre-
requisite for metabolic engineering, has
been a huge challenge for several decades.
Some crucial steps in paclitaxel biosynthe-
sis have remained unclear, even though nu-
merous omic resources are now available
for Taxus [4].
Four independent research groups recently
reported the missing steps in paclitaxel
biosynthesis, especially focusing on the
formation of the crucial oxetane ring
[2,5–7]. Previous studies demonstrated
that taxadiene 5α-hydroxylase (T5αH),
the ﬁrst cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme
in the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway, can
catalyze the formation of multiple oxidized
taxadiene products other than taxadiene-
5α-ol [8]. Zhao and colleagues recently re-
ported that this enzyme has weak cyclase
activity, leading to the oxetane structure.
They revealed that a T5αH enzyme,
CYP725A4, can catalyze two successive
epoxidation events, leading to the formation
of the oxetane ring before acetylation of
taxadiene-5α-ol (Figure 1A) [5]. Zhang and
coworkers discovered an epoxidase, 2-
oxoglutarate/Fe(II)-dependent dioxygenase,
that may catalyze the epoxidation of the
carbon-4 (C4) and C20 double bonds
(Figure 1A). It catalyzed the conversion of
taxusin to taxusin-4β,20-epoxide in vitro,
but there was no direct evidence that it is
involved in the cyclization of oxidized
taxadiene in vivo [6]. Encouragingly, Jiang
and colleagues discovered a bifunctional
P450 enzyme, taxane oxetanase 1 (TOT1).
They demonstrated that TOT1 predomi-
nantly catalyzes oxidative rearrangement
of the C4 and C20 double bonds to
form an oxetane ring directly, whereas paral-
lel epoxidation is not part of this pathway
and
does
not
generate
an
essential
intermediate, which represents a previously
unknown enzymatic mechanism for oxetane
ring formation (Figure 1A) [2]. This mecha-
nism was conﬁrmed by identifying another
P450 enzyme, CYP725A55, which cata-
lyzes oxetane ester formation via the same
oxidative rearrangement mechanism as
TOT1 [7]. In addition, both Zhang et al.
and Jiang et al. uncovered the enzymes
(T9αOH and T9αH1) responsible for taxane
C9 hydroxylation, and Zhang and col-
leagues further identiﬁed the missing T9α
oxidase that catalyzes C9 oxidation [2,6].
At this point, only the C1 hydroxylation en-
zyme taxane 1β-hydroxylase (T1βH) remains
undiscovered in paclitaxel biosynthesis.
Because of the functional promiscuity of
CYPs, it is possible that the C1 hydroxyl-
ation activity could be fulﬁlled by other
known hydroxylases. Therefore, these en-
deavors taken together may enable the
heterologous reconstitution of the whole
paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway.
Zhang et al. and Jiang et al. propose that
two gene clusters are involved in the bio-
synthesis of the key intermediate baccatin
III from taxadiene; both of these were tran-
siently expressed in Nicotiana benthamiana
(a close relative of tobacco), generating
baccatin III. These two gene clusters have
13 and nine genes, respectively, and the
latter represents a minimal pathway to the
key intermediate baccatin III [2,6]. Moreover,
Zhang and coworkers also successfully re-
constructed a downstream pathway in pac-
litaxel biosynthesis to convert baccatin III into
paclitaxel in N. benthamiana [6]. All these ef-
forts promise the efﬁcient biomanufacturing
of paclitaxel through synthetic biology.
Several metabolic engineering strategies
have already been used to produce the
intermediates and precursors of paclitaxel
biosynthesis in heterologous expression
systems (Figure 1B). The excellent micro-
bial host Escherichia coli gave the highest
recorded concentration of oxygenated
taxane, 570 mg/l, by optimizing P450
expression, N-terminal modiﬁcation, and
reductase chaperone interaction [9]. How-
ever, P450s often lose their function due
to incorrect folding and incorporation into
the cell membrane, and there are still
674
Trends in Biotechnology, June 2024, Vol. 42, No. 6
Trends in
Biotechnology
