limitations in the assembly of multi-gene
pathways such as the paclitaxel biosyn-
thetic pathway in E. coli.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a model
yeast host, produces a functional type II
P450 with an intact intracellular membrane
system that ensures the coexpression of
hydroxylase genes associated with pacli-
taxel biosynthesis [10]. There have been
several reports of the production of inter-
mediates including taxadiene, taxadiene-
5α-ol, and taxadiene-5α-ol acetate. The
longest paclitaxel pathway assembled in
S. cerevisiae so far [taxadiene synthase
(TS)–T5αH/cytochrome P450 reductase
(CPR)–taxadiene-5α-ol O-acetyltransferase
(TAT)–T10βH] enabled the production of
33 mg/l of oxygenated taxanes, including
taxadiene-5α-ol acetate and taxadiene-5α-
acetate-10β-ol [11].
Plant systems for the synthesis of plant-
derived natural products have some advan-
tages, such as functional expression and
precise spatial organization of the key
enzymes, in addition to their photosynthetic
capacity. Taxadiene and taxadiene-5α-
ol have been obtained from engineered
Arabidopsis thaliana, N. benthamiana,
Solanum lycopersicum, and Artemisia
annua. As described above, two long
pathways were reconstructed in tobacco
by transient expression to produce the key
intermediate baccatin III [2,6]. However,
compared to microbial systems, plant
systems are still limited in terms of culture
conditions, difﬁculty of genetic manipula-
tion, and mass cultivation.
Equally notably, some endophytic fungi can
produce paclitaxel, although their produc-
tion yield is often low. To date, more than
20 genera of endophytic fungi have been
identiﬁed in association with both Taxus
species and non-Taxus species such as
sycamore and ginkgo. The sequences of
the paclitaxel-producing fungal genes are
90% identical to the corresponding Taxus
plant genes, possibly because of horizontal
gene transfer or coevolution [12]. They may
have an independent paclitaxel biosynthetic
pathway, but until now genes associated
with paclitaxel pathway have not been
extensively studied in endophytic fungi.
Nevertheless, endophytic fungi might be a
new promising platform for the large-scale
production of paclitaxel via the develop-
ment of synthetic biology tools.
In summary, complete de novo biosynthesis
of paclitaxel in heterologous systems is a
goal worth striving for because some typical
precursors such as taxadiene and even
baccatin III have already been synthesized.
Despite some controversies regarding the
speciﬁc catalytic order and substrate pro-
miscuities of the enzymes, recent milestone
studies will greatly promote the design and
construction of microbial or plant factories
for the sustainable production of paclitaxel.
We expect these strategies to replace the
current semi-synthetic approach and meet
the demand for paclitaxel drugs on the inter-
national market.
Acknowledgments
This study was ﬁnancially supported by Key Project at
central government level: The Ability Establishment
of Sustainable Use for Valuable Chinese Medicine
Resources (2060302) and Liaoning Distinguished
Scholars (2023JH6/100500001).
Declaration of interests
The authors declare no conﬂicts of interests.
1Division of Biotechnology, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 457 Zhongshan Road, Dalian
116023, PR China
2University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100049, PR China
3CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Science for Analytical
Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, PR China
4Dalian Key Laboratory of Energy Biotechnology, Dalian Institute
of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 457
Zhongshan Road, Dalian 116023, PR China
*Correspondence:
zhouyongjin@dicp.ac.cn (Y.J. Zhou).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2024.04.001
© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
References
1. Wani, C.M. et al. (1971) Plant antitumor agents. VI.
Isolation and structure of taxol, a novel antileukemic and
antitumor agent from Taxus brevifolia. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
93, 2325–2327
GGPP
Taxadiene
Baccatin III
Paclitaxel
Taxadiene
hexa-acetate
4-Hydroxy-5,20-
expoxy-taxane
Baccatin I
1-Dehydro-
xybaccatin I
Endotaxadiene
Exotaxadiene
T5 H
epoxidase
T5 H
TOT1
Paclitaxel
Yeast
Bacteria
Endophytic
fungi
Plant
systems
Taxus brevifolia
4-Hydroxy-5,20-
expoxy-taxane
Endotaxadiene
Exotaxadiene
(A)
(B)
T1 H
TOT1
Trends
Trends in
in Biotechnology
Biotechnology
Figure 1. Elucidation of the Taxol (paclitaxel) biosynthetic pathway and Taxol production
in heterologous systems via synthetic biology approaches. (A) Taxol biosynthetic pathway and
mechanism of oxetane ring formation from three recent proposals described in [5] (left), [2,7] (middle), and [6]
(right). (B) Synthetic biology for Taxol biosynthesis and sustainable production. Various metabolic engineering
strategies for Taxol precursor biosynthesis have been implemented in heterologous expression systems such
as Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, some plants, and endophytic fungi. Abbreviations: GGPP,
geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate; T1βH, taxane 1β-hydroxylase; T5αH, taxadiene 5α-hydroxylase; TOT1, taxane
oxetanase 1.
Trends in Biotechnology
Trends in Biotechnology, June 2024, Vol. 42, No. 6
675
