
[PDF physical page 1]
         © Copyright 2005 by the American Chemical Society          Volume 44, Number 17            May 3, 2005




        Current Topics
        articles.               Structural and Catalytic Diversity within the Amidohydrolase Superfamily†
                                                Clara M. Seibert and Frank M. Raushel*(UTC).published
                       Department of Chemistry, P.O. Box 30012, Texas A&M UniVersity, College Station, Texas 77842-3012
    share02:29:07                                    ReceiVed December 20, 2004; ReVised Manuscript ReceiVed March 16, 2005
at
202518,legitimately  to             ABSTRACT: The amidohydrolase superfamily comprises a remarkable set of enzymes that catalyze the
Marchhow               hydrolysis of a wide range of substrates bearing amide or ester functional groups at carbon and phosphorus
onon                centers. The most salient structural landmark for this family of hydrolytic enzymes is a mononuclear or
                   binuclear metal center embedded within the confines of a (â/R)8-barrel structural fold. Seven variations
                     in the identity of the specific amino acids that function as the direct metal ligands have been structurallyCHINAoptions                    characterized by X-ray crystallography. The metal center in this enzyme superfamily has a dual functionality
OFfor                in the expression of the overall catalytic activity. The scissile bond of the substrate must be activated for
UNIV              bond cleavage, and the hydrolytic water molecule must be deprotonated for nucleophilic attack. In all                    cases, the nucleophilic water molecule is activated through complexation with a mononuclear or binuclear
OCEAN                metalpolarizedcenter.throughIn theLewisbinuclearacid catalysismetal centers,via complexationthe carbonylwithandthephosphorylâ-metal ion,groupswhile ofthethehydrolyticsubstrateswaterare
via               molecule is activated for nucleophilic attack by interaction with the R-metal ion. In the mononuclear
                  metal centers, the substrate is activated by proton transfer from the active site, and the water is activated
                by metal ligation and general base catalysis. The substrate diversity is dictated by the conformational
                      restrictions imposed by the eight loops that extend from the ends of the eight â-strands.Downloaded                                https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines
   See      A comprehensive understanding of the intimate relation-      global protein folds of urease (URE),1 phosphotriesterase
             ship between protein structure and enzymatic activity is an     (PTE), and adenosine deaminase (ADA) (1). The most salient
            unsolved problem that is essential for deciphering substrate      structural landmark for this family of predominantly hydro-
              specificity for proteins of unknown function and the creation       lytic enzymes is a mononuclear or binuclear metal center
             of novel catalytic activities from existing active site tem-     embedded within the confines of a protein possessing a (â/
               plates. The amidohydrolase superfamily of enzymes is a well-      R)8-barrel structural fold. The metal center in this enzyme
           documented example for the divergence of protein architec-     superfamily has a dual functionality in the expression of the
              ture and the associated catalytic transformations that can arise      overall catalytic activity. The scissile bond of the substrate
           from a common ancestral precursor. Holm and Sander first     must be activated for bond cleavage, and the hydrolytic water
                                                                     molecule must be enhanced for nucleophilic attack. Since              identified the amidohydrolase superfamily from the three-
            dimensional structural similarities within the active sites and
                                                                                                                       1 Abreviations: PTE, phosphotriesterase; ADA, adenosine deami-
                                                                                             nase; CDA, cytosine deaminase; AGD, acetyl glucosamine-6-phosphate
                       † This work was supported in part by the NIH: GM 33894 and GM       deacetylase; URE, urease; PHP, phosphotriesterase homology protein;
              71790.                                               DHO, dihydroorotase; IAD, isoaspartyl dipeptidase; D-HYD, D-hydan-
               * To whom correspondence should be addressed: e-mail: raushel@       toinase; L-HYD, L-hydantoinase; RDP, renal dipeptidase; URI, uronate
              tamu.edu; fax: (979) 845-9452; phone: (979) 845-3373.                  isomerase; DAA, D-amino acid deacetylase.
                                      10.1021/bi047326v CCC: $30.25  © 2005 American Chemical Society
                                                           Published on Web 04/09/2005


[PDF physical page 2]
6384  Biochemistry, Vol. 44, No. 17, 2005                                                             Current Topics
the initial discovery of the amidohydrolase superfamily in     Scheme 1
1997, the number of documented members within  this
enzyme group now exceeds 1000.
  There are currently 16 unique members of the amidohy-
drolase superfamily for which high-resolution X-ray crystal
structures are available.2 The detailed protein structures,
coupled in some cases with an elucidation of the catalytic
reaction mechanisms, have significantly enhanced our knowl-
edge of the range of catalytic and structural diversity within
this enzyme superfamily. This group of enzymes catalyzes
reactions involving amino acids, sugars, nucleic acids, and
organophosphate esters. In this assessment of the amidohy-
drolase superfamily, the structural and mechanistic diversity
within the active site will be described and correlated with
the subsequent evolution of  the  reaction and  substrate
specificity.

CHEMICAL REACTIONS

  Of the 16 nonredundant protein structures that have been
deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) for members of
the amidohydrolase superfamily, there are three enzymes for
which the chemical reactions have not, as yet, been charac-
terized. One of these enzymes, the PTE homology protein
(PHP) from Escherichia coli, is most structurally similar to
PTE, but it does not catalyze the hydrolysis of organophos-
phate triesters (2). The catalytic reactions for two other
proteins from Thermotoga maritima, solved by the efforts
of the Joint Center for Structural Genomics, also have not
been identified. However, based on current sequence align-
ments, the protein Tm0667 (PDB entry 1j6o) may function
to hydrolyze nucleic acids, while protein Tm0936 (PDB entry
1j6p) likely catalyzes a hydrolytic substitution within a
heteroaromatic base. The remaining structurally characterized
members of the amidohydrolase superfamily catalyze hy-
drolytic reactions with the single exception of uronate
isomerase (URI), which catalyzes an aldose/ketose isomer-
ization reaction between D-glucuronate and D-fructuronate
(3). PTE catalyzes the hydrolysis of a phosphorus-oxygen
bond within an organophosphate triester (4, 5). The rest of
the structurally characterized proteins catalyze the cleavage
of C-N bonds. Seven of these examples catalyze the hydro-
lysis of amide bonds: urease (URE) (6, 7), dihydroorotase
(DHO) (8), iso-aspartyl dipeptidase (IAD) (9), the various
hydantoinases, D-HYD (10, 11) and L-HYD (12), renal    DIVALENT METAL CENTER
dipeptidase (RDP) (13), N-acetyl glucosamine-6-phosphate
deacetylase (AGD) (14) and D-amino acid deacetylase (DAA)       There are seven structurally characterized variations of the
(15). Two other proteins, adenosine deaminase (ADA) (16)      divalent metal centers within the amidohydrolase superfamily
and cytosine deaminase (CDA) (17), catalyze the elimination     (Table 1). The prototypical and most common metal center,
of ammonia from aromatic bases. There are three separate     subtype I, is the form of the binuclear metal center found in
entries for HYD that catalyze the cleavage of hydantoins     PTE, DHO, IAD, URE, and the three versions of HYD. In
with alternative stereochemical and structural constraints. The       all seven proteins, the two divalent cations are separated by
chemical diversity for substrates recognized by the ami-     approximately 3.6 Å and are ligated to the protein through
dohydrolase superfamily is illustrated in Scheme 1.              electrostatic interactions with the side chains of six amino
                                                                     acids. The more buried metal ion, MR, is coordinated to two
   2                                                                  histidine residues from strand 1 of the â-barrel and an    Protein Data Bank structures referenced: PHP, 1bf6 (2); URI, 1j5s
(3); PTE: 1hzy (4) and 1ez2 (5); URE, 2ubp (6) and 2kau (7); DHO:      aspartate from strand 8. The more solvent-exposed metal ion,
1j79 (8); IAD, 1onw and 1onx (9); D-HYD, 1gkp (10) and 1k1d (11);     Mâ, is ligated to two imidazole side chains of histidine from
L-HYD, 1gkr (12), RDP:  1itq and 1itu (13); AGD, 1o12 and 1un7      strands 5 and 6. The two divalent cations are bridged by a(14), DAA: 1m7j (15); ADA: 1a4m (16), CDA, 1k6w and 1k70 (17);
tatD-related deoxyribonuclease, 1j6o; metal-dependent hydrolase of     hydroxide in addition to a carbamate functional group that
cytosine deaminase/chlorohydrolase family, 1j6p.                        originates from the posttranslational modification of a lysine


[PDF physical page 3]
Current Topics                                                               Biochemistry, Vol. 44, No. 17, 2005  6385
                                                           molecules  is  further hydrogen bonded  to  the  invariantTable 1: Variations of the Metal Ligands to the Mononuclear and
Binuclear Metal Centers in the Amidohydrolase Superfamily              aspartate residue from strand 8 and the second histidine from
                                                                 strand 1. The AGD from T. maritima has all of the metal                                               strand
                                                                ligands found in the PTE subgroup except for the bridging
 subtype   metals   positions    1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8                                                              carboxylate from strand 4. From the X-ray crystal structure,
   I       Zn, Ni     R, â   HxH       K  H  H    D          it appears that the two histidines from strand 1 do not
   II     Zn        R, â   HxH        E  H  H    D                                                                  contribute to metal binding. In addition, Glu-115 from strand   III     Zn, Fe   R     HxH         H   hb    D
  IV     Fe       â       hxha     E    H  H       db     3 appears to be positioned as a potential bridging carboxylate.
 V     Zn      â       hxha  C       H  H       db      This suggests that the T. maritima enzyme may be able to
  VI    Zn        R, â   HxD     E    H  H       db      bind two metal ions under the proper conditions. This
  VII                HxH         H       D                                                             conclusion is supported by the observation that the AGD
   a These residues are in the active site but do not appear to be ligated     homologue from B. subtilis also has a bridging carboxylate
directly to the divalent cation. The specific function of these residues     from strand 3 and does have two metals in the X-ray crystalis uncertain and in some cases a second metal can be accommodated
in the site, but the second metal ion is apparently not required for      structure (14). However, in the AGD homologue from E.
catalytic activity. b These residues are not ligated directly to one of       coli, the two conserved histidine residues from strand 1 have
two divalent cations but are hydrogen bonded to the hydrolytic water     been replaced with glutamine and asparagine (gi: 16128653),
molecule.                                                        residues that are not commonly found to ligate metals,
                                                              suggesting that the enzyme can indeed function with only a
residue from strand 4. The binuclear metal centers can self-      single metal ion at the Mâ site. The ligation geometry for
assemble in the presence of bicarbonate (18), but  it  is      the AGD metal center from T. maritima is presented in
uncertain whether there are other accessory proteins that      Figure 1D.
catalyze the assembly process in the cell other than with      The metal center within the active  site of the other
urease (19).                                                      deacetylase, DAA, is from subtype V and also functions with
  Virtually the same structural motif is observed in subtype     a single divalent cation at the Mâ-position. An additional
II except the carboxylated lysine residue is replaced with a     metal  ion can be  forced  into  the  active  site  at high
glutamate from strand 4. The only member of this particular      concentrations (15, 22). However, the second metal ion is
subtype for which there is a structure is the PTE homology      not critical for catalytic activity. Like E. coli AGD, this active
protein (PHP) from E. coli. In PHP, an alanine residue has       site contains all of the protein ligands found in the PTE
been inserted into the amino acid sequence immediately prior     subgroup, except the bridging carboxylate from strand 4. The
to the bridging glutamate residue. This insertion functions      tightly bound metal ion is ligated to the two histidines from
to push the glutamate forward, so the side chain carboxylate      strands 5 and 6 in addition to a cysteine from strand 2. Thus
can occupy the same relative position as the carbamate group       far, this is the only structurally characterized example from
from the carboxylated lysine of the PTE subgroup. Repre-       this superfamily that utilizes a cysteine as a direct metal
sentations of these two binuclear metal centers are found in      ligand and the only protein that uses a structural or catalytic
Figure 1A,B.                                                   residue from strand 2. The aspartate from strand 8 is poised
  The divalent cation centers of subtype  III, found  in      to serve as an acid/base catalyst in activation of the hydrolytic
adenosine deaminase and cytosine deaminase, have only a     water molecule. The structure of the divalent cation site in
single metal ion in the active site. In these two proteins, the   DAA is illustrated in Figure 1E.
lone metal ion occupies the same physical location as MR in      The renal dipeptidase from humans is apparently the most
the PTE subgroup, and the side chain ligand from â-strand      distantly related member of the amidohydrolase superfamily
4 that would normally bridge the two metal ions is missing.      for which there is a three-dimensional structure (13). There
The conserved histidine residue from strand 5 is rotated into      are two particularly interesting aspects of the renal dipep-
the space normally occupied by the bridging side chain of      tidase structure. The protein binds 2 equiv of zinc, but the
subtypes I and II and is ligated directly to MR. The conserved      bridging ligand is a glutamate rather than a carboxylated
histidine residue from strand 6 is not ligated to any metal      lysine residue and originates from strand 3 rather than from
ion but appears to function in catalysis as a general base      strand 4. This feature is reminiscent of what is observed in
during proton abstraction from the water molecule that is     subtype IV with AGD. In addition, the second histidine
directly coordinated to the single metal ion at position MR.      residue from the HxH motif within strand 1 is substituted
It is curious to note that while ADA and CDA catalyze very     with an aspartic acid residue. In this structure one of the δ
similar chemical reactions, ADA is a Zn-dependent enzyme     oxygens from the aspartic acid replaces the ϵ2 nitrogen of
(20), while CDA apparently requires ferrous iron for catalytic      the second histidine. The other δ oxygen apparently replaces
activity (21). A representative example of this type of metal      the coordination  function  of  the  aspartate  that  usually
center is shown in Figure 1C.                                   coordinates MR from strand 8. The highly conserved aspartate
  Subtype IV is exemplified by AGD (T. maritima) which,     from strand 8 is present; however, its function, as deduced
like CDA, has a mononuclear iron center embedded within     from the X-ray structure, appears to be formation of a
the active site. However, the metal ion occupies the Mâ site     hydrogen bond with the hydrolytic water rather than to ligate
rather than the MR site. The iron is directly coordinated to     MR. In addition to these residues, there is a histidine from
the side chains from three amino acids originating from the      strand 4 that has been proposed to function in the stabilization
â-barrel. Two of these side chains are from the histidines in      of the tetrahedral intermediate.  It thus appears that the
strands 5 and 6. The third protein ligand is an uncommon      catalytic reaction mechanism of the renal dipeptidase may
glutamate from strand 3 rather than strand 4. Also bound to     be somewhat different from the proposed chemical mecha-
this metal ion are two water molecules. One of these water     nisms of the other amidohydrolases. The structure of the


[PDF physical page 4]
6386  Biochemistry, Vol. 44, No. 17, 2005                                                             Current Topics





FIGURE 1: Comparison of six variations for the binding of one or two divalent cations to the active site of enzymes within the amidohydrolase
superfamily. (A) Subtype I (PTE, from PDB file: 1hzy); (B) subtype II (PHP, from PDB file: 1bf6); (C) subtype III (ADA, from PDB file:
1a4m); (D) subtype IV (AGD, from PDB file: 1o12); (E) subtype V (DAA, from PDB file: 1m7j); (F) subtype VI (RDP, from PDB file:
1itq). The ligands are annotated according to the specific strand within the â-barrel from which they originate. The metal ions are depicted
as blue spheres. The figures were drawn using WebLab Viewer Pro.

divalent metal center in the renal dipeptidase is illustrated
in Figure 1F.
  The final variant of divalent cation centers, subtype VII,
is represented by uronate isomerase (URI) and is not fully
characterized (3). The initial structure was solved in the
absence of added metal ions, although there  is density
consistent with either a metal ion or a water molecule in the
active site. It is known from a comparison of the holo- and
apo-enzymes within this family of enzymes that there can
be large structural changes in the active site in the absence
of divalent cations, which can make it difficult to identify
the residues that directly coordinate the metals (23). Nev-
ertheless, structural alignments demonstrate that URI has the
commonly conserved HxH motif from strand 1, a histidine
from strand 5, and an aspartate from strand 8. This is the
only structurally characterized amidohydrolase member that
does not have a histidine at the end of strand 6. However,                                                              FIGURE 2:  Overlay of the metal center for selected members of
there are a number of amino acid residues that are found at       the amidohydrolase superfamily. The individual metal centers are
the ends of the remaining strands that could function as either      color coded according to the following format: PTE, from PDB
direct metal ligands or catalytic side chains.                             file: 1hzy (light green); PHP, from PDB file: 1bf6 (yellow); ADA,
 A superposition of the six subtypes of structurally char-     from PDB file: 1a4m (dark blue); AGD, from PDB file: 1o12
                                                                                 (light blue); DAA, from PDB file: 1m7j (red); and RDP, fromacterized divalent cation centers is presented in Figure 2.                                             PDB file: 1itq (dark green).
This figure graphically illustrates the apparent plasticity of
the protein architecture for changes in the number of bound                                                                                is noteworthy. The RMS deviation for these atoms span from
divalent cations and the introduction of direct metal ligands                                                                 0.2 to 0.6 Å between pairs of structures, despite the numerous
or acid/base catalysts from nearly every strand within the                                                                    substitutions and sequence rearrangements.
(â/R)8-barrel. A majority of the systems identified thus far
operate as binuclear metal centers, but it is clear that simpler                                      SECONDARY METAL LIGANDS
variations have evolved that function quite well with a single
divalent cation. For proteins that bind two divalent cations       The secondary metal ligands, those residues that hydrogen
the bridging protein ligand is predominantly a posttransla-     bond or ion pair with the direct metal ligands, are quite
tionally modified lysine residue from strand 4 or less often      variable among  those members  of  the amidohydrolase
a glutamate from strand 3 or 4. Direct metal ligands are con-     superfamily for which crystal structures are available. This
tributed by the side chains of aspartate, glutamate, histidine,       is particularly true for the multiple examples that possess
and cysteine. The histidine residue from strand 5 is, however,      the binuclear metal center of subtype I. For example, His-
the only metal ligand that has been retained in all of the     254 from the end of strand 7 in PTE hydrogen bonds with
structurally characterized metal centers. The conservation in      the direct metal ligand, Asp-301 from strand 8 (4). None of
the position of the atoms that directly ligate the metal ions      the other structures of subtype I show this interaction, but


[PDF physical page 5]
Current Topics                                                               Biochemistry, Vol. 44, No. 17, 2005  6387





FIGURE 3: Primary and secondary metal ligands in PTE (A) and DHO (B). In PTE His-254 is hydrogen bonded with Asp-301 from strand
8, and Ser-102 is hydrogen bonded to His-57 from strand 1 (taken from PDB file: 1hzy). In DHO Asn-44 is hydrogen bonded to His-18
from strand 1, and Tyr-104 is hydrogen bonded to the carboxylated Lys-102 from strand 4. Glu-141 and Glu-176 are hydrogen bonded to
His-139 and His-16, respectively (taken from PDB file: 1j79).
this cluster of amino acids has been proposed to facilitate
the shuttling of protons away from the active site of PTE
during substrate turnover (24). The second histidine within
the HxH motif from PTE interacts with Ser-102, which is
positioned just after the end of strand 2. PHP, DHO, and
RDP have similar contacts with other residues found in the
loop that follows strand 2, while the other structurally
characterized members of the amidohydrolase superfamily
do not exhibit such interactions. The aspartic acid in the HxD
motif from strand 1 of RDP has an additional interaction
with the invariant aspartic acid from strand 8. The highly
conserved aspartic acid residue from strand 8 is usually a
direct metal ligand to MR in all of the other structures, but
in RDP this aspartic acid hydrogen bonds only with the
bridging hydroxide (13).                                      FIGURE 4: Overlay of the eight â-strands for PTE, from PDB file:
  The carboxylated lysine of PTE does not hydrogen bond     1hzy (bright green); DHO, from PDB file: 1j79 (red); and IAD,
with any other residues. However, in some of the other     from PDB file: 1onw (purple).
structures the residues that bridge the two divalent cations
                                                               of the secondary metal interactions in DHO and PTE isalso interact with the side chains of other amino acids within
                                                              presented in Figure 3.the active site. For example, in DHO the carboxylated Lys-
102 is hydrogen bonded to Tyr-104 (8) but in URE the                                       BETA BARRELcarboxylated lysine is hydrogen bonded to Thr-172 (6). The
histidine from strand 5 has no other contacts in PTE.      The â-barrel core within the amidohydrolase superfamily
However, the homologous residues in PHP, DHO, and all       is formed from the interaction of 8 â-strands in a manner
three of the hydantoinases make contact with a serine or      similar to other proteins previously identified as (âR)8-barrel
glutamate residue that is two residue positions removed from      proteins (1). The main chain atoms of these eight strands
the  direct metal  ligand from  the same  â-strand. The      overlay very well among the structures of the amidohydrolase
conserved histidine from strand 5 has other, less conserved,      superfamily members determined thus far. A superposition
contacts in URE, ADA, and RDP. The histidine from strand      of the CR atoms for the â-barrels gives an RMSD ) 1.5 (
6 of PTE interacts with no other amino acids in the active      0.3 Å. Occasionally there is a deletion or insertion in a strand
site other than with Mâ. However, in ADA this residue      that causes a single residue interruption of the secondary
interacts with Tyr-240 from strand 6. In PHP and DAA, the      structure. On the C-terminal side of the â-barrel the metal
conserved histidine from strand 6 interacts with Asp-209 at     binding residues that form the core of the mononuclear and
the end of strand 7 and Glu-224 from loop 5. The highly      binuclear metal centers deviate somewhat from one another.
conserved aspartic acid from strand 8 has no interactions     The structural overlay presented in Figure 4 was constructed
beyond the first histidine of the HxH motif and the catalytic     by aligning the â-strands only. There  is scant sequence
hydroxide. The specific functions of these secondary interac-      conservation in the â-strands prior to the metal binding
tions in the structure and function of the amidohydrolase      residues with the single exception of the amino acid that is
superfamily have  not, as  yet, been ascertained via the     two residue positions before the first histidine in the HxH
characterization of mutant enzymes. The significant vari-      motif from strand 1. This residue is often an aspartate or
ability of the secondary metal ligands suggests that the     glutamate and anchors the backbone of the first histidine.
primary  role  of  these  interactions  is  in  the  structural     However, PTE and PHP do not have this structural feature.
maintenance of the active site rather than modulation of the        It  is interesting to note that the metal ligands and the
electrostatic environment for the metal center. A comparison      R-helices superimpose remarkably well when the â-strands


[PDF physical page 6]
6388  Biochemistry, Vol. 44, No. 17, 2005                                                             Current Topics





FIGURE 5: The conformational diversity among the loops that follow the eight â-strands within the â-barrels the amidohydrolases. The loop
colors are coded as 1, red; 2, purple; 3, dark green; 4, bright blue; 5, orange; 6, dark blue; 7, pink; and 8, bright green. The identity of the
enzymes are ADA, from PDB file: 1a4m (A); DAA, from PDB file: 1m7j (B); DHO, from PDB file: 1j79 (C); IAD, from PDB file:
1onw (D); PTE, from PDB file: 1hzy (E); and URI, from PDB file: 1j5s (F).

are used to create the superpositions. The positional conser-      for entry into their active sites. Loop 1 has direct contact
vation of the metal ligands to one another may reflect the     with substrate analogues in both ADA and CDA. In ADA it
high evolutionary barrier that would have to be overcome     appears that Trp-117 or the mobile loop after strand 2
to simultaneously rearrange the positions of the metal ligands.      containing Trp-117 acts as a gatekeeper for entry into the
                                                                  active site. The restricted access to the active site suggests
LOOPS AND ACTIVE SITES                                   that the catalytic interconversion between substrate and
                                                            product is sequestered from the bulk solvent. In IAD, loops  In a manner reminiscent of the hypervariable regions in                                            1-4 have direct contact with the product, aspartate. Inantibodies, the eight loops that are found immediately after                                                                   addition, the binding site for IAD appears to be accessiblethe residues that bind the divalent cations vary immensely                                                           only from the side and not from the top as viewed from thein sequence, length, and conformation despite the strong                                                                    â-barrel, unlike most of the other proteins (9). However, instructural conservation of the preceding â-strands and the
                                                                 the absence of aspartate, the residues covering the active siteR-helices that follow. The conformational diversity of the
                                                                 are highly mobile and probably do not block the entry ofloops, starting with the residues immediately following the
                                                                   dipeptides. The temperature factors for the loop that coversend of the â-strands and ending in a common region at or
                                                                 the active site are very high, even in the presence of thenear the N-termini of the R-helices is shown in Figure 5.
                                                                product, aspartate. In the crystal structure of DHO theAll of these loops show substantial variability in length.
                                                                 product, dihydroorotate, is found bound to one subunit, whileUronate isomerase has several loops (1, 3, and 4) that are
                                                                 the substrate, carbamoyl aspartate, is bound to the adjacentmuch longer than the typical loops found in the other
                                                               subunit within the same dimeric complex (8). The biggeststructures (3). Loop 1 of URI comprises 102 residues and
                                                                 difference in the conformational geometry between the twocontains six helices that form a distinct subdomain. The first
                                                               subunits is found in loop 4. The changes in the orientationloops of both ADA (16) and CDA (17) are also somewhat
large (72 residues forming four helices and 47 residues      of loop 4 may mediate the catalytic interconversion between
forming two helices, respectively). The loops do not fold      substrate and product in this enzyme. The positioning of a
back on the active site to contact substrates, products, or      substrate analogue at the top of the â-barrel in PTE  is
inhibitors. In the structurally characterized members of the      presented in Figure 6.
amidohydrolase superfamily only 18 of the 64 loops contact      Many of the proteins make contact with the substrates
the substrate, product, or inhibitor in the structures that     through loops 6, 7, and 8. In RDP, loop 6 makes contact
contain small molecules bound within the active site. In     with a substrate analogue (13). Loop 7 has contact with
general, loops 7 and 8 are most often involved in contacting     bound small molecule ligands  in PTE, URE  (Bacillus
the ligands in the active site.                                       pasteurii), DHO and RDP. Loop 8 interacts with substrate
  Access to the active sites in some of these enzymes     analogues in PTE, URE (B. pasteurii), CDA, IAD, and RDP.
requires conformational changes. For example, both ADA     There is a large change in the position of loop 7 in URE (B.
and CDA have relatively large substrates but small channels      pasteurii) when inhibitor is bound. The binding site for DAA


[PDF physical page 7]
Current Topics                                                               Biochemistry, Vol. 44, No. 17, 2005  6389

                                                     Scheme 2





                                                           with the â-metal ion. This interaction serves to polarize the
                                                       amide bond and make the carbonyl carbon more electrophilic.
                                                   The bridging hydroxide is poised for nucleophilic attack at
                                                                 the re-face of the carbonyl group. In addition, the aspartate
                                                      from strand 8 is hydrogen bonded to the bridging hydroxide
                                                       and is positioned to function as a proton shuttle between
                                                                   substrate and product. In the enzyme complex with carbam-
                                                              oyl aspartate the newly formed carboxylate group is found
FIGURE 6:  Orientation of a substrate analogue directly above the      as a bridge between the two divalent cations. This result
binuclear metal center of PTE. The eight â-strands are shown in     demonstrates that the water of hydrolysis originated with the
bright green (from PDB file: 1ez2). The two metal ions are shown      bridging hydroxide. During the cleavage of dihydroorotate
as blue spheres and the metal ligands are illustrated in a stick format.                                                                 the nitrogen of the amide bond must be protonated. The only
                                                                residue that is positioned in a manner that can serve this
appears to be collapsed in the crystal structure (15). There                                                               function is the carboxylate from the invariant aspartate from
is, however, a very narrow bent channel that leads from the                                                                 strand 8. A mechanism that is consistent with the structural
bulk solvent into the active site. The loops in this region                                                       and biochemical information is presented in Scheme 2 (8,
have a slight elevation in the temperature factors, and their                                                                   25). Mechanisms that are entirely analogous to the one
mobility may enable the substrate to enter the active site.                                                              presented in Scheme 2 for DHO have also been proposed
Sequestering  the  substrates from bulk  solvent may be                                                                    for PTE and IAD (24, 9). However, somewhat different
important for DAA. In contrast, RDP does not appear to                                                     mechanisms have been proposed for URE (26, 27). Benini
sequester the substrate from solvent. The structures for wild-                                                                         et al. have argued for the polarization of the carbonyl group
type  variants  of HYD  that  are  stereoselective  for  the                                                     by coordination with Mâ and complexation of MR by one of
hydrolysis of hydantoins of amino acids have been deter-                                                                 the two amide nitrogens of the substrate (26). Proton transfer
mined (10-12). A proposal has been made for how the                                                                    to the leaving group is facilitated by the bridging hydroxide
orientation of substrates within the active sites leads to a                                                       and a hydrogen bonding  interaction from a conserved
discrimination between enantiomers (11, 12).                                                                     histidine that originates from the loop that follows strand 7.
  For all of these enzymes, the primary active site archi-                                                               In a competing mechanism proposed by Hausinger and co-
tecture is one that has evolved for the production and delivery                                                             workers, proton transfer to the leaving group originates
of hydroxide to an acceptor substrate. The structural motifs                                                                      directly from a histidine from loop 7 rather than the aspartate
for the activation of the hydrolytic water molecule are largely                                                      from strand 8 (27).
conserved, while the part of the active site that is contributed                                                     The reaction mechanism for the elimination of ammonia
by  the loops  to define  the  substrate  specificity shows                                                                    in adenosine deaminase has also received significant inter-
substantial variability.                                                               rogation (16, 20). Adenosine deaminase has a subtype III
                                                        mononuclear metal center and the enzymatic reaction is anMECHANISMS OF ACTION                                                       example of a nucleophilic aromatic substitution by water.
  The elements of the catalytic reaction mechanisms have      In the subtype  III metal centers, the lone metal ion  is
been examined in detail for some members of the amidohy-      positioned in the MR position. In these mononuclear examples
drolase superfamily. The best documented case  is  that      the histidine from strand 5 coordinates the lone metal ion in
catalyzed by dihydroorotase from E. coli (8, 24). With DHO      addition to the two histidines from strand 1 and the invariant
the crystal structure was solved in the presence of carbamoyl      aspartate from strand 8. The histidine from strand 6 appar-
aspartate at a pH where the thermodynamic equilibrium      ently functions as a general base in the abstraction of a proton
constant between dihydroorotate and carbamoyl aspartate is     from the water molecule bound to the metal center. The
near unity (8). DHO is a dimer and the crystal structure      incipient hydroxide attacks the aromatic ring to form a
shows that the substrate and product are bound to separate      tetrahedral intermediate. This reaction is activated by proton
monomeric units within the dimeric protein. Therefore, this     donation from a glutamate  that  is found three residue
structure revealed the specific interactions within the active      positions beyond the conserved histidine from strand 5. This
site immediately before and after the enzymatic reaction had    HxxE motif at the end of stand 5 is found in every one of
occurred. In the case of dihydroorotate, the carbonyl group      the known amidohydrolase enzymes that catalyze a nucleo-
of the amide bond about to be cleaved is found interacting      philic aromatic substitution reaction except for adenine


[PDF physical page 8]
6390  Biochemistry, Vol. 44, No. 17, 2005                                                             Current Topics
Scheme 3                                  REFERENCES
                                                                                     1. Holm, L., and Sander, C. (1997) An Evolutionary Treasure:
                                                                                 Unification of a Broad Set of Amidohydrolases Related to Urease,
                                                                                Proteins:  Struct., Funct., Genet. 28, 72-82.
                                                                                     2. Buchbinder, J. L., Stephenson, R. C., Dresser, M. J., Pitera, J.
                                                                     W., Scanlan, T. S., and Fletterick, R.  J. (1998) Biochemical
                                                                                 Characterization and Crystallographic Structure of an Escherichia
                                                                                        coli Protein from the Phosphotriesterase Gene Family, Biochem-
                                                                                             istry 37, 5096-5106.
                                                                                     3. Schwarzenbacher, R., Canaves, J. M., Brinen, L. S., Dai, X.,
                                                                      Deacon, A. M., Elsliger, M. A., Eshaghi, S., Floyd, R., Godzik,
                                                                                 A., Grittini, C., Grzechnik, S. K., Guda, C., Jaroszewski, L.,
                                                                              Karlak, C., Klock, H. E., Koesema, E., Kovarik, J. S., Kreusch,
                                                                                 A., Kuhn, P., Lesley, S. A., McMullan, D., McPhillips, T. M.,
                                                                                    Miller, M. A., Morse, A., Moy, K., Ouyang,  J., Robb, A.,
                                                                            Rodrigues, K., Selby, T. L., Spraggon, G., Stevens, R. C., van
                                                                     den Bedem, H., Velasquez, J., Vincent, J., Wang, X., West, B.,
                                                                        Wolf, G., Hodgson, K., Wooley,  J., and Wilson  I. A. (2003)
                                                                                Crystal Structure of Uronate Isomerase (Tm0064) from Thermo-
                                                                           toga maritima at 2.85 Å Resolution, Proteins:  Struct., Funct.,
                                                                           Genet. 53, 142-145.
                                                                                     4. Benning, M. M., Shim, H., Raushel, F. M., and Holden, H. M.
                                                                           (2001) High-Resolution X-ray Structures of Different Metal-
                                                                                 Substituted Forms of Phosphotriesterase from Pseudomonas
                                                                              diminuta, Biochemistry 40, 2712-2722.
                                                                                     5. Benning, M. M., Hong, S.-B, Raushel, F. M., and Holden, H. M.
deaminase. These examples include adenosine deaminase           (2000) The Binding of Substrate Analogs to Phosphotriesterase,
(16), AMP deaminase (gi:  608497), guanine deaminase              J. Biol. Chem. 275, 30556-30560.
(gi: 16130785), cytosine deaminase (17), and the proteins          6. Benini, S., Rypniewski, W. R., Wilson, K. S., Miletti, S., Ciurli,
annotated as chlorohydrolases (28, PDB entry 1j6p). Collapse              S., and Mangani, S. (1999) A New Proposal for Urease Mecha-                                                                    nism Based on the Crystal Structures of the Native and Inhibited
of  the  tetrahedral  intermediate  is  facilitated by proton         Enzyme from Bacillus pasteurii: Why Urea Hydrolysis Costs Two
donation from the protonated histidine from strand 6 and            Nickels, Struct. Folding Des. 7, 205-216.
proton transfer from the carbinol to the aspartate from strand          7. Jabri, E., Carr, M. B., Hausinger, R. P., and Karplus, P. A. (1995)
8 or the glutamate from strand 6, depending on whether the          The Crystal Structure of Urease from Klebsiella aerogenes,                                                                            Science 268, 998-1004.
enol or the keto form of inosine is the primary product. A                                                                                     8. Thoden, J. B., Phillips, G. N., Jr., Neal, T. M., Raushel, F. M.,
reaction mechanism for adenosine deaminase is presented          and Holden, H. M. (2001) Molecular Structure of Dihydrooro-
in Scheme 3.                                                                         tase: A Paradigm for Catalysis Through the Use of a Binuclear
                                                                       Metal Center, Biochemistry 40, 6989-6997.
                                                                                     9. Thoden, J. B., Marti-Arbona, R., Raushel, F. M., and Holden, H.
SUMMARY                                               M. (2003) High-Resolution X-ray Structure of Isoaspartyl Dipep-
                                                                                     tidase from Escherichia coli, Biochemistry 42, 4874-4882.
  The amidohydrolase superfamily comprises a remarkable        10. Abendroth,  J., Niefind, K., and Schomburg, D. (2002) X-ray
set of enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of a wide range            Structure of a Dihydropyrimidinase from Thermus Sp. at 1.3 Å
of substrates bearing amide or ester functional groups at            Resolution, J. Mol. Biol. 320, 143-156.
carbon and phosphorus centers. In all cases, the nucleophilic        11. Cheon, Y. H., Kim, H. S., Han, K. H., Abendroth, J., Niefind, K.,                                                                    Schomburg, D., Wang, J., and Kim, Y. (2002) Crystal Structure
water molecule is activated through complexation with a            of D-Hydantoinase from Bacillus stearothermophilus: Insight into
mononuclear or binuclear metal center. Seven variations in            the Stereochemistry of Enantioselectivity, Biochemistry 41, 9410-
the identity of the specific amino acid metal ligands have           9417.
                                                                            12. Abendroth, J., Niefind, K., May, O., Siemann, M., Syldatk, C.,been structurally characterized by X-ray crystallography. In                                                                     and Schomburg, D. (2002) The Structure of L-Hydantionase from
the binuclear metal centers the carbonyl and phosphoryl           Arthrobacter aurescens Leads to an Understanding of Dihydro-
groups  are  polarized through Lewis  acid  catalysis  via           pyrimidinase Substrate and Enantio Specificity, Biochemistry 41,
complexation with  the â-metal  ion, while  the  solvent          8589-8597.
                                                                            13. Nitanai, Y., Satow, Y., Adachi, H., and Tsujimoto, M. (2002)molecule is activated for nucleophilic attack by interaction                                                                                Crystal Structure of Human Renal Dipeptidase Involved in Beta-
with the R-metal ion. In the mononuclear metal centers, the          Lactam Hydrolysis, J. Mol. Biol. 321, 177-184.
substrate is activated by proton transfer from the active site,        14. Vincent, F., Yates, D., Garman, E., Davies, G. J., and Brannigan,
and the water is activated by metal ligation and general base               J. A. (2004) The Three-Dimensional Structure of the N-Acetyl-
                                                                           glucosamine-6-Phosphate Deacetylase, NagA, from Bacillus sub-catalysis. The metal centers are perched at the C-terminal                                                                                                                tilis: A Member of the Urease Superfamily, J. Biol. Chem. 279,
end of the â-barrel core within a (âR)8 structural domain.          2809-2816.
The substrate diversity is dictated by the conformational        15. Liaw, S.-H., Chen, S.-J., Ko, T.-P., Hsu, C.-S., Chen, C. J., Wang,
restrictions imposed by the eight loops that extend from the          A. H., and Tsai, Y.-C. (2003) Crystal Structure of D-Aminoacylase
                                                                    from Alcaligenes faecalis Da1. A Novel Subset of Amidohydro-ends of the eight â-strands.                                                                                     lases and Insights into the Enzyme Mechanism, J. Biol. Chem.
                                                                            278, 4957-4962.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT                                              16. Wang, Z., and Quiocho, F. A. (1998) Complexes of Adenosine
                                                                   Deaminase with Two Potent Inhibitors: X-ray Structures in Four
 We thank Professors Hazel M. Holden (Wisconsin),           Independent Molecules at pH of Maximum Activity, Biochemistry
                                                                                37, 8314-8324.Patricia Babbitt (UCSF), and John A. Gerlt (Illinois) for                                                                            17. Ireton, G. C., McDermott, G., Black, M. E., and Stoddard, B. L.
many insightful discussions concerning the structure and           (2002) The Structure of Escherichia coli Cytosine Deaminase, J.
function of the amidohydrolase superfamily.                         Mol. Biol. 315, 687-697.


[PDF physical page 9]
Current Topics                                                               Biochemistry, Vol. 44, No. 17, 2005  6391

 18. Shim, H., and Raushel, F. M. (2000) Self-Assembly of the        An Enzyme Capable of Detoxifying Organophosphorus Nerve
     Binuclear Metal Center of Phosphotriesterase, Biochemistry 39,           Agents, Biochemistry 33, 15001-15007.
    7357-7364.                                                           24. Aubert, S. D., Li, Y., and Raushel, F. M. (2004) Mechanism for
 19. Mulrooney, S. B., and Hausinger, R. P. (1990) Sequence of the            the Hydrolysis of Organophosphates by the Bacterial Phosphot-
     Klebsiella aerogenes Urease Genes and Evidence for Accessory             riesterase, Biochemistry 43, 5707-5715.
     Proteins  Facilitating Nickel Incorporation,  J. Bacteriol. 172,        25. Porter, T. N., Li, Y., and Raushel, F. M. (2004) Mechanism for
    5837-5849.                                                                the Dihydroorotase Reaction, Biochemistry 43, 16285-16292.
 20. Wilson, D. K., Rudolph, F. B., and Quiocho, F. A. (1991) Atomic        26. Benini, S, Rypniewski, W. R., Wilson, K. S., and Ciurli, S. (2001)
     Structure of Adenosine Deaminase Complexed with a Transition            Structure-based Rationalization of Urease Inhibition by Phos-
     State Analog: Understanding Catalysis and Immunodeficiency            phate: Novel Insights into the Enzyme Mechanism, J. Biol. Inorg.
     Mutations, Science 252, 1278-1284.                               Chem. 6, 778-790.
 21. Porter, D. J., and Austin, E. A. (1993). Cytosine Deaminase: The        27. Pearson M. A., Park, I. S., Schaller, R. A., Michel, L. O., Karplus,
     Roles of Divalent Metal Ions in Catalysis, J. Biol. Chem. 268,            P.  A., and Hausinger, R.  P. (2000) Kinetic and  Structural
    24005-24011.                                                               characterization of urease Active Site Variants, Biochemistry 39,
 22. Lai W. L., Chou, L. Y., Ting, C. Y., Kirby, R., Tsai, Y. C., Wang,          8575-8584.
    A. H. J., and Liaw, S. H. (2004), The Functional Role of the        28. Seffernick, J. L., and Wackett, L. P. (2001) Rapid Evolution of
     Binuclear Metal Center in D-Aminoacylase - One-Metal Activa-            Bacterial Catabolic Enzymes: A Case Study with Atrazine
     tion and Second-Metal Attenuation,J. Biol. Chem. 279, 13962-           Chlorohydrolase, Biochemistry 40, 12747-12753.
     13967.
 23. Benning, M. M., Kuo, J. M., Raushel, F. M., and Holden, H. M.
     (1994) The Three-Dimensional Structure of Phosphotriesterase:         BI047326V