
[PDF physical page 1]
                                                                                                  Research Paper  211

Predictive, structure-based model of amino acid recognition by
nonribosomal peptide synthetase adenylation domains
Gregory L Challis, Jacques Ravel and Craig A Townsend



Background: Nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs) are large modular        Address: Department of Chemistry, The Johns
proteins that selectively bind, activate and condense amino acids in an ordered     Hopkins University, 3400 North Charles Street,
                                                                                              Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA.
manner. Substrate recognition and activation occurs by reaction with ATP
within the adenylation (A) domain of each module. Recently, the crystal             Correspondence: Craig A Townsend
structure of the A domain from the gramicidin synthetase (GrsA) with                  E-mail: townsend@jhunix.hcf.jhu.edu
L-phenylalanine and adenosine monophosphate bound has been determined.
                                                                       Key words: adenylation domain, amino acid
                                                                                                        activation, nonribosomal peptide synthetase,
Results: Critical residues in all known NRPS A domains have been identified         substrate binding, substrate specificity
that align with eight binding-pocket residues in the GrsA A domain and define
sets of remarkably conserved recognition templates. Phylogenetic relationships       Received: 7 October 1999
                                                                                         Revisions requested: 2 November 1999among these sets and the likely specificity determinants for polar and nonpolar
                                                                                         Revisions received: 6 December 1999
amino acids were determined in light of extensive published biochemical data for                                                                                  Accepted: 14 December 1999
these enzymes. The binding specificity of greater than 80% of the known NRPS
A domains has been correlated with more than 30 amino acid substrates.             Published: 23 February 2000

                                                                              Chemistry & Biology 2000, 7:211–224
Conclusions: The analysis presented allows the specificity of A domains of
unknown function (e.g. from polymerase chain reaction amplification or genome     1074-5521/00/$ – see front matter
sequencing) to be predicted. Furthermore, it provides a rational framework for    © 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
altering of A domain specificity by site-directed mutagenesis, which has
significant potential for engineering the biosynthesis of novel natural products.


Introduction                                       domains within a module. A terminal thioesterase is fre-
A wide range of biologically active peptides is synthe-    quently present to release the peptide from the enzyme
sized by nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs) in   by cyclization or hydrolysis.
bacteria and fungi. These metabolites show functional
diversity and include antibiotics  (e.g. penicillins, van-    In most NRPSs the organization and order of the modules
comycin, bacitracin and gramicidin), siderophores (e.g.   maps in a 1:1 manner to the amino acid sequence of the
mycobactin and enterobactin), toxins (e.g. syringomycin    peptide products (co-linearity rule). This paradigm has
and  HC-toxin)  and  immunosuppressive  agents  (e.g.    allowed researchers to assign a specific amino acid activa-
rapamycin and cyclosporin). The biosyntheses of nonri-    tion function to each module. Exceptions have appeared
bosomal peptides share a common mechanism, which has    recently, however, that seem to violate this paradigm.
been widely investigated (for reviews see [1–3]). Briefly,    Nocardicin A is a monocyclic β-lactam antibiotic known to
NRPSs   are   large   multifunctional   enzymes   of   be derived from nocardicin G [9]. A tripeptide composed
100–1700 kDa [2] that have a modular structural organiza-    of L-serine and two units of 4-hydroxy-L-phenylglycine
tion and are thought to link amino acid residues according   (HPG) would seem the logical precursor of nocardicin G
to the multiple-carrier thiotemplate mechanism [4–8].     [10]. We have recently determined, however, that a pair of
The minimal module is composed of an amino-acid-acti-   NRPSs  is contained in the nocardicin A biosynthetic
vating domain, a thiolation domain and a condensation    cluster  encompassing  five  modules  rather  than  the
domain. The activation domain recognizes a substrate    expected three (S.D. Breazeale, M. Gunsior and C.A.T.,
amino (or hydroxy) acid, usually specifically, and activates    unpublished  observations).  In  addition,  Pseudomonas
it as its acyl adenylate by reaction with ATP. This active    syringae syringomycin  is a  cyclic lipodepsinonapeptide
ester  is then covalently linked as  its thioester to the   whose synthetase genetic organization does not respect
enzyme-bound 4′-phosphopantetheine located within the    the  co-linearity  rule  [11]. The module  activating the
module. The reaction continues by the direct transfer to    carboxy-terminal threonine encoded by the gene syrB1 is
another acylamino acid intermediate on the adjacent    located upstream of syrE, which encodes the first eight
downstream  module  mediated  by  the  condensation    amino-acid-activating modules.  Mycobacterium  smegmatis
domain to form a peptide bond. In some cases, modifica-    produces exochelin MS, a pentapeptide siderophore [12].
tions (epimerization, N- or C-methylation or cyclization)    Genetic analysis has revealed the presence of six NRPS
are  catalyzed by  additional domains  or by modified   modules rather than the expected five. The role of the


[PDF physical page 2]
212  Chemistry & Biology 2000, Vol 7 No 3




sixth module could not be assigned [13]. The genetic    nearing completion, a similar approach was described by
organization of the bleomycin biosynthetic cluster has    Stachelhaus et al. [17], in which phylogenetic and structure-
been elucidated recently and has indicated the presence    based  analyses  identified  these  essential  residues and
of 11 NRPS modules for eight amino acids units in the    allowed a correlation with substrate specificity to be estab-
peptide product [14].                                             lished. Although the X-ray structure of GrsA formed the
                                            common basis for our two approaches, we have both rein-
In the past decade, enormous progress has been made in    forced, and extended the analysis to include 33 amino acid
the discovery and sequencing of NRPS genes from bacte-    substrates (Table S1) for which the function of adenylation
ria and  fungi  (for  a comprehensive  list see  [3] and    domains has been assigned by either direct enzymic assay,
Tables S1 and S2 in the Supplementary material section).    or convincing deduction, and for which multiple protein
Many of these putative peptide synthetases produce pep-    sequences are available of A domains recognizing specific
tides of unknown structure, but all share the well-con-   amino acids. Care has been taken to assemble an accurate
served  characteristic  signature  sequences  of NRPSs   and comprehensive database to ensure the integrity of these
summarized by Marahiel et al. [2].                                correlations. In many cases  it  is possible to suggest the
                                                         chemical basis for substrate selectivity, whereas in others,
Specificity is principally, but not exclusively, controlled at     distinct binding motifs have been identified that pose inter-
the adenylation/ pantetheinylation step [1,15]. Conti et al.    esting questions for further research to understand the
[16] have recently identified, by crystal structure analysis,    origins of  their  specificity  at a fundamental  level. We
the substrate-binding pocket of the phenylalanine adeny-    present an algorithm at the first level for the prediction of
lation (A) domain of the gramicidin S synthetase (GrsA)    function  of uncharacterized A domains  translated from
from Bacillus brevis. The amino acids lining the substrate-   newly isolated gene sequences, which provides at a second
binding  pocket mediate amino  acid  specificity. The    level a framework for rational mutagenesis to alter the selec-
authors concluded that, because of the high degree of    tion of amino acid for activation at a given module. Eight
sequence identity among NRPS activation domains, the   amino acid residues have been identified whose order and
GrsA  structure represents a  structural model  that  all    alignment can be readily applied to refine and advance
NRPS activation domains could fit [16].                       current phylogenetic analyses. Application of this structural
                                                mask has made it possible for A domains of diverse evolu-
Motivated by the exceptions to the co-linearity rule seen in    tionary origins to be correlated directly to function with far
our laboratory and cases emerging in the literature, we have    greater accuracy than anticipated at the outset of this study.
developed a method to reveal the amino acid building
blocks activated by individual adenylation domains on the   Results and discussion
basis of their sequence. Here we describe the protein    Analysis of adenylation domains using phylogenetic tools
sequence analysis of over 150 NRPS activation domains to    Phylogenetic analysis and sequence alignments have been
pinpoint the essential amino acid residues involved in sub-    applied to A domains and revealed limited correlation
strate  specificity and  binding. As  this manuscript was    with function [18–23]. The small number of sequences, or

Figure 1

                                                                                                      (a) The substrate-binding pocket of the
                                                                                                  gramicidin S synthase (GrsA) phenylalanine-
                                                                                                          activating domain, viewed from above. The
                                                                                                     eight residues thought to be important for
                                                                                                 substrate selection are indicated (Ile299 is
                                                                                     obscured by Ala301). The figure was
                                                                                         generated from 1amu.pdb using RasMol.
                                                                                                   (b) Identification of the eight amino acids
                                                                                                                   lining the substrate binding pocket of four
                                                                  A domains from different genera:
                                                                                       Streptomyces calcium-dependent antibiotic
                                                                                              synthetase Cda1-M2 and Bacillus fengycin
                                                                                              synthetase FenD-M2, which both activate
                                                                                                        L-threonine; Amycolatopsis chloroeremomycin
                                                                                              synthetase CepA-M3 and Bacillus bacitracin
                                                                                              synthetase BacC-M5, which both activate
                                                                                                    L-asparagine. The sequence of each A domain
                                                                           was aligned to the sequence of GrsA, and
                                                                                                                           critical amino acids were identified. The
                                                                                       secondary structural elements in the GrsA
                                                                                  sequence are indicated: α helices are boxed
                                                                                                                     in green and β sheets are boxed in blue.


[PDF physical page 3]
                                                        Research Paper Prediction of NRPS amino acid selection Challis et al.  213




only a single genus, used and the choice of a large number    phylogenetic analysis of 180 amino acids is more likely to
of residues make these analyses of limited value.            emphasize genus-specific mutational evolution than func-
                                                                  tional evolution of the protein studied. This result sup-
On the basis of the assumption that the eight amino acids    ports the importance of the residues lining the binding
lining the binding pocket (Figure 1a) determine substrate    pocket in defining the function of each binding pocket, as
specificity, we used phylogenetic tools to establish a rela-    observed similarly by Stachelhaus et al. [17]. A dichotomy
tionship between these important residues and substrate   between  eukaryotic and  prokaryotic domains  is  still
specificity in 154 A domains in the database. We believe    observed, however, but to a lesser extent.
that these residues are sufficient to both predict and, in
many cases, rationalize the substrate specificity of NRPS    Prokaryotic activation domains appear to be the result of
A domains.                                           an evolutionary mechanism involving horizontal transfer.
                                           The analysis of whole modules by sequence alignments
To validate the theory, the eight residues lining the   shows that a greater homology is observed in the regions
binding pocket of the A domain were obtained from all    flanking the A domain (data not shown) [16]. Moreover,
known sequences in the database, after aligning each to    the functional clustering (Figure S1) among prokaryotic A
that of the phenylalanine A domain of GrsA using the   domains makes it unlikely that they arose by convergent
ClustalX multiple alignment software (Figure 1b) [24].    evolution, and there is no evidence for an ancient activa-
Two phylogenetic trees were constructed, one based on    tion domain originating by transfer from a eukaryotic
the  180–200  amino  acids  spanning  motifs  A3–A6    ancestor (Figures S1, S2 in the Supplementary material).
(Figure S1 in the Supplementary material section) as    In some cases, such as the leucine A domains of GrsB and
described previously by Konz  et al. [20] and the other   TycC, it is possible to imagine an independent evolution-
based on the eight critical residues (Figure S2). Tables S1    ary mechanism. These A domains do not cluster according
and S2 in the Supplementary material list the identity of    to their function on either tree. A more detailed phyloge-
these residues and their position according to the number-    netic analysis would be needed to confirm such an evolu-
ing of GrsA [16]. In contrast to the analysis of Stachelhaus    tionary hypothesis for this important group of enzymes.
et  al.  [17], we chose to exclude Cys331 because the
sidechain of this residue points away from the specificity   The phylogenetic tree in Figure S2 can serve as a tool for
pocket in GrsA [16]. This observation does not, however,    predicting the amino acid selectivity of activation domains
exclude the possibility that residues in this position could   and for discerning evolutionary relationships among syn-
participate in substrate selection in other A domains.    thetases of diverse origin. A more detailed analysis  is
Lys517 was omitted because it is strictly conserved and is    required, however, to identify important residues for sub-
not involved in substrate discrimination.                        strate  recognition  through,   for  example,  hydrogen
                                                        bonding, electrostatic or Van der Waals interactions.
The functional clustering observed when limiting the
analysis  to the eight amino acids  lining the binding    Functional analysis of amino-acid-activating domains
pocket (Figure S2) is far greater than that observed in the  We first generated a schematic of the specificity pocket
analysis  of 180–200 amino  acids encompassing motif    based on the crystal structure of the phenylalanine-activat-
A3–A6, which shows clustering predominantly among    ing domain of the gramacidin S synthetase GrsA (Figure 2).
genus lines (Figure S1). This  is certainly because the    Schematics of the predicted specificity pocket structures



Figure 2

(a) Three-dimensional structure generated
from 1amu.pdb using RasMol (version 2.6)
and (b) two-dimensional representation of
the specificity pocket from the phenylalanine-
activating domain of GrsA. In all the
two-dimensional representations, residue
coding is as follows: acidic, red; basic, blue;
neutral polar, yellow; hydrophobic, gray. Hy
represents a variable hydrophobic residue; N
represents a nonconserved residue.


[PDF physical page 4]
214  Chemistry & Biology 2000, Vol 7 No 3




for each A domain in the database were then produced by    characterized, the predicted specificity pocket structures
mapping to this template the eight critical residues identi-    for the putative HPG-activating domains from the chloro-
fied by the sequence alignments. In general, the predicted   eremomycin synthetase CepB and the CDA synthetase
specificity pocket structures fall into one of two groups,    are highly conserved (Figure 3b). Furthermore, comparing
depending on the chemical nature  of the  substrate’s    the predicted structures for the L-serine- and HPG-acti-
sidechain. For domains that activate amino acids with polar    vating domains reveals that they have a remarkably similar
sidechains, one or two universally conserved polar residues    architecture. The principal difference is the substitution
can be identified that presumably interact with the sub-    of Ser301 in the former with Gly301 in the latter. From a
strate sidechain through hydrogen bonding and electrosta-    functional perspective, this could be explained by direct
tic interactions. The remaining residues in the specificity   hydrogen bonding of the HPG hydroxyl group to the
pocket are hydrophobic and vary among domains that acti-   His278 nitrogen. In contrast, the analysis of Stachelhaus et
vate the same amino acid. In contrast, for substrates with     al. [17] places a leucine residue at this position. Our analy-
hydrophobic sidechains, the residues lining the specificity     sis indicates that serine- and HPG-activating domains
pockets are all hydrophobic, except for proline and pipeco-    could be functionally interconverted by the single point
late. Although some of these residues appear to be highly    mutation Ser301↔Gly301.
conserved, variation in other residues seems to be toler-
ated. This finding, coupled with the observation that many    Functional characterization of the cloned syringomycin
of these domains have a lower substrate selectivity than    synthetase SyrB has shown that  it specifically activates
those that activate polar amino acids, makes it difficult to    L-threonine [11]. Wild-type actinomycin synthetase AcmB
assign functional roles for individual residues. The follow-    also activates L-threonine  [26]. Sequence alignment of
ing discussion is, therefore, split into two main sections on    these domains with the putative L-threonine-activating
domains that activate substrates with polar sidechains and   domains from  fengycin  synthetases FenD and  Pps2,
those that activate substrates with hydrophobic sidechains.    pristinamycin  I synthetase SnbC, exochelin synthetase
                                                 FxbC, pyoverdin synthetase PvdD and CDA synthetase
Substrates with polar sidechains                       Cda1 reveals highly conserved predicted structures for the
Serine-, threonine- and 4-hydroxyphenylglycine-activating          specificity pocket (Figure 4a). Interestingly, and unexpect-
domains                                                        edly, these structures are quite different from those pre-
The enterobactin synthetase EntF and the  first two    dicted for the specificity pocket of the L-serine-activating
modules of the syringomycin synthetase SyrE have been   domains (Figure 3a). This difference presumably reflects
cloned, overexpressed, purified and shown to specifically    the need to specifically activate threonine in the presence
activate L-serine [11,25]. Sequence alignment of these    of serine. A comparison of the predicted structures of the
proteins and the putative L-serine-activating domain from    threonine-activating domains with that of the mycobactin
the calcium-dependent antibiotic (CDA) synthetase Cda1    synthetase MbtB module 1 (Figure 4b), which ostensibly
predicts highly conserved structures for the specificity    contains a domain capable of activating both L-serine and
pockets (Figure 3a). In particular, the His278/Ser301 dyad    L-threonine, suggests how this might be achieved. In our
is universally conserved. Mapping of this dyad to the GrsA    analysis, Asn278 is universally conserved (unlike in [17])
structure suggests a functional role in serine selection,   and probably interacts with the threonine hydroxyl. There
which is hydrogen bonding of the His278 nitrogen to the     are, however, a number of other amino acid substitutions
Ser301 hydroxyl group, which in turn hydrogen bonds to   (Phe236→Met, Trp239→Leu and Met322→Leu),  that
the substrate hydroxyl group.                             presumably diminish specificity in the MbtB A domain.

Although no domains that specifically activate 4-hydroxy-     It should be noted that the excluded residue 331 is histidine
L-phenylglycine  (HPG)  have  been   biochemically    in these cases. For this residue to be involved in hydrogen


Figure 3

                                                                                                      (a) Predicted structure for the specificity
                                                                                        pocket of L-serine-activating domains based
                                                                                on alignment of the Cda1-M1, EntF, SyrE-M1
                                                                                 and SyrE-M2 sequences. (b) Predicted
                                                                                                               specificity pocket structure for HPG-activating
                                                                                   domains based on alignment of the Cda1-M6,
                                                                       CepB-M1 and CepB-M2 sequences. For
                                                                                                   description of the domain nomenclature see
                                                                                                the legend for Table S1.


[PDF physical page 5]
                                                        Research Paper Prediction of NRPS amino acid selection Challis et al.  215




Figure 4

(a) Predicted structure for the specificity
pocket of L-threonine-activating domains based
on alignment of SyrB, AcmB-M1, Cda1-M2,
FenD-M2, Pps2-M2, FxbC-M2 and SnbC-M1.
(b) Structure predicted for the L-threonine/
L-serine-activating domain from MbtB-M1.





bonding to the substrate hydroxyl, however, a conforma-     thiol. A comparison of these structures with those predicted
tional change in the specificity pocket would be required.       for the threonine-activating domains (Figure 4a) reveals
                                                                that they share this residue. Aside from relatively conserva-
To test further our approach for assigning the specificity    tive changes among the hydrophobic residues in the speci-
of amino-acid-activating domains, the predicted specificity     ficity pocket structures for these two substrates, the only
pocket structures of the putative dehydrothreonine-acti-    major difference  is the Ser301→Gly substitution in the
vating domain of syringomycin synthetase SyrE [17] and    threonine-activating domains. Ser301 therefore probably
L-threonine-activating  domains  were  compared.  This    plays an important role in selecting cysteine over threonine.
analysis indicated that the ‘dehydrothreonine’ and threo-   As  hydrogen  bonding between  the  Ser301  sidechain
nine specificity pockets are identical in structure. It is sug-    hydroxyl group and the sidechain sulfur of cysteine  is
gested, therefore, that the substrate for this domain  is    unlikely to occur, it is not easy to assign a functional role for
actually L-threonine; the dehydroamino  acid probably     this residue. A test of its role in substrate selectivity would
being formed through dehydration of the peptide product   be to examine the effect of the mutation Ser301↔Gly.
of the NRPS. Furthermore, exclusion of a dehydroamino
acid is consistent with chemical expectation that such an   A comparison of the structures for the cysteine-activating
enamine species would be neither stable in solution, nor   domains discussed above with those predicted for the
capable of propagating peptide elongation.                    L-cysteine-activating domains from the several known
                                       ACV synthetases (e.g. PcbAB and AcvA from Nocardia lac-
Cysteine-activating domains                                 tamdurans and  Aspergillus  nidulans, respectively) shows
Cloning and expression of residues 1–1491 of the yersini-    that they are quite different (Figure 5b). In fact, the very
abactin synthetase Irp2 (HMPW2) have shown that it acti-    highly  conserved ACV  synthetase  cysteine-activating
vates L-cysteine [27]. Sequence alignment of this protein   domain  is closer in structure to that predicted for the
with the putative cysteine-activating domains from baci-    L-valine-activating domain from the same synthetases,
tracin synthetase BacA, anguibactin synthetase AngR and    consistent  with  the  isolation  of  L-(α-aminoadipoyl)-
pyochelin synthetases PchE and PchF predicts a highly    L-valinyl–D-valine  from  large  scale  fermentations  of
conserved structure for the specificity pocket (Figure 5a).    Cephalosporium acremonium [28]. These observations are in
The universally conserved Asn278 is presumably involved    keeping with the evolution of ACV synthetases through
in substrate selection through interaction with the cysteine   gene duplication and subsequent functional divergence.


Figure 5

(a) Predicted structures for the specificity
pocket for the L-cysteine-activating domain
from Irp2 and the putative L-cysteine-
activating domains from BacA-M2, AngR and
PchE and PchF. (b) Predicted specificity
pocket structures for AcvA and PchAB.


[PDF physical page 6]
216  Chemistry & Biology 2000, Vol 7 No 3




Figure 6

                                                                                                      (a) Predicted structures for the specificity
                                                                                         pockets of L-aspartate-activating domains
                                                                                 based on alignment of LicB-M2, LchAB-M2,
                                                                                     SrfAB-M2, BacC-M4, Cda1-M4, Cda1-M5
                                                                                 and Cda2-M1. (b) Structures predicted for
                                                                                                the L-asparagine-activating domains from
                                                                              BacC-M5, TycC-M1, CepA-M3 and
                                                                               Cda2-M3. Where two amino acid residues are
                                                                                                    specified at a given position the first refers to
                                                                                     a Bacillus-derived domain and the second
                                                                                                          refers to a Streptomyces-derived domain.




Aspartate-, asparagine-, glutamate- and glutamine-activating      bonding to the substrate amide can be envisioned. Salt-
domains                                                   bridge formation between the sidechain amino and car-
Recombinant A domain from the second module  of    boxylate groups of these residues may anchor them close
lichenysin synthetase LicB was shown to specifically acti-    to each other in the pocket. Furthermore, the presence of
vate L-aspartate [20]. The purified trimodular surfactin    both Lys278 and Glu322 renders the overall charge of the
synthetase SrfAB has also been shown to activate L-aspar-    pocket neutral in accord with the overall charge on the
tate, consistent with the deduced  role of the second    substrate sidechain.
module incorporating this amino acid into surfactin [29].
Alignment of these sequences with the putative aspartate-   The functional significance of the Glu322 residue in the
activating  domains  from  bacitracin  synthetase  BacC,    asparagine-activating domains  has been  demonstrated
lichenysin synthetase LchAB and CDA synthetases Cda1    recently by Stachelhaus et al. [17]. It was shown that the
and Cda2 predicts a highly conserved structure for the    single point mutation His322→Glu in the aspartate-spe-
specificity pocket. The three differences, which are genus     cific activating domain from surfactin synthetase SrfAB
specific, are the substitutions His322→Ala, Val299→Ile    completely altered the specificity to asparagine.
and Ile330→Val  (Bacillus-derived→Streptomyces-derived;
Figure 6a). It seems unlikely that these differences are   Comparison of the predicted specificity pocket structure
functionally significant, although the specificity of any of    for the apparent L-aspartate-activating domain from the
the Streptomyces-derived domains has yet to be examined    syringomycin synthetase SyrE with those for the aspar-
experimentally. The universally conserved Lys278 proba-    tate-activating domains discussed above reveals extensive
bly forms salt bridges with the carboxylate group of the    differences. In fact, the structure is much closer to those
substrate sidechain. In contrast, Stachelhaus  et  al. [17]    predicted for the putative L-glutamate-activating domains
have suggested a key interaction between the substrate   from bacitracin synthetase BacA and surfactin synthetase
and His322. This residue, however, is replaced by alanine   SrfAA (Figure 7a). Partially purified trimodular SrfAA has
in Streptomyces coelicolor, making the proposed importance   been shown to activate not only L-glutamate, but also
of this interaction unlikely. Additionally, Thr239 is con-    L-aspartate at approximately one third the rate [29]. It
served and might contribute to substrate selection.          seems likely that the L-glutamate-activating domain also
                                                            accepts L-aspartate as a substrate, because the other two
The A domain of the first module of tyrocidine synthetase   modules in SrfAA are thought to incorporate L-leucine
TycC has been shown to activate specifically L-asparagine    (see below). The activation domains from SyrE-M8, BacA-
[30]. Alignment  of  this sequence  with  the  putative  M4 and SrfAA-M1 therefore appear to have relaxed speci-
L-asparagine A domains from bacitracin synthetase BacC,     ficity that allows incorporation of glutamate or aspartate
chloroeremomycin synthetase CepA and the CDA syn-    into their peptide products, depending on either the avail-
thetase Cda2 predicts highly conserved structures for the     ability of the substrates in the cell, or perhaps a down-
asparagine specificity pockets, which are very similar to    stream selectivity mechanism [15]. For these domains, a
the aspartate-activating domains. The predicted struc-    conserved  lysine  residue  occurs  at  position  239,  as
tures for both domains contain Lys278. The His/Ala322   opposed to position 278 in the aspartate-specific domains.
residue  in  the  structure  of  the  aspartate-activating    Additionally, Asp278 is conserved in the aspartate/gluta-
domains is, however, replaced by a universally conserved    mate-activating domains and may help modulate the
Glu322 residue in the asparagine-activating domain struc-    relaxed  specificity  of these domains. As L-3-hydroxy-
ture. Again, there are genus-specific variations in the    L-aspartate occurs in syringomycin,  it  is also possible,
hydrophobic residues 239 and 299 (Figure 6b). A func-    therefore, that this amino acid, not L-aspartate, is the sub-
tional  role  for Lys278 and Glu322 through hydrogen     strate for the activation domain in SyrE.


[PDF physical page 7]
                                                        Research Paper Prediction of NRPS amino acid selection Challis et al.  217




Figure 7

(a) Predicted specificity pocket structures for
the putative L-glutamate activating domains
from SrfAA-M1 and BacA-M4, and the
putative L-aspartate-activating domain from
SyrE-M8; (b) Predicted specificity-pocket
structure for the L-glutamine-activating domain
from LicA-M1.





Cloning and overexpression of the activation domain from   Ser301↔Gly and Leu322↔Gly  for serine↔glutamate,
the  first module of the lichenysin synthetase LicA has   and Leu322↔Ser for HPG↔glutamine.
shown that it specifically activates L-glutamine [20]. The
predicted structure for the specificity pocket is very similar   The A domain from the second module of the tyrocidine
to those predicted for the glutamate/aspartate-activating    synthetase TycC has been cloned, overexpressed and
domains discussed above. The only significant difference   shown to specifically activate L-glutamine [30]. The struc-
is the Lys239→Gln substitution (Figure 7b), which could    ture of the specificity pocket is quite similar to those pre-
reflect requirement for a neutral functional group to ensure    dicted for the apparent L-glutamate-activating domains
selectivity for glutamine over glutamate. Of course, this   from the fengycin synthetases. Interestingly, the principal
observation may not be general because the sequences of    difference  is not Gly322→Ser but His278→Gln, which
only two closely related isoenzymes are currently available.    presumably  selects glutamine over glutamate through
                                                         head-to-head  hydrogen  bonding  between  the  amide
Sequence alignment of the apparent glutamate-activating    groups of Gln278 and the substrate (Figure 8b).
domains   from   fengycin   synthetases   Pps1/FenC,
Pps3/FenE and Pps4/FenA predicts a highly conserved     Ornithine-, N-hydroxyornithine-, lysine- and N-hydroxylysine-
group of specificity pocket structures. Indeed, the first     activating domains
two pairs of isoenzyme share identical template sequences   The  recombinant  activating domain  from  the  third
and differ from the third pair only in the substitution   module of the gramicidin synthetase GrsB has been
Ser322→Gly (Table S1). Interestingly, an additional set of   shown to be specific for L-ornithine [32]. Alignment of
isoenzymes (Fen1, Fen3 and Fen4), of undetermined    the sequence from GrsB with the putative L-ornithine-
sequence, have been experimentally demonstrated to acti-    activating domains from fengycin synthetases Pps1 and
vate L-glutamate, L-glutamate and L-glutamine, respec-   FenC, tyrocidine synthetase TycC and bacitracin syn-
tively [31]. Further research will be required to clarify the    thetase BacB predicts a highly conserved structure for the
inferred L-glutamine activation by Pps4/FenA. Unexpect-    specificity pocket. Conservative substitutions occur in
edly, when these structures are compared with those pre-    the hydrophobic  residues 301 and 330  (Figure  9a).
dicted for L-serine- and L-HPG-activating domains a close   Among the remaining universally conserved residues,
relationship  is revealed (see above and Figure 4a).  It   Glu278 and Ser322 are probably involved in salt-bridge
might be possible, therefore, to interconvert the substrate    formation and hydrogen bonding with the sidechain
specificity  of  these  domains by  point  mutations  at   amino group of the substrate.


Figure 8

(a) Selectivity pocket structures predicted for
the apparent L-glutamate-activating domains
from Pps1/FenC-M1 and Pps3/FenE-M1
(R = H; X = O–), and Pps4/FenA-M2 (R = OH;
X = NH2). (b) Selectivity-pocket structure
predicted for the L-glutamine-activating domain
from TycC-M2.


[PDF physical page 8]
218  Chemistry & Biology 2000, Vol 7 No 3




Figure 9

                                                                                                      (a) Predicted specificity-pocket structures for
                                                                                                the L-ornithine-activating domains from GrsB
                                                                                 and the putative ornithine-activating domains
                                                                                          from FenC, Pps1, TycC and BacB.
                                                                                                   (b) Predicted specificity-pocket structures for
                                                                                                the putative 5-N-hydroxyornithine-activating
                                                                                   domains from FxbC.





A comparison of these structures with those predicted for    the ornithine and proposed 5-N-hydroxyornithine activat-
the  putative  ornithine-activating  domains  from  the    ing domains discussed above. As 5-N-acetyl-5-N-hydroxy-
exochelin synthetase FxbC  reveals  substantial  differ-    ornithine  is  also incorporated  into the ferrichrome  of
ences. In particular, the glutamate residue at position 278    U. sphaerogena, it seems likely that the domain from FxbB
in the former  is shifted to position 239 in the  latter    activates 5-N-formyl-5-N-hydroxyornithine — the  corre-
(Figure 9b). As the identity of the corresponding peptide    sponding amino acid  in the exochelin structure from
residues in exochelin  itself  is not ornithine, but 5-N-   M. smegmatis [13].
hydroxyornithine [13], it is likely that these domains actu-
ally activate 5-N-hydroxyornithine. This interpretation    For  the  analogous   family   of   substrates,   lysine,
differs from that of Stachelhaus et al. [17], who assigned    6-N-hydroxylysine  and  6-N-acyl-6-N-hydroxylysine,  a
this domain as an ornithine-activating domain. Indeed, it    similar pattern emerges  for the predicted  specificity-
has been shown this modified amino acid is incorporated    pocket structures. Thus, the structures for the putative
into the related siderophore ferrichrome from Ustilago    lysine-activating domain from bacitracin synthetase BacB,
sphaerogena [33]. Furthermore, the loss of ferrichrome syn-    the putative 6-N-hydroxy- and 6-N-acyl-6-N-hydroxy-
thesis upon disruption of an ornithine 5-N-hydroxylase    lysine-activating  domains  from  the  mycobactin  syn-
gene in Ustilago maydis indicates amino acid oxidation pre-    thetases  MbtF  and  MbtE,  respectively,   all  show
ceeds polypeptide formation [34].                             substantial differences (Table S1). It is, however, not pos-
                                                                 sible to derive consensus specificity-pocket structures for
The predicted  structure  for the  specificity pocket  of    these  substrates  as  these  are  the  only domains  of
exochelin synthetase FxbB domain is dissimilar to both   known sequence.


Figure 10

                                                                                                      (a) Structures predicted for the L-leucine
                                                                                                               specificity pockets from SrfAA-M3, SrfAB-M3,
                                                                                         LicB-M3, LicA-M3, LchAB-M3, LchAA-M3
                                                                                 and BacA-M3. (b) Structures predicted for
                                                                                                the specificity pockets from CepA-M1,
                                                                                 LchAA-M2, LicA-M2, SrfAA-M2 and SrfAC-
                                                                               M1. (c) Structures predicted for the specificity
                                                                                         pockets from TycC-M6 and GrsB-M4.
                                                                                                   (d) Structures predicted for the specificity
                                                                                         pockets from CssA-M2, CssA-M3, CssA-M8
                                                                                 and CssA-M10.


[PDF physical page 9]
                                                        Research Paper Prediction of NRPS amino acid selection Challis et al.  219




Substrates with hydrophobic sidechains                The wild-type surfactin, fengycin and gramicidin syn-
Leucine-, isoleucine- and valine-activating domains               thetases, SrfAB, Fen3 and AcmB, respectively, have been
The surfactin synthetases SrfAA, SrfAB and SrfAC have   shown to activate L-valine [29,31,35]. In addition, the
been partially purified and shown to activate L-leucine.    recombinant A domain from the first module of SrfAB
Competition experiments have indicated that the putative    activates valine and isoleucine to a lesser extent [37].
leucine-activating domains of these synthetases also acti-   Sequence alignment of these domains with the putative
vate L-valine and L-isoleucine to a lesser extent [29]. Wild-    valine-activating  domains  from  fengycin  synthetases
type gramicidin synthetase GrsB is also known to activate   FenE and Pps3 and  lichenysin synthetase LicB and
L-leucine [35]. Sequence alignment of these domains with   LchAB predicts well-conserved structures, broadly similar
other putative leucine-activating domains from eubacteria    to those for the isoleucine-activating domains discussed
—  bacitracin synthetase BacA, chloroeremomycin syn-    above. One striking difference  is the universally con-
thetase CepA, lichenysin synthetases LchAA, LchAB,    served Phe239/Phe278 dyad in the isoleucine-activating
LicA and LicB, and tyrocidine synthetase TycC — pre-   domains is replaced with a Phe239/Trp278 dyad in the
dicts three families of highly conserved specificity pocket    valine-activating domains (Figure 11b). This is in accord
structures  (Figure  10a–c).  In  accordance  with  the    with the smaller steric size of the valine sidechain than the
lipophilicity of the substrate sidechain, the residues lining    isoleucine sidechain and might be important in biasing the
this pocket are principally hydrophobic. It  is, therefore,    substrate  selectivity  of  these  domains.  All  of  these
difficult to assign functional roles for particular residues in    isoleucine- and valine-activating domains are from the
these structures. A fourth family of  specificity pocket    Bacillus genus.
structures for leucine-activating domains is formed by the
four from the eukaryotic cyclosporin synthetase CssA   Like the  Bacillus  L-isoleucine- and  L-valine-activating
(Figure 10d). These structures, which are again composed   domains discussed above, the remaining valine-activating
almost entirely of hydrophobic residues, are all identical.     domains of known sequence cluster in a genus-dependent
                                                 manner (Table S1). Their predicted specificity-pocket
Experimental characterization of the recombinant fengy-    structures do, however, consist mostly of hydrophobic
cin synthetase FenB and purification of the isoenzyme    residues as expected. It appears, therefore, that a number
Fen5 have demonstrated that these enzymes both activate    of genus-specific solutions have evolved selecting  for
L-isoleucine [31,36]. FenB was also shown to activate    valine from the cellular amino acid pool, although more
L-valine with about one tenth of the efficiency. The acti-   sequence data will be required to substantiate this conjec-
vating domain from the third module of the lichenysin    ture. One interesting exception to  this generalization,
synthetase LicC has been cloned, overexpressed, purified    however, is the case of AVC synthetases, which cluster
and shown to activate L-isoleucine [20]. This domain simi-    across genus lines, as noted above.
larly  activates L-leucine and L-valine with about one
quarter of the  efficiency. Sequence alignment of the    Phenylalanine-, tryptophan- and tyrosine-activating domains
isoleucine-activating domains from these synthetases with    Wild-type  GrsA,  three  truncated  fragments  of  this
the putative isoleucine-activating domains from bacitracin   monomodular synthetase and recombinant tyrocidine syn-
synthetases BacA, BacC and lichenysin synthetase LchAC    thetase TycA have been shown to activate both L- and
predicts a well-conserved family of structures  for the    D-phenylalanine [38–40]. Sequence alignment of the acti-
specificity pockets. As expected, the residues lining this    vation domains from these synthetases with that from the
pocket are largely hydrophobic (Figure 11a).                second module of bacitracin synthetase BacC predicts a


Figure 11

(a) Specificity pocket structures predicted for
the L-isoleucine-activating domains from
fengycin synthetase FenB-M1 and lichenysin
synthetase LicC-M3, and for the putative
L-isoleucine-activating domains from fengycin
synthetase Pps5-M1 and bacitracin
synthetases BacA-M1, BacA-M5 and
BacC-M1. (b) Specificity pocket structures
predicted for the L-valine-activating domain
from gramicidin synthetase GrsB-M2 and the
putative L-valine-activating domains from
fengycin synthetases FenE-M2 and Pps3-M2,
lichenysin synthetases LicB-M1 and LchAB-M1
and surfactin synthetase SrfAB-M1.


[PDF physical page 10]
220  Chemistry & Biology 2000, Vol 7 No 3




Figure 12

                                                                                                      (a) Specificity-pocket structures predicted for
                                                                                                the D-/L-phenylalanine-activating domains from
                                                                                            gramacidin synthetase GrsA and tyrocidine
                                                                                              synthetase TycA and the putative
                                                                                                        D-/L-phenylalanine-activating domain from
                                                                                                       bacitracin synthetase BacC-M2;
                                                                                                   (b) specificity pocket structure predicted for
                                                                                                the D-/L-phenylalanine- and L-tryptophan-
                                                                                                          activating domain from tyrocidine synthetase
                                                                                  TycB-M3; (c) specificity pocket structure
                                                                                               predicted for the putative L-phenylalanine-/
                                                                                                       L-tryptophan-activating domain from tyrocidine
                                                                                              synthetase TycB-M2; (d) specificity-pocket
                                                                                                    structures predicted for L-tryptophan-
                                                                                                          activating domains from the calcium-
                                                                                    dependent antibiotic synthetases Cda1-M3
                                                                                 and Cda3-M2.





structure containing only two highly conservative substitu-   As  tyrocidines  containing  either  L-phenylalanine  or
tions (Figure 12a). In contrast, cloning, overexpression and    L-tryptophan  at  the  third  position  of  their  peptide
purification  of  the  activation domain from  the  third   sequence  are  also known  [30], TycB-M2  might be
module of the tyrocidine synthetase TycB has shown it to    expected to contain an activating domain of similar archi-
activate L-tryptophan, in addition to L- and D-phenylala-    tecture  to TycB-M3.  For  reasons  that  are  unclear,
nine [30]. As both this module and TycA contain an    however, a comparison of the structures predicted for the
epimerization domain, these results are in accord with the    specificity pockets of these two domains shows that they
isolation of tyrocidines containing only D-phenylalanine at    are quite different (Figure 12b,c).
the first position of their peptide sequence, but either
D-phenylalanine or D-tryptophan at the fourth position. A   Comparing the structure for the third module of the tyro-
comparison of the predicted specificity pocket structures    cidine synthetase TycB with those predicted for the puta-
for the A domains of these modules reveals two substitu-    tive tryptophan-activating domains from the second and
tions: Ala322→Gly and Ile330→Val (Figure 12a,b). An    third modules of the CDA synthetases Cda1 and Cda3,
inspection of the GrsA crystal structure (Figures 1,3a)    respectively, reveals that they are of similar structure. The
indicates that the latter substitution should not alter the    principal  nonconservative  substitution  is Gly322→Ser
substrate specificity predicted for the TycB domain. In    (Figure 12). As variants of the CDA containing L- or
contrast,  the  former  substitution would  increase  the    D-phenylalanine in place of the L-tryptophan residues are
volume of the pocket enough to allow the larger aromatic    not known  it seems that Ser322 plays a pivotal role in
sidechain of tryptophan to bind preferentially. Recently,    selecting tryptophan over phenylalanine. This could be
Stachelhaus et al. [17] have confirmed this hypothesis by a    achieved through hydrogen bonding between the trypto-
mutagenesis experiment (Ala322→Gly).                  phan N-H and Ser322.

Figure 13

                                                                                                      (a) Predicted structure for the specificity
                                                                                        pocket of the L-tyrosine/L-tryptophan-
                                                                                                          activating domain from tyrocidine synthetase
                                                                                  TycC-M3. (b) Predicted structures for the
                                                                                                               specificity pockets of the putative L-tyrosine-
                                                                                                          activating domains from fengycin synthetases
                                                                              FenA-M3/Pps4-M3 and FenD-M1/Pps2-M1.


[PDF physical page 11]
                                                        Research Paper Prediction of NRPS amino acid selection Challis et al.  221




Figure 14

(a) Predicted structures for the specificity
pockets of the putative 3-hydroxy-L-tyrosine-
activating domains from chloroeremomycin
synthetases CepA-M3 and CepB-M3.
(b) Predicted specificity pocket structures for
the putative 3-hydroxy-4-methoxy-
L-phenylalanine-activating domains from the
saframycin MX1 synthetases SafA-M1 and
SafB-M2.





Cloning and overproduction of the activating domain from    actually  3-hydroxy-4-methoxy-L-phenylalanine  [43].  In
the  third module  of  tyrocidine synthetase TycC has    line with this suggestion, the predicted specificity-pocket
shown that it activates either L-tyrosine or L-tryptophan    structures for these domains are quite different from the
with approximately the same efficiency [30]. This finding    other  tyrosine-activating domains; they  curiously  lack
is in accord with the structure of tyrocidine D, which con-    polar residues capable of hydrogen bonding with the sub-
tains tryptophan in place of tyrosine at the seventh posi-    strate (Figure 14b).
tion.  In  contrast,  the  purified  wild-type  fengycin
synthetases Fen2 and Fen4 are reported to activate L-tyro-     Proline- and pipecolate-activating domains
sine, but not L-tryptophan [31]. In line with these observa-   The  recombinant  activating  domains  from  the  first
tions, no tryptophan-containing analogs of fengycin appear   modules of the tyrocidine and gramicidin synthetases,
to be known and, indeed, tyrosine at position 3 is lac-   TycB and GrsB [30,44], and the wild-type fengycin syn-
tonized in the product. Comparison of the structures for    thetase Fen1 have been shown to activate L-proline [31].
the specificity pocket for the A domain from Fen2 and   A comparison of the predicted structure of the specificity
Fen4  isoenzymes  FenD-M1/Pps2-M1  and  FenA-    pocket from the former domains with those from the puta-
M3/Pps4-M3, respectively, with that from TycC-M3 indi-    tive L-proline-activating domains from the Fen1 isoen-
cates a possible reason for these differences in substrate   zymes Pps4/FenA and the pristinamycin/virginiamycin
selectivity. Glu322 is therefore universally conserved in    synthetases SnbDE reveals that they are highly con-
the five domains and could have a role in substrate selec-    served. Given that proline is a hydrophobic amino acid, it
tion by hydrogen bonding to the aromatic hydroxyl group     is at first sight surprising that a number of polar residues is
of tyrosine. Residue Thr239, however, which is univer-    present  in  these  predicted  structures  (Figure  15a).
sally conserved in the fengycin structures, is replaced by    Proline, however, has much greater solubility in water
leucine  in the  tyrocidine  structure (Figure  13). This    than comparable  aliphatic amino  acids, which might
residue  could  also be  involved  in  tyrosine  selection    account for the substrate specificity conferred by these
through hydrogen bonding with the hydroxyl group of this    binding pockets.
substrate. The  replacement  of  this  residue  with  a
hydrophobic one could therefore lead to relaxed substrate   The synthetase responsible for pipecolate incorporation in
specificity and allow tryptophan to bind as well.              the biosynthesis of immunomycin has been purified from
                                                                 Streptomyces hygroscopicus var. ascomyceticus. This enzyme
A comparison of the predicted specificity-pocket structures    activates L-proline with about one fifth the efficiency, and
for the A domains from chloroeremomycin synthetases    a number of proline and pipecolate derivatives as well
CepA and CepB with those for the tyrosine-activating     [45]. Consistent with these observations, disrupting of the
domain, discussed above, reveals several differences. The    putative cyclodeaminase responsible  for conversion  of
differences may confer specificity for 3-hydroxy-tyrosine,    L-lysine to L-pipecolate in S. hygroscopicus, which produces
which has been shown to be incorporated into the closely    the related immunosuppressant rapamycin, led to the syn-
related glycopeptide vancomycin [41].                          thesis of prolylrapamycin as the major product [46]. A
                                                       comparison of the predicted specificity pocket structures
The two aromatic rings in the myxobacterial metabolite    for  the  pipecolate-incorporating  enzymes  from  the
saframycin MX1 have been shown to derive from tyrosine    rapamycin and FK-506 biosynthetic gene clusters reveals
by precursor incorporation experiments [42]. Other exper-    that they are similar to those for the proline-activating
iments with blocked mutants, however, have suggested   enzymes discussed above (Figure 15). The  ability for
that the  substrate  for the  putative  tyrosine-activating    these enzymes to activate and incorporate L-proline  is
domains from saframycin synthetases SafA and SafB is    therefore readily explained.


[PDF physical page 12]
222  Chemistry & Biology 2000, Vol 7 No 3




Figure 15

                                                                                                      (a) Predicted structures for the specificity
                                                                                         pockets of the L-proline-activating domains
                                                                                          from tyrocidine synthetase TycB-M1 and
                                                                                                  gramicidin synthetase GrsB, and the putative
                                                                                                            L-proline-activating domains from fengycin
                                                                                             synthetases FenA/Pps4 and
                                                                                                      pristinamycin/virginiamycin synthetases
                                                                             SnbDE; (b) the putative L-pipecolate-
                                                                                                          activating domains from rapamycin synthetase
                                                                         RapP and FK-506 synthetase FkbP.





Other amino-acid-activating domains                        Although 19 of the 20 common amino acids are repre-
For the domains that activate amino acids other than those    sented among the eight critical binding pocket residues,
discussed above, either more than one domain has not    arginine is notably absent from any of the >150 A domains
been sequenced (histidine, 3-methylglutamate, β-alanine,    examined. The reasons for this are not understood. Simi-
arginine, phenylglycine, 3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine and     larly, although some binding pockets lend themselves
2-butenyl-3-methyl-L-threonine), or the specificity pocket    readily to chemical interpretation of their substrate speci-
structures deduced from the available information show     ficity, particularly those recognizing polar amino acids,
weak homology (alanine and glycine). For these cases,    others do not; for example, cysteine or the strikingly polar
more sequence data will be required to derive consensus    pockets  selective  for  proline  and  pipecolate. More
structures for the specificity pockets. As glycine has no    broadly, a number of structural motifs have evolved to
sidechain and the sidechain of alanine is very small, it may    bind nonpolar amino acids, and often less selectively than
transpire that there are many degenerate solutions to    their polar counterparts. This initial, quite empirical analy-
selectively activating these substrates.                             sis could lead to more rigorous consideration of the many
                                                           questions of molecular recognition raised by this model of
One interesting case worthy of comment, however,  is   amino acid recognition and activation.
β-alanine seen in the siderophore exochelin [13]. In the
predicted  specificity pocket, the otherwise universally   Significance
conserved aspartate residue at position 235 is displaced to   One application of this model is for the prediction of the
position 236. This striking change presumably accommo-    order and identity of amino acids activated by a nonribo-
dates the greater separation between the amino and car-   somal peptide synthetase (NRPS) based on its sequence.
boxyl termini of this substrate.                     As many organisms appear to contain multiple NRPS
                                                     gene clusters, the ability to do this may greatly aid identi-
Limitations                                                      fication of a cluster of interest using the polymerase
A clear shortcoming of the available biochemical data is    chain  reaction (PCR)  with  appropriately  designed
that it is limited mostly to A domains from E. coli, Bacillus    primers. A second  application  is  to  rationally  alter
sp. and Pseudomonas sp. The important actinomycetes,    subsets of the eight critical residues to change the amino
notably Streptomyces, are largely missing from this essential    acid  recognized  and  activated  by  these  domains.
database. Additional potential deficiencies are that the pre-   Although this experiment has not yet been carried out
dictive value of the model is obviously dependent on accu-    with a full NRPS, encouragement can be taken from
rate sequence information available in the public domain,    existing, albeit limited, data that mutagenesis of recombi-
the accuracy of which we have come to question in certain   nant A domains to modify substrate specificities has
instances. Moreover, in the existing literature the limited   been achieved [17]. From the perspective of genetic engi-
number of potential substrates (amino acids and stereo-    neering, a useful comparison to the modular polyketide
chemistry) that have been tested for activity in some cases    synthases can be made. A large base of genetic experi-
against a particular A domain gives the impression, perhaps   ments exists here, where, in general, the swapping of
falsely, of high substrate specificity. This is especially rele-    functional domains has given proteins of significantly
vant for recognition of hydrophobic amino acids in which    reduced synthetic ability [47,48]. More recent experi-
relaxed specificity is frequently observed. Looking ahead,   ments suggest that improved efficiency can be achieved
the substrate recognition patterns identified by this model   by swapping entire modules [49]. Clearly, both of these
and that of Stachelhaus et al. [17] will provide guides for    strategies are available for the modification of NRPSs,
more thoughtful consideration of potential substrates both    and,  indeed, have  been  attempted  [37,50–52]. The
in overall structure, and absolute stereochemistry.         unknown tertiary and quarternary structures of these


[PDF physical page 13]
                                                        Research Paper Prediction of NRPS amino acid selection Challis et al.  223




giant synthetases, however, make the effect of gross          nonribosomal peptide biosynthesis at modular multienzymatic
                                                                                    templates. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 15428-15435.
mutational changes on catalytic efficiency impossible to                                                                                      9.  Townsend, C.A. & Wilson, B.A. (1988). The role of nocardicin G in
predict, but experience has shown them to be substan-          nocardicin A biosynthesis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 110, 3320-3321.
tially detrimental. The micro changes that may now be     10.  Wilson, B.A., Bantia, S., Salituro, G.M., Reeve, A.M. & Townsend, C.A.
                                                                                 (1988). Cell-free biosynthesis of nocardicin A from nocardicin E and
possible to engineer into existing NRPSs on the basis of          S-adenosylmethionine. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 110, 8238-8239.
the new model will not greatly affect their macromolecu-     11.  Guenzi, E., Galli, G., Grgurina, I., Gross, D.C. & Grandi, G. (1998).
lar structure and may, as a consequence, enable the          Characterization of the syringomycin synthetase gene cluster. A link
                                                                      between prokaryotic and eukaryotic peptide synthetases. J. Biol.
comparatively efficient synthesis of new peptide prod-        Chem. 273, 32857-32863.
ucts. For the moment, however, the promise of this strat-     12.  Sharman, G.J., Williams, D.H., Ewing, D.F. & Ratledge, C. (1995).
                                                                                                      Isolation, purification and structure of exochelin MS, the extracellular
egy for creating of structurally altered natural products                                                                                  siderophore from Mycobacterium smegmatis. Biochem. J. 305, 187-196.
will benefit from further protein sequence information to     13.  Yu, S., Fiss, E. & Jacobs, W.R., Jr. (1998). Analysis of the exochelin locus
refine the model discussed in this article and, ideally,             in Mycobacterium smegmatis: biosynthesis genes have homology with
                                                                        genes of the peptide synthetase family. J. Bacteriol. 180, 4676-4685.
extend the analysis to unusual amino acid substrates of     14.  Shen, B., Du, L., Sanchez, C., Chen, M. & Edwards, D.J. (1999).
choice.                                                                   Bleomycin biosynthesis in Streptomyces verticillus ATCC15003: a
                                                                      model of hybrid peptide and polyketide biosynthesis. Bioorg. Chem.
                                                                                 27, 155-171.
Materials and methods                                        15.  Belshaw, P.J., Walsh, C.T. & Stachelhaus, T. (1999). Aminoacyl-CoAs
Rasmol was used to view and analyze the crystal structure of the pheny-         as probes of condensation domain selectivity in nonribosomal peptide
lalanine activating domain of gramicidin A synthetase, GrsA (1amu.pdb),           synthesis. Science 284, 486-489.
to determine the binding pocket residues believed to be involved in sub-     16.  Conti, E., Stachelhaus, T., Marahiel, M.A. & Brick, P. (1997). Structural
strate selection. Multiple protein sequence alignments of candidate          basis for the activation of phenylalanine in the non- ribosomal
                                                                                    biosynthesis of gramicidin S. EMBO J. 16, 4174-4183.
adenylation domains were performed with ClustalX [24]. The eight criti-
                                                                          17.  Stachelhaus, T., Mootz, H.D. & Marahiel, M.A. (1999). The specificity-
cal amino acid residues lining the binding pockets of each A domain                                                                                     conferring code of adenylation domains in nonribosomal peptide
were obtained after aligning each sequence to the GrsA sequence          synthetases. Chem. Biol. 6, 493-505.
using its secondary structure mask as illustrated in Figure 1. For phylo-     18.  Turgay, K., Krause, M. & Marahiel, M.A. (1992). Four homologous
genetic analysis, peptide sequences were aligned using the ClustalX         domains in the primary structure of GrsB are related to domains in a
multiple alignment software described above. The distance matrices          superfamily of adenylate-forming enzymes. Mol. Microbiol. 6, 529-546.
were calculated from these alignments using the Kimura protein dis-     19.  Zhang, J.H., Quigley, N.B. & Gross, D.C. (1995). Analysis of the syrB
tance algorithm [53], and trees were generated using the unweighted         and syrC genes of Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae indicates that
                                                                                syringomycin is synthesized by a thiotemplate mechanism. J. Bacteriol.pair  group method  arithmetic  averages (UPGMA)  [54] and  the
                                                                             177, 4009-4020.
GROWTREE program of the GCG Wisconsin package (version 9.0).
                                                                          20.  Konz, D., Doekel, S. & Marahiel, M.A. (1999). Molecular and
                                                                               biochemical characterization of the protein template controlling
Identification of the predicted amino acid activated by a specific unknown          biosynthesis of the lipopeptide lichenysin. J. Bacteriol. 181, 133-140.
NRPS A module can be performed online in automated fashion at the     21.  de Crecy-Lagard, V., et al., & Blanc, V. (1997). Streptogramin B
forthcoming website: http://raynam.chm.jhu.edu/~nrps/.                            biosynthesis in Streptomyces pristinaespiralis and Streptomyces
                                                                                                virginiae: molecular characterization of the last structural peptide
Supplementary material                                                      synthetase gene. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 41, 1904-1909.
Supplementary material including a  list of amino acids  lining the     22.  Cosmina, P., et al., & van Sinderen, D. (1993). Sequence and analysis
                                                                                          of the genetic locus responsible for surfactin synthesis in Bacillus
binding pockets of A domains of assigned (Table S1) and unas-
                                                                                                      subtilis. Mol. Microbiol. 8, 821-831.
signed (Table S2) functions, and phylogenetic analysis of residues                                                                          23.  Husi, H., Schorgendorfer, K., Stempfer, G., Taylor, P. &
between the A3 and A6 core motif (Figure S1) and the eight putative         Walkinshaw, M.D. (1997). Prediction of substrate-specific pockets in
binding-pocket residues (Figure S2)  is available at http://current-          cyclosporin synthetase. FEBS Lett. 414, 532-536.
biology.com/supmat/supmatin.htm.                                       24.  Thompson, J.D., Gibson, T.J., Plewniak, F., Jeanmougin, F. &
                                                                                    Higgins, D.G. (1997). The ClustalX windows interface: flexible
                                                                                        strategies for multiple sequence alignment aided by quality analysis
Acknowledgements                                                             tools. Nucleic Acids Res. 25, 4876-4882.
Financial support of this work by the National Institute of Health (AI-14937)     25.  Reichert, J., Sakaitani, M. & Walsh, C.T. (1992). Characterization of
and the Wellcome Trust to G.L.C. (053086) is gratefully acknowledged.             EntF as a serine-activating enzyme. Protein Sci. 1, 549-556.
                                                                          26.  Keller, U. (1987). Actinomycin synthetases. Multifunctional enzymes
References                                                                 responsible for the synthesis of the peptide chains of actinomycin.
                                                                                                              J. Biol. Chem. 262, 5852-5856.
 1.  von Döhren, H., Keller, U., Vater, J. & Zocher, R. (1997).
                                                                          27.  Gehring, A.M., Mori, I., Perry, R.D. & Walsh, C.T. (1998). The
      Multifunctional peptide synthetases. Chem. Rev. 97, 2675-2705.
                                                                             nonribosomal peptide synthetase HMWP2 forms a thiazoline ring
 2.  Marahiel, M.A., Stachelhaus, T. & Mootz, H.D. (1997). Modular peptide
                                                                                  during biogenesis of yersiniabactin, an iron-chelating virulence factor
     synthetases involved in nonribosomal peptide synthesis. Chem. Rev.
                                                                                          of Yersinia pestis. Biochemistry 37, 11637-11650.
     97, 2651-2673.
                                                                          28.  Byford, M.F., Baldwin, J.E., Shiau, C.-Y. & Schofield, C.J. (1997). The
 3.  Konz, D. & Marahiel, M.A. (1999). How do peptide synthetases
                                                                     mechanism of ACV synthetase. Chem. Rev. 97, 2631-2649.
     generate structural diversity? Chem. Biol. 6, R39-R48.
                                                                           29.  Galli, G., et al., & Grandi, G. (1994). Characterization of the surfactin
 4.  Laland, S.G., Froyshov, O., Gilhuus-Moe, C. & Zimmer, T.L. (1972).
                                                                                synthetase multi-enzyme complex. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
     Gramicidin S synthetase, an enzyme with an unusually large number of
                                                                          1205, 19-28.      catalytic functions. Nat. New. Biol. 239, 43-44.
                                                                          30.  Mootz, H.D. & Marahiel, M.A. (1997). The tyrocidine biosynthesis
 5.  Laland, S.G. & Zimmer, T.L. (1973). The protein thiotemplate
                                                                         operon of Bacillus brevis: complete nucleotide sequence and
    mechanism of synthesis for the peptide antibiotics produced by
                                                                               biochemical characterization of functional internal adenylation     Bacillus brevis. Essays Biochem. 9, 31-57.
                                                                             domains. J. Bacteriol. 179, 6843-6850. 6.  Lipmann, F. (1973). Nonribosomal polypeptide synthesis on
                                                                          31.  Steller, S., et al., & Vater, J. (1999). Structural and functional     polyenzyme templates. Accounts Chem. Res. 6, 361-367.
                                                                                      organization of the fengycin synthetase multienzyme system from 7.  Kurahashi, K. (1974). Biosynthesis of small peptides. Annu. Rev.
                                                                                      Bacillus subtilis b213 and A1/3. Chem. Biol. 6, 31-41.    Biochem. 43, 445-459.
                                                                          32.  Krause, M., Marahiel, M.A., von Dohren, H. & Kleinkauf, H. (1985). 8.  Stein, T., et al., & Morris, H.R. (1996). The multiple carrier model of
                                                                                Molecular cloning of an ornithine-activating fragment of the


[PDF physical page 14]
224  Chemistry & Biology 2000, Vol 7 No 3





     gramicidin S synthetase 2 gene from Bacillus brevis and its
     expression in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 162, 1120-1125.
33.  Emery, T.F. (1966). Initial steps in the biosynthesis of ferrichrome.
     Incorporation of δ-N-hydroxyornithine and δ-N-acetyl-δ-N-
     hydroxyornithine. Biochemistry 5, 3694-3701.
34.  Wang, J., Budde, A.D. & Leong, S.A. (1989). Analysis of ferrichrome
     biosynthesis in the phytopathogenic fungus Ustilago maydis: cloning
      of an ornithine-N5-oxygenase gene. J. Bacteriol. 171, 2811-2818.
35.  Vater, J. & Kleinkauf, H. (1975). Substrate specificity of the amino acyl
     adenylate activation sites of gramicidin S-synthetase (GSS). Acta.
     Microbiol. Acad. Sci. Hung. 22, 419-425.
36.  Lin, G.H., et al., & Liu, S. T. (1998). Molecular cloning and
     characterization of fengycin synthetase gene fenB from Bacillus
      subtilis. J. Bacteriol. 180, 1338-1341.
37.  Elsner, A., et al., & Bernhard, F. (1997). Substrate specificity of hybrid
    modules from peptide synthetases. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 4814-4819.
38.  Vater, J. & Kleinkauf, H. (1976). Gramicidin S-synthetase. A further
     characterization of phenylalanine racemase, the light enzyme of
     gramicidin S-synthetase. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 429, 1062-1072.
39.  Stachelhaus, T. & Marahiel, M.A. (1995). Modular structure of peptide
     synthetases revealed by dissection of the multifunctional enzyme
     GrsA. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 6163-6169.
40.  Pfeifer, E., Pavela-Vrancic, M., von Dohren, H. & Kleinkauf, H. (1995).
     Characterization of tyrocidine synthetase 1 (TY1): requirement of
      posttranslational modification for peptide biosynthesis. Biochemistry
     34, 7450-7459.
41.  Zmijewski, M.J. & Fayerman, J.T. (1995). Glycopeptides. In Genetics
    and Biochemistry of Antibiotic Production. (Vining, L.C. & Stuttard, C.,
      eds.), pp 269-281, Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, MA.
42.  Mikami, Y., et al., & Okuda, S. (1985). Biosynthetic studies on
     saframycin A, a quinone antitumor antibiotic produced by
     Streptomyces lavendulae. J. Biol. Chem. 260, 344-348.
43.  Pospiech, A., Bietenhader, J. & Schupp, T. (1996). Two multifunctional
     peptide synthetases and an O-methyltransferase are involved in the
     biosynthesis of the DNA-binding antibiotic and antitumour agent
     saframycin Mx1 from Myxococcus xanthus. Microbiology 142, 741-746.
44.  Hori, K., et al., & Saito, Y. (1991). The nucleotide sequence for a
      proline-activating domain of gramicidin S synthetase 2 gene from
     Bacillus brevis. J. Biochem. 110, 111-119.
45.  Nielsen, J.B., Hsu, M.J., Byrne, K.M. & Kaplan, L. (1991). Biosynthesis
      of the immunosuppressant immunomycin: the enzymology of
     pipecolate incorporation. Biochemistry 30, 5789-5796.
46.  Khaw, L.E., Bohm, G.A., Metcalfe, S., Staunton, J. & Leadlay, P.F.
     (1998). Mutational biosynthesis of novel rapamycins by a strain of
     Streptomyces hygroscopicus NRRL 5491 disrupted in rapL, encoding
     a putative lysine cyclodeaminase. J. Bacteriol. 180, 809-814.
47.  McDaniel, R., et al., & Ashley, G. (1999). Multiple genetic modifications
      of the erythromycin polyketide synthase to produce a library of novel
      ‘unnatural’ natural products. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96, 1846-1851.
48.  Katz, L. (1997). Manipulation of modular polyketide synthases. Chem.
     Rev. 97, 2557-2575.
49.  Gokhale, R.S., Tsuji, S.Y., Cane, D.E. & Khosla, C. (1999). Dissecting
    and exploiting intermodular communication in polyketide synthases.
     Science 284, 482-485.
50.  Stachelhaus, T., Schneider, A. & Marahiel, M.A. (1995). Rational
     design of peptide antibiotics by targeted replacement of bacterial and
     fungal domains. Science 269, 69-72.
51.  Schneider, A., Stachelhaus, T. & Marahiel, M.A. (1998). Targeted
      alteration of the substrate specificity of peptide synthetases by rational
    module swapping. Mol. Gen. Genet. 257, 308-318.
52.  de Ferra, F., Rodriguez, F., Tortora, O., Tosi, C. & Grandi, G. (1997).
     Engineering of peptide synthetases. Key role of the thioesterase-like
    domain for efficient production of recombinant peptides. J. Biol.
    Chem. 272, 25304-25309.
53.  Kimura, M. (1983). The Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution.
    Cambrige University Press, Cambridge.
54.  Sneath, P.H. & Sokal, R.R. (1973). Numerical Classification. Freeman,
    San Francisco, CA.