
[PDF physical page 1]
       Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x
   Visualizing acyl carrier protein interactions
   within a crosslinked type I polyketide
   synthase



        Received: 6 November 2024               Ziran Jiang1,2, Graham W. Heberlig    1,2, Jeffrey A. Chen    1, Jennifer Huynh    1,
                                       James J. La Clair   1 & Michael D. Burkart   1
       Accepted: 1 August 2025


                                         Using a combination of dual covalent crosslinking and cryo-EM analyses, we
          Check for updates                     elucidate the structure of mycocerosic acid synthase from Mycobacterium
                                                 tuberculosis trapped in two distinct catalytic states during its iterative cycle.1234567890():,;                 1234567890():,;                                     These structures reveal domain architecture of the acyl carrier protein med-
                                                  iating condensation and dehydration through dual site-selective crosslinking
                                             of the acyl carrier protein with the ketosynthase and dehydratase domains.
                                Map density was sufﬁcient to visualize full domain architecture with active site-
                                    bound probes and elucidate key interactions of four distinct crosslinked
                                                species. Here, iterative vectorial polyketide biosynthesis arises through an
                                                 overall twisting and tilting architecture, enabling positioning and entry of the
                                         cognate substrate at each enzymatic domain. These structures present valu-
                                             able details for future therapeutic design against mycocerosic acid biosynth-
                                                   esis in M. tuberculosis.




        Approximately 25% of the global population is infected by Myco-   However, progress toward their understanding has been hindered by
        bacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), responsible for 1.5 million annual deaths   the lack of fundamental structural knowledge attributed to their inher-
        worldwide1 and a leading cause of child mortality2. This has been   ently large size and complex structural dynamics. Early type  I PKS
        aggravated by multidrug-resistant strains, which now infect over half a   structural studies focused on excised catalytic domains, didomains, or
         million patients, and new therapies will be crucial for future control3,4.   pruned modules5,12, where the ACP is either missing or poorly resolved.
       As exempliﬁed by isoniazid, which targets the enoylreductase in   As single particle cryo-EM has advanced, modular PKSs have been cap-
        mycolic acid biosynthesis, mycocerosic acid synthase (MAS) offers a   tured utilizing antigen-binding fragments for structural stabilization,
         potential drug target (Figs. 1a and 2b) by producing part of phthiocerol   enabling some ACP visualization in complex with select domains, but
        dimycocerosate (PDIM) (Supplementary Fig. 1), a key component of   the map density of substrates and ACP structure has remained missing
        the cell envelope5. While PDIM makes up 46% of extractable Mtb lipids,   or fragmentary13–17.
             it plays a major role in Mtb virulence, immunosuppression, and      To address these challenges, we developed dual site-selective
         evasion6–8. MAS, a fully reducing iterative type I polyketide synthase   crosslinking probes as tools to conformationally constrain PKSs in
         (PKS), is composed of six domains (Fig. 2a, b) that together catalyze   their functional states for structural analysis18. Tethering a covalent
        the elongation of n-C6-C20 fatty acids to prepare mycocerosic acid9,10.   crosslinker onto the ACP can trap the interactions mediating catalysis
        Within this 448 kDa obligate homodimer, ﬁve monofunctional enzy-  when crosslinked with  catalytic domains, offering unambiguous
        matic domains sequentially catalyze discrete chemical steps upon a   structural information of the protein-protein interactions (PPIs) and
        growing metabolite that is covalently tethered to the acyl carrier   protein-substrate interactions19. We aim to visualize catalytic domains
        protein (ACP)5 (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. 1).                        in complex with ACP and chose MAS as a type I PKS model by which to
           Type I PKSs, including MAS, have garnered signiﬁcant attention as   develop and demonstrate these tools (Fig. 1b–d). Here, we elucidate
         potential therapeutic targets and for the rational design of metabolites11.   the complete structure of MAS with well-deﬁned ACP interactions



         1Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. 2These authors contributed equally: Ziran Jiang, Graham W.
          Heberlig.    e-mail: mburkart@ucsd.edu



        Nature Communications| (2025)16:7798                                                                                                        1


[PDF physical page 2]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x





Fig. 1 | Dual site-selective crosslinking of the mycocerosic acid synthase (MAS).    fully reduce the condensation product (modiﬁcation compartment, steps 2–4).
a Depiction of ACP processivity in MAS biosynthesis. ACP must interact with each  MAS exists as a homodimer, where protomer 1 (indicated by A after each abbre-
catalytic domain, acyltransferase (AT, step 5 extension unit loading), ketosynthase    viation) is depicted with domain abbreviations, and protomer 2 (indicated by B or
(KS, step 1 condensation. Substrate loading or reloading step is not shown),        by prime’ after each abbreviation). b Mechanism of ACP = KS (=indicates crosslink)
ketoreductase (KR, step 2 β-ketoreduction), dehydratase (DH, step 3 dehydration),    crosslinking reaction. c Mechanism of ACP = DH crosslinking reaction. d This pro-
and enoylreductase (ER, step 4 α,β-enoylreduction), through discrete protein-       cess is achieved through chemoenzymatic loading of 1 onto the apo-ACP to deliver
protein and protein-substrate interactions during each catalytic cycle. MAS can be   crypto-ACP. Once loaded, the active site Cys of KS or His of DH react with the α-Br-
divided into two compartments, one that serves to load and elongate acyl chains    pantetheinamide warhead, yielding a crosslinked complex.
(condensation compartment, steps 1 and 5); and a second that serves to modify and


through the application of dual site-selective crosslinking (Fig. 2a and   domains, including ketosynthases (KS) (Fig. 1b)19,20, dehydratases (DH)
Supplementary Fig. 2) and single particle cryo-EM analysis, resolving    (Fig. 1c)21,22, and other partner proteins23,24 in type II fatty acid synthase
key protein-protein interactions between the ACP with enzymatic   (FAS) and PKS systems. Here, a panel of crosslinkers (Supplementary
domains and linker regions that to date have remained unresolved. We   Fig. 3) can be loaded onto an ACP through a chemoenzymatic one-pot
ﬁnd that dual covalent crosslinkers combined with cryo-EM single   reaction using four enzymes (CoaA, CoaD, CoaE, and Sfp) to access
particle analysis can offer access to multiple ACP bound states and   crypto-ACP (Fig. 1d)25,26. In type II systems the crypto-ACP can be gen-
provide a dynamic framework from which to visualize complex ACP   erated separately, puriﬁed, and incubated in any desired molar ratio
interactions in multidomain synthases.                               with the target partner protein in trans (intermolecularly between two
                                                                           proteins). However, when applying this technique to type  I PKSs,
Results                                                   where multiple domains are found within a single megasynthase pro-
Domain-selective crosslinking of MAS                                   tein, the free reactive crosslinker has the potential to react with an
We have previously demonstrated that dual covalent crosslinkers   enzymatic domain, thereby inactivating it and creating shunt domain
(Supplementary Fig. 3) efﬁciently trap the ACP with a variety of partner   products (Supplementary Fig. 4a).



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7798                                                                            2


[PDF physical page 3]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x





Fig. 2 | Architecture of complex A displaying crosslinking of ACP = KS domains.   to 5. Two protomers comprise the structure in (a). c Coomassie brilliant blue
a Structure of complex A at 3.9 Å with a contour level of 0.088. Distances of key     stained 6% SDS-PAGE gel (Supplementary Fig. 45) depicting the outcome of
residues in select domains are shown to compare the conformation of each pro-     crosslinking with 1. d Selected particle stacks from 2D classiﬁcation. e FSC curve for
tomer. The homodimeric architecture provides two catalytic chambers housing the   complex A density map (Supplementary Figs. S8–S9). f Demonstration of ACPs
catalytic process. ACPs engage their catalytic domains in chambers 1 and 2. b Linear   crosslinked at KSs, revealing dual site-selective crosslinking with 1 (Fig. 1b).
organization of each domain in respective MAS protomers, where L1-L5 are linkers 1



   To avoid such shunt products, we ﬁrst attempted to crosslink   Crosslinking enables cryo-EM structure elucidation of multiple
(Supplementary Fig. 5) the excised crypto-ACP domain with excised  complexes
KS, excised KS-LD-AT (including linker domain LD) of MAS, or E. coli   Unproductive crosslinking studies with excised MAS domains in trans
FabB (type II FAS KS) in trans with a panel of crosslinkers (Supple-   led us to explore the reaction in cis (intramolecularly within the same
mentary Fig. 3). This experiment was designed to also investigate   protein) under the hypothesis that crosslinking between the ACP and
the PPIs between excised MAS ACP and excised MAS KS through  KS could enhance resolution in cryo-EM by rigidifying these dynamic
structural analysis. However, modest or no crosslinking yield was   multidomain proteins (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 2). To evaluate
observed between the crypto-ACP and KS or KS-LD-AT (Supple-  MAS with the ACP crosslinked to KS (Fig. 1b), we revisited our meth-
mentary Figs. 5a, b). This is likely due to inactivation of the KS, as it   odology to improve crosslinking probe loading efﬁciency. We ﬁrst
has been reported that the excised MAS-like PKS KS-LD-AT trido-   converted the probes into the primed CoA analogs, followed by
main construct exists as a monomer-dimer equilibrium in solution5.   addition of apo-MAS to maximize the yield of crosslinked MAS (Sup-
This interpretation is supported by published observation of KSs in   plementary Fig. 4b). In this way, this optimized reaction sequence
both type I and type II systems, conﬁrming that KS domains function   minimized interaction time between the free probe and the apo-MAS,
as obligate homodimers. Surprisingly, slight crosslinking between   limiting shunt product formation.
FabB and excised MAS-ACP was observed, indicating that MAS-ACP     We then turned our attention to selecting an optimal probe for
is functional even though excised. The low crosslinking yield was   crosslinking MAS in cis (Supplementary Fig. 3). With in trans cross-
most likely due to the difference in ACP-KS PPIs between E. coli type   linking in E. coli ACP as a model (Supplementary Fig. 6), we learned
II FAS and M. tuberculosis type I PKS systems. We examined cross-   that α-bromoamide probes can target both KS and DH enzymes.
linking between the excised MAS ACP and intact full-length MAS.   Here, the use of a probe that targets more than one domain could
With the intact MAS, crypto-ACPs loaded with a panel of probes   provide a useful tool to trap the dynamic multistate movement in
crosslinked efﬁciently (left, Supplementary Fig. 5c), conﬁrming that  MAS (Fig. 1a). We selected C16-α-bromoamide 1 (Figs. 1b–d and
the KS activity requires a stable dimerization interface provided by   Supplementary Fig. 3), where a long lipid tail mimicked the growing
other domains such as DH and ER. In comparison, crosslinking   mycocerosate chain, and the α-bromoamide moiety offered excel-
between E. coli AcpP (right, Supplementary Fig. 5c) and intact MAS   lent crosslinking efﬁciency (Fig. 2c). Size exclusion chromatography
showed  only  very  limited  crosslinking  with  the same  panel,   afforded crosslinked MAS products at >45% crosslinking yield by
demonstrating that PPIs between ACP and KS domains are distinct  SDS-PAGE (right, Supplementary Fig. 7). Aliquots of a 1 mg/mL sam-
in type I and type II systems. These studies of crosslinking in trans   ple were applied to holey carbon grids, blotted, and plunge-frozen in
demonstrate the importance of strict PPIs and domain boundaries   liquid ethane on a Vitrobot Mark IV. Micrographs were collected at
as exempliﬁed in previous PKS engineering works27,28.              130,000× nominal magniﬁcation with a pixel size of 0.889 Å and




Nature Communications| (2025)16:7798                                                                        3


[PDF physical page 4]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x


exposure dose of 55 e-/Å2 on a Titan Krios G4 electron microscope.   the modifying compartment are used. DHA • DHB is a dimer of two
The resulting movies were processed within Cryo-SPARC and curated   double-hotdog folds, forming a “handshake fold” and creating a 429 Å2
to remove micrographs with poor CTF ﬁt, large in-frame motion, and   interface5. The catalytically inactive pseudo-KR domain (ΨKR) is linked
images with overly thick ice. After unsupervised particle picking and   to the DH through a 31 residue DH-ΨKR linker (L2) (Supplementary
ﬁltering (Supplementary Figs. 8–9), an initial stack of ~1,050,000   Figs. 13b and 52a, b). Next, a 27 residue linker 3 (L3) connects the ΨKR
particles was obtained and further classiﬁed, ﬁltered, and reﬁned to   to the ER, which is a homodimer that forms a 1165 Å2 interface, fol-
generate four reconstructed maps for complexes A-D from a single   lowed by a 21 residue linker 4 (L4) connecting ER to KR. Altogether, L2,
data set. In complex A (Supplementary Fig. 2), all domains KS, LD, AT   L3, and L4 form two sets of antiparallel β-strands, providing extensive
(acyl transferase), DH, ΨKR (nonfunctional ketoreductase as struc-   interfaces with the KR (2365 Å2) and ER (686 Å2) domains. Supported
tural support), ER (enoylreductase), KR (ketoreductase), and ACP are  by partial density, a 14 residue ﬂexible KR-ACP linker (L5) allows the
visualized. Both ACPs crosslinked at KSs with probe 1. Based on the  ACP to travel between the domains of each of the catalytic chambers of
SDS-PAGE results of crosslinking, cross-protomer crosslinking was  MAS (Supplementary Figs. 13b and 52a, b). The linker-based network
observed, but the data does not exclude crosslinking within the same   creates two functional catalytic chambers and ensures ﬂexibility for
protomer (Supplementary Figs. 7 and 45). Complex B (Supplemen-   the ACP to reach all domains akin to porcine FAS (Supplementary
tary Fig. 2) revealed the homodimeric condensation compartment   Figs. 48 and 49). Due to the ﬂexibility offered by the linker-based
(KS-LD-AT) with one ACP crosslinked at KS via 1, while the other KS   architecture, complex A  is not perfectly symmetrical. Distances
was inhibited by 1 in small molecule form (without ACP). Complex C   between the active site residues Tyr1912 (KR) and Ser623 (AT), as well
(Supplementary Fig. 2) demonstrated the modifying compartment   as Tyr1912 (KR) and Ser2060 (ACP), are 78.1 Å and 71.9 Å, respectively,
(DH-ΨKR-ER-KR), with ACP crosslinked with DH through 1. Complex   in protomer 1, compared with 72.4 Å and 69.6 Å inter-residue distances
D (Supplementary Fig. 2) revealed all domains, with both ACPs   in protomer 2, revealing a signiﬁcant in-plane tilting movement of the
crosslinked at DH and KS, respectively.                             modifying compartment that pivots at the KS • KS’ core (Fig. 2a). The
    Evaluating these four crosslinked complexes offered several   double crosslinking between ACPs and KSs was supported by unam-
important structural insights. First, dual site-selective crosslinking   biguous map density. The crosslinkers tethered on the ACPA and ACPB
enabled  high-resolution  visualization  of  multidomain  synthases   through a 4’-phosphopantetheine (PPant) arm are well resolved within
detailing MAS ACP interactions with crosslinked domains, adjacent   the KS • KS’ binding tunnels, each making a covalent linkage at the
domains, and linker peptides. Second, ACP crosslinking can rigidify   active site Cys residues (Cys177 in KS and KS’) (Fig. 2f and Supple-
MAS, providing higher local resolution at the crosslinked sites. Finally,   mentary Fig. 14).
dual site-selective crosslinking greatly enhanced the homogeneity of 4
trapped states within 6 catalytic states in each catalytic chamber.      Intramolecular Crosslinking Between ACP and KS in Complex B
                                             We also obtained a density map for complex B (Fig. 3 and Supple-
Architecture of the ACPs = KSs dual crosslinked complex A      mentary Fig. 15) from the same dataset with a higher overall resolution
We obtained a density map with 3.87 Å resolution (Fig. 2) from samples   (3.22 Å) that further elucidates details of the condensation compart-
of the ACPs = KSs ( = indicates crosslink) dual crosslinked protein,  ment (KS-LD-AT), with only one ACP crosslinked at KS (Fig. 3a and
complex A, including all domains KS, AT, DH, ΨKR, ER, KR, and ACP   Supplementary Figs. 15–17). Due to the structural rigidiﬁcation of
(Fig. 2a and Supplementary Figs. 10–12). Both ACPs are crosslinked at   covalent ACP crosslinking, the local resolution around the ACP cross-
the homodimeric KS domains, linking Ser2060 in ACP with Cys177 in   linked region is higher than the non-crosslinked region (Supplemen-
KS with the C16 acyl tail bound within the canonical KS substrate   tary Fig. 15). This effect is particularly pronounced in AT’ in complex B.
pocket (Fig. 2f). Our SDS-PAGE results (Supplementary Figs. 7 and 45)  Such a rigidiﬁcation effect through ACP crosslinking binding was also
demonstrate cross-protomer crosslinking, but they do not exclude   observed in the recent DEBS structures30. Along with crosslinker 1, ACP
crosslinking within the same protomer. The full MAS structure adopts  was unambiguously resolved. Covalent bond S-C between the KS
a homodimeric architecture (Fig. 2a), comprising two catalytic cham-   active site Cys177 and the reactive α-position of the crosslinker (Fig. 3e
bers (chambers 1 and 2, Fig. 2a). The dimerization interface is com-  and Supplementary Fig. 18), as well as the O-P covalent bond between
prised of the KS • KS’ (2566 Å2), DHA • DHB (429 Å2), and ERA • ERB (1165   the ACP active residue Ser2060 and the PPant arm (Fig. 3e and Sup-
Å2) domains. The condensation compartment consists of a KS • KS’   plementary Fig. 18), were determined by continuous map density. In
homodimer core followed by two AT domains on opposite sides   the other protomer, continuous density was observed only for cross-
spaced out by LD domains (Supplementary Fig. 13a). While the LD   linker 1 reacted with Cys177 of KS but not ACP due to the shunt reac-
domain acts as a spacer between the KS and AT domains, it has limited   tion of 1 (Supplementary Fig. 19).
contact with the KS. Intriguingly, the 62 residue post-AT linker (L1)        In MAS, the ACP approaches the KS domain with a head-on
brings the KS and AT into proximity via a polar interface (Supple-   orientation (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Fig. 20A). This contrasts
mentary Fig. 13a). L1 wraps around the LD, forming an LD/L1 interface   with type II KS-ACP interactions, typiﬁed by AcpP = FabB (PDB ID:
(1627 Å2), which offers extensive L1/KS (970 Å2) and L1/AT (320 Å2)   7L4L), where the AcpP α-helical bundle is tilted to allow the KS to
interactions. The LD has been previously reported to be involved in a  make more contact with helices 1, 2, and 3 (Supplementary Fig. 20d)
turnstile mechanism, where in a closed conformation it forms exten-  and loop 1 of ACP. Type II ACPs are also typically negatively charged
sive interactions with the AT to block access to the KS13. While such a  and utilize extensive electrostatic interactions for KS recognition. In
turnstile-closed state ensures vectorial biosynthesis in the DEBS type I   contrast, the coulombic potentials are evenly distributed across the
modular PKS system13,29, it is not observed in complex A, which is an  MAS ACP (Supplementary Fig. 17). This lack of electrostatic inter-
iterative type I PKS (Supplementary Fig. 13).                           actions is compensated by the multidomain architecture of MAS,
   From the AT, L1 leads to the DHA • DHB of the modifying com-  where the ACP  is located on the same polypeptide as other
partment which resides just above the KS • KS’ core (Supplementary   domains31. Interactions between ACP and KS are limited to a single
Figs. 13a, 52a, and 52b). Residues 882-893 residing in C-terminal of  hydrogen bond between Arg2045 on loop 1 of the ACP and Glu79 of
linker 1 were not modeled in due to weak density. Due to this, the  KS (Fig. 3b and Supplementary Fig. 21a) along with weak hydro-
connection between the condensation and modifying compartments   phobic and  electrostatic interactions (Supplementary  Fig. 50).
cannot be deﬁned within the same protomer. As a result, two separate  Complex B reveals that the docking of ACP on KS is mainly facili-
labeling systems of KS-LD-AT/KS’-LD’-AT’ for the condensation com-   tated by interactions with the neighboring AT domain via hydrogen
partment and DHA-ΨKRA-ERA-KRA-ACPA/DHB-ΨKRB-ERB-KRB-ACPB for   bonding between Arg2032 and Arg2033 on helix 1 and Arg2090 on



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7798                                                                     4


[PDF physical page 5]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x





Fig. 3 | Structure of complex B with a single ACP = KS crosslink. a Map of one    entrance of the KS substrate binding tunnel demonstrates the inter-loop interac-
ACP crosslinked at KS’ within the condensation compartment at 3.2 Å, with a         tions (Asn272, Asp274, and Asn421) and its interactions with the PPant arm of 1. This
contour level of 0.12. Colored circles represent regions of expansion in (b–e). Panel   gate is visualized in both KSs in complex A. e Crosslinker 1 links ACP to KS by
(f) further distinguishes the KS and KS’. b Crosslinking of ACP and KS traps PPIs     trapping Cys177 (Fig. 1b), highlighting active site residues in the substrate loading
between ACP and KS. A single hydrogen bond between Glu79 and Arg2045 med-    and reloading states (Fig. 1a). f Demonstration of the deep KS binding tunnel
iates the ACP interaction with KS. c More extensive residue interactions are seen    formed by the KS • KS’ dimerization interface. In complex B, one ACP is crosslinked
between ACP and AT. d The KS gating network (gating loops 1 and 2) residing at the    at KS, while KS is shunted by 1 without ACP.


helix 4 with Asp819 on the AT domain (Fig. 3C and Supplementary   (Supplementary Figs. 28b, c). In MAS complex B (Supplementary
Fig. 21b).                                                                      Fig. 28a), the crosslinker, tethered through a phosphodiester linkage
   We adopted a quantitative crosslinking assay to evaluate the MAS   to Ser2060 of ACP, has the PPant arm forming hydrogen bonds with
mutants in this study, as the correlation between crosslinking yield and   residues Thr279 and Thr281 in KS (Fig. 3d, e). These reside on a loop
enzymatic activity has been validated32. ACP-AT interactions were   analogous to gating loop 2 of FabF, which orchestrates with gating
veriﬁed to be critical for the ACP catalytic efﬁciency with KS by eval-   loop 1 to govern the recognition and processing of ACP substrates
uating  comparative  crosslinking  of  point  mutants  Glu79Lys,   (Supplementary Figs. 28b,  c)33,34. In E. coli FabF, PPant interactive
Asp819Ala, Asp819Arg, Arg2032Asp, and Arg2090Asp (Supplementary   residues His268 and Thr270 in gating loop 2 are responsible for gov-
Figs. 22–27). In comparison, ACPs in modular type I PKSs DEBS-M1   erning the gate-closed and gate-open conformation by interacting with
(PDB ID: 7M7F, Supplementary Fig. 20b) and Lsd14 (PDB ID: 7S6C,   Asp35 of AcpP. In KS, Thr279 and Thr281, respectively, reﬂect similar
Supplementary Fig. 20c) adopt slightly different binding modes at the   positions (Supplementary Fig. 28).
condensation state, with more interactions between helix 1 and 2 of      Through  the  crosslinking  assay  (Supplementary  Fig.  22),
ACP and KS, but no  interactions with the AT (Supplementary  mutant Thr279Ala (Supplementary Figs. 22–23) revealed a 2-fold
Fig.  20a)13,14. However, the observed ACP-AT interactions are in   decrease, and Thr281Ala (Supplementary  Figs. 22–23) showed
agreement with the recent complex between DEBS-M3 and ACP2   complete abolishment of crosslinking efﬁciency. Based on this
structure at the transacylation state30. It is worth noting that a six   result, Thr279 and Thr281 in gating loop 2 are strong candidates for
residue helix of KS near the ACP docking interface mediates interac-   regulating the gating mechanism of KS. Consistent with FabF, the
tions with ACP in Lsd14 (Pro118-Ser123, PDB ID: 7S6C, Supplementary   coordination of gating loops 1 and 2 is directed by the highly con-
Fig. 20c), DEBS-M1 (Pro113-Ala118, PDB ID: 7M7F, Supplementary   served residues Asp274 and Asn421 across type I and type II PKS and
Fig. 20b), as well as type II AcpP=KS (Ser63-Arg68, PDB ID:7L4L, Sup-  FAS KSs (also conserved in DEBS-M1 and LSD14)33. Surprisingly,
plementary Fig. 20d); but this structural feature is not seen in MAS   crosslinking was completely eliminated in MAS mutant Asn421Ala,
complex B (Supplementary Figs. 20a, e).                             suggesting its potential role in orchestrating the KS gating system
                                                              (Supplementary Fig. 22). Although the gating loops are in the closed
Non-turnstile ketosynthase substrate regulation                 conformation upon crosslinking in both MAS complexes A and B,
The KS from MAS shares similarities in KS substrate binding with type I  Asp2059 of ACP appears to be a candidate residue to trigger
and  II PKSs by using the same canonical KS binding tunnel as   opening of the gating network by interaction with loop 1 of KS
demonstrated in E. coli FabF (PDB ID: 7L4L), Lsd14 (PDB ID: 7S6C), and   (Supplementary Fig. 28a). Interestingly, the main KS gating residue
DEBS-M1 (PDB ID: 7M7F) (Supplementary Fig. 20e). The AcpP = FabF   (gating loop 1) is Met417 instead of Phe, as found in type II PKS and
structure revealed an unprecedented gating motif for KSs that assists  FAS systems33,34. When mutated to Phe (Met417Phe), a 35% decrease
in the substrate binding sequence of the ping-pong mechanism33.   in crosslinking efﬁciency was observed. This may be due to the use
Here, Phe400 of gating loop 1 moves 7 Å upon the interaction of gating   of methylmalonyl-CoA as the extension unit in MAS instead of
loop 2 with acyl-AcpP in preparation for the initial transacylation step;   malonyl-CoA, as Met is more ﬂexible and less bulky. Although more
this is followed by Phe400 repositioning near the active site for   detailed investigation is necessary, key residues Thr279, Thr281,
malonyl-AcpP  to undergo  decarboxylative  Claisen condensation   Met417, and Asn421 are most probably involved in regulating the



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7798                                                                          5


[PDF physical page 6]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x





Fig. 4 | Structure of single ACP = DH crosslinked complex C. a Cryo-EM map at   MAS-like PKS and Complex A were aligned to the crosslinked DH of complex C
3.7 Å and a contour level of 0.19, of ACP crosslinked to DH of the modifying       (RMSD = 1.266 Å). Residues shown are the reactive His and Asp residing at the active
compartment. Colored circles represent regions of expansion in (b–e). b) Upon      site of the DH domain. Lower left cartoon demonstrates the crosslinked DH sub-
ACP = DH crosslinking, interactions are observed between ACP with DH. A single     strate binding tunnel entrance (arrow) translates and rotates away from KR to be
hydrogen bond is observed between DH Asn933 and ACP Thr2072. c In addition,    accessible for MAS ACP crosslinking in complex C. e ACP = DH crosslinking forged a
more extensive interactions are seen between ACP and L2 as well as L5.             covalent bond between active site His929 and 1. The continuous map density for
d Comparison amongst apo-DH of MAS-like PKS (purple) (PDB ID: 5BP4), apo-DH of   the crosslinking at His929 and Ser2060 can be found in Supplementary Fig. 36.
MAS complex A (orange) (PDB ID: 9D2Y), and crosslinked ACP = DH of complex C    f Depiction of the hydrophobic tail of 1 within the binding pocket of DH (Supple-
(PDB ID: 9D30) demonstrating DH reactive residues His and Asp as well as the      mentary Fig. 37).
signiﬁcant domain translation and rotation (Supplementary Fig. 39). DH domains of



gate-open and gate-closed conformations in KS as a part of the   by Khosla et al. emphasizes the reloading of extended or processed
substrate regulation.                                                 substrate is prohibited by the “turnstile closed” conformation (AT
    Within the KS active site, the covalent bond between the α carbon   blocking ACP access to the KS) to ensure the vectorial synthesis of
of 1 and Cys177 of KS is well visualized (Supplementary Fig. 18). The   modular polyketides37. The absence of observed “turnstile closed”
warhead carbonyl of crosslinker 1 coordinates with two highly con-   conformations in MAS complexes A and B implies that iterative type I
served residues His312 and His348 (Supplementary Fig. 18), trapping   PKSs utilize a different mechanism to prevent premature reloading of
the transacylation (substrate loading or reloading) state of KS in its   the KS domain.
gate-closed form (Supplementary Fig. 28a)19. Supported by continuous
map density, the C16 acyl tail of 1 is buried deep within the hydro-   Intramolecular crosslinking between DH and ACP in Complex C
phobic tunnel formed by the KS • KS’ dimeric interface (Supplemen-  We also obtained a map of the modifying compartment DH-ΨKR-ER-
tary Figs. 18 and 29). The end of the binding tunnel lacks a clear  KR-ACP (3.74 Å) from the same dataset. Here, one ACP is covalently
boundary with the binding tunnel of the other KS monomer, providing   crosslinked to the DH domain (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Figs. 31–33),
space for the ﬁnal long, branched mycocerosic acid product (Supple-   which consists of a double-hotdog fold in type I PKSs.In thiscomplex, 1
mentary Fig. 29). In comparison to KS from DEBS-M1 (Supplementary   covalently crosslinks the ACP to the active site His929 of the DH
Fig. 29c) and Lsd14 (Supplementary Fig. 29d), the binding tunnels of    (Fig. 4e and Supplementary Fig. 36). Like the observations found with
MAS and FabB KSs (Supplementary Fig. 29b) are narrower. A published   complexes A (Supplementary Fig. 10) and B (Supplementary Fig. 15),
MAS-like PKS KS-LD-AT tridomain structure (PDB ID: 5BP1) was crys-   local resolution on DHA is higher compared to that of the uncros-
talized in the monomeric form, and the KS domain was reported to be   slinked DHB (Supplementary Fig. 31). Even though DH is composed of a
catalytically inactive5. Compared with the intact MAS complex B, active   double-hotdog fold,  it only contains one set of reactive residues
site Cys178 is shifted by 10.2 Å. The dimerization interface in complex B   His797 and Asp1095 (Supplementary Fig. 34a, c). The other hotdog
(Supplementary Fig. 30) plays a pivotal role in maintaining the stability   fold is responsible for forming the DHA • DHB dimerization interface
and positioning of the active site. In the other protomer’s KS domain, 1   through a “handshake fold”5. The two hotdog folds are connected
can be found alone (a shunt product without ACP) with continuous   through a 20-residue loop (Supplementary Fig. 34b). The ACP = DH
density. We presume that the highly potent warhead reacted with the   crosslinking observed in complex C is bound in an opposite orienta-
KS active site as a small molecule in the absence of ACP35.               tion when compared to that for the E. coli AcpP=FabA (PDB ID: 4KEH)
    The AT domain in complex A is in the apo form (without substrate   (Supplementary Fig. 34a)38. In contrast to the extensive interactions
in the active site), consisting of an α/β-hydrolase and ferredoxin sub-   between the highly negatively charged AcpP (helices 2 and 3) and a
domains, sharing a similar fold with other type I and type II systems.   positively charged patch of FabA, the ACP in MAS shows only limited
The “turnstile closed” conformation shown in the reported DEBS-M1 is   interactions with the DH domain between Thr2072 of helix 2 of ACP
not observed in either complex A or B, leaving the KS domain acces-  and Asn933 of DH (Fig. 4b and Supplementary Figs. 33 and 35a). Akin to
sible to ACPs13,36. The turnstile model in type I modular PKS proposed   the binding between ACP and KS in complexes A and B, the binding



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7798                                                                      6


[PDF physical page 7]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x





Fig. 5 | Structural insight into MAS conformationally-guided processivity.        sequentially to KR, DH, and ER. Dehydration processing is exempliﬁed in com-
Following KS (at KS and KS’), ACP•KS substrate reloading occurs through transa-    plexes C and D, where complex D is trapped through crosslinking of ACPs with DH
cylation from ACP. Next, ACP accepts a methylmalonate monomer from AT. ACP    (chamber 1) and KS (chamber 2), respectively, showing this conformational
shuttles the extension unit to its partner KS to induce condensation. Complex B    movement. A full iteration is completed through substrate reloading. After 4
informs this step. MAS ﬂexibility enables in plane tilting and out-of-plane twisting.    iterations, PapA5 transfers the mature mycocerosates to phthiocerol, forming
During this process, ACP is distal to the condensation compartment, therefore,      phthiocerol dimycocerosate (PDIM).
interactions with the modifying compartment are favored, and the ACP binds



between ACP and DH is mainly facilitated by surrounding structural   active site, MAS-DH features a deep binding tunnel to accommodate
elements. Arg2045, Thr2046, and Tyr2056 (ACP loop 1) interact with   the long, branched-chain acyl intermediates (Fig. 4f and Supplemen-
Ser1187 and Glu2000 of inter-domain linkers (L2 and L5) (Fig. 4c and   tary Fig. 37). The analogous E. coli crosslinked structure (AcpP = FabA)
Supplementary Fig. 35b). Mutation of Ser1187Ala and Thr2046Val   revealed a DH gating mechanism utilizing residues Phe165 and Phe171
validated these interactions as important for activity, resulting in a loss   to enforce substrate speciﬁcity (Supplementary Fig. 38b). In MAS-DH,
of 22% and 20% crosslinking, respectively. These ﬁndings emphasize   these gating residues are replaced by the DH-ΨKR interdomain linker
the outsized role that inter-domain linkers play in PKS catalysis.         L2, leaving the DH entrance exposed (Supplementary Fig. 38a, c).
    Although crosslinker 1 has historically been used to target KS,   Surprisingly, while the E. coli type II DH regulates the substrate speci-
complex C only contains crosslinking between ACP and DH. Unlike the   ﬁcity via gating residues, we observe a major domain rotation of the
shunt product in complex B (Fig. 3f), there is no probe observed in the   crosslinked DH in comparison to the apo-DHs in MAS complex A and
uncrosslinked DH of the opposite protomer, indicating that the reac-   MAS-like PKS modifying compartment (Fig. 4d and Supplementary
tivity between crosslinker 1 and DH is facilitated by ACP binding. To   Fig. 39). In the DH apo form the active site entrance resides underneath
validate the ability of α-bromoamide warheads to crosslink domains   the ΨKR • KR domains, providing no access for ACP binding. In com-
other than KS, we performed crosslinking experiments of E. coli crypto-   plex C, the DH translates and rotates away from the ΨKR • KR to enable
AcpP loaded with 2, 3, 5, or 6 with a panel of partner proteins including   access to the ACP (Supplementary Fig. 39). The limited space between
FabF (KS), Cys163Ala FabF (KS*), FabG (KR), FabA (DH), FabI (ER), and  apo-DH and ΨKR • KR hinders ACP docking and likely plays a role in
FabD (AT) from E. coli (Supplementary Fig. 6). Similar to our obser-   shielding the active site of the DH in certain catalytic states.
vation in MAS complex C, where ACP is crosslinked with DH, crypto-
AcpPs loaded with 2 and 3 were able to crosslink both FabA and FabF,  ACP = DH and ACP = KS Dual Crosslinked Complex D
with no crosslinking seen with the other enzymes.                    Within the same data set, a 6.18 Å density map was obtained visualizing
     Crosslinker 1 enters the canonical DH substrate binding tunnel   both ACPs trapped at DH and KS, respectively, yielding complex D
and is crosslinked to His929 (Fig. 4e and Supplementary Fig. 37A),   (Fig. 5 and Supplementary Fig. 40a). While this reconstruction was not
similar to the type II E. coli AcpP=FabA (PDB ID: 4KEH, Supplementary   detailed enough to allow atomic modeling, it reveals the remarkable
Fig. 37b) and AcpP=FabZ (PDB ID: 6N3P) structures38,39. Complete map   ﬂexibility of MAS processivity. This map shows an asymmetric pose of
density is observed from Ser2060 to C4 of the acyl tail of 1, although  MAS, and all domains are visualized, including both ACPs. Anchoring at
no other signiﬁcant substrate-protein polar interactions are observed   the KS • KS’ core, the modifying compartment DHB-ΨKRB-ERB-KRB
(Supplementary Fig. 36). Unlike the narrow and well-deﬁned FabA   demonstrates an astonishing higher-order dynamic (tilted and twisted)



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7798                                                                                 7


[PDF physical page 8]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x


pose directed toward KS • KS’, where ACPB is trapped at KS (Supple-    (Fig. 5). Starting with the substrate loading step, acyl-ACPA interacts
mentary Fig. 40b). On the other side, DHA-ΨKRA-ERA-KRA is tilted and   with KS in catalytic chamber 1 to deliver a long fatty acyl thioester to
twisted away from the KS • KS’ core, with ACPA trapped at DH. In   Cys177. Based on the higher-order dynamics in this step40, if in-plane
contrast to complex A, where both ACPs are crosslinked at KSs,    tilt and out-of-plane twist are moderate, ACPB can interact with the KS
showing only a slight tilt, the conformational state of complex D clearly   in the other chamber, exempliﬁed by complex A. If the modifying
revealed the capability of catalytic chambers 1 and 2 (Fig. 2a) to pro-  compartment (DHB-ΨKRB-ERB-KRB) in chamber 2 tilts and twists away
cess substrates asymmetrically. The fact that both ACPs are trapped at  from the KS domain, ACPB kinetically prefers to interact with the
different domains in two different catalytic chambers in complex D,   modifying compartment, supported by complexes B and D. This high
together with complex A, in which both ACPs are crosslinked at KSs,   degree of twist and tilt may be the reason that the KS domain is
reveals that both chambers can process substrates synchronously, in   inhibited by shunt product in complex B.
contrast to DEBS-M1 and Lsd14 type I modular systems13,14. At max-       Subsequently, holo-ACP visits the AT to load a methylmalonyl
imum extension, the length between active site residues Ser2060   extender unit, followed by a return to the KS for chain elongation in
(ACPA) and Ser1996 (L5) is 84 Å (Supplementary Fig. 41). The distance  chamber 1 (Fig. 5). These three steps, substrate loading, transacylation,
between Ser1995 (KRA) to the phosphodiester motif of the PPant in KS  and condensation, require ACP to shuttle within the condensation
(chamber 1, Fig. 2a) is approximately 66 Å. When DH-ΨKR-ER-KR is  compartment in chamber 1. As the modifying compartment tilts and
tilted and twisted away from the KS • KS’ core, ACPA active residue   twists away from the condensation compartment in chamber 1, the
Ser2060 can still reach the KS • KS’ core through the length of L5;   interactions of ACPA with modifying domains in chamber 1 are more
however, the modifying domains KRA, DHA, and ERA are preferred. In   favorable. In the reduction steps, the elongated substrate on ACP is
the comparison amongst the linker conformations of complexes A, B,   fully reduced in the modifying compartment in chamber 1 (Fig. 5). The
and C, the tilting and twisting movements stem from linker 1 (unmo-   dehydration step is structurally represented by complexes C and D.
deled residues 882-893 at the C-terminal). Linkers 2, 3, 4, and most of  Complex D demonstrates ACP trapped at KS in one chamber, while
linker 1 adopt similar conformations amongst complexes A, B, and C.  ACP is trapped at DH in the other. After the substrate on ACP is fully
Linker 5, which directly governs the ﬂexibility of ACP, on the other   reduced, it is reloaded onto KS for another iteration. Such a higher-
hand, points in different directions between complexes A and C.   order dynamics-driven vectorial processivity agrees with the “see-saw”
(Supplementary  Fig.  52) The  tilting and  twisting conformation  model suggested by EcPKS1 and EcPKS2 from Elysia chlorotica by the
demonstrates that type I PKSs can make use of conformational ﬂex-    Hill and Schmidt groups44. In the EcPKS2 structure, the linker between
ibility to localize reactivity between the distinct elongation and mod-  KR and ACP alternates between disordered and ordered conformation
iﬁcation compartments, much like what has been indicated with type   (interacting with nonfunctional methyltransferase) to control the
I FAS40.                                                                       ﬂexibility of ACP and, consequently, change the domain sampling
                                                                        proﬁles. Although the alternation between ordered and disordered
Discussion                                                   conformations of linker 5 was not found in the MAS complexes, our
The combination of developed dual covalent crosslinkers and the  model does not exclude this function.
ability of cryo-EM to capture multiple protein complexes within a        In modular PKS Lsd14, the post-ACP dimerization element or pre-
single dataset has enabled the visualization of multiple trapped cata-  KR dimerization element keeps both ACPs in proximity14,45,46. Due to
lytic states in the type  I iterative PKS MAS from M. tuberculosis.    this, the catalytic chambers function asynchronously in their proposed
Crosslinking between ACP and catalytic domains led to an overall  pendulum model. The absence of post-ACP dimerization element or
rigidiﬁed protein architecture, provided resolution improvement, and   pre-KR dimerization element allows MAS to function synchronously
yielded four uniquely trapped states, complexes A–D. Upon cross-  and asymmetrically (Supplementary Fig. 51). In DEBS-M1, to strictly
linking, the ACP = KS and ACP = DH binding interfaces were revealed,   enforce the vectorial biosynthesis, the protein adopts a turnstile-
highlighting interactions between these domains as well as with   closed conformation after chain elongation, where the AT interacts
neighboring structural elements (Supplementary Fig. 42). In compar-   with the LD to sterically occlude the ACP from binding KS. These
ison to type  II systems, the ACP in MAS adopted unique docking   structural features in modular PKS systems prevent substrate reload-
orientations at both KS and DH. Importantly, the expected PPIs   ing onto KS to avoid unwanted products. However, in iterative type I
between ACP and each of these domains were altered and largely  PKS systems such as MAS, substrate reloading is essential for pro-
replaced by PPIs with adjacent domains and linker peptides. In addi-   cessivity. The higher-order dynamics can guide the ACP to interact
tion, crosslinker 1 interrogated the substrate-protein interactions in   preferentially with the condensation or modifying compartments, but
both the KS and DH domain active sites. The inability to crosslink    it does not completely prohibit ACP from revisiting domains. There-
truncated KS or KS-AT with ACP emphasizes the critical role of domain   fore, a substrate regulation mechanism is needed in iterative type I PKS
architecture and linker regions in stabilizing reactive interactions.   system. In the MAS KS, while gating loops 1 and 2 may play a role in
Importantly, complexes A and B are the validation of cross-protomer   substrate speciﬁcity, recent studies have shown the substrate gate-
processivity in type I PKSs based on the SDS-PAGE results (Supple-   keeping capability of KS in type I system31,47,48. Mutagenesis and ana-
mentary Figs. 7 and 45), while crosslinking within the same protomer is    lysis depicted that KS dimer interface loops containing conserved
likely due to high out-of-plane twisting. Complex D shows that while  TNGQ or VMYH motifs are commonly found in KS families that pre-
ACP interacts with DH in chamber 1, the other ACP interacts with the   ferentially accept D-β-hydroxyacyl or α/β-enoylacyl intermediates,
KS in chamber 2 (Fig. 5), corroborating the obligate dimerization of   respectively. Such a dimer interface loop is not conserved in KSs that
MAS. The cross-protomer processivity plays an important role in   accept β-methylene intermediates. MAS KS, which does not contain
guiding synthetic efﬁciency in type I PKSs, and likely FASs by allowing   the TNGQ or VMYH motifs, instead possesses LTHE (residues 127-130
the ACPA to interact with KS while ACPB interacts with KS’ or vice versa.   in MAS complex B), hinting that D-β-hydroxyacyl or α/β-enoylacyl
     In complex B, MAS potentially adopts KS gating loops similar to E.   intermediates are not the preferred substrates. KS substrate speciﬁcity
coli type II KSs, and the presence of key gating residues is essential for   in a type I system was also observed in our recent development of
activity. In complex C, MAS-DH does not demonstrate gating control   cerulenin crosslinker 8 (Supplementary Fig. 3)20. Due to the oxidized α,
like that found in E. coli FabA and H. pylori FabZ39,41–43. Instead, DH   β, and γ positions in the cerulenin crosslinker, it had minimal cross-
rotation upon ACP binding presents a strong candidate for DH gating   linking between MAS ACP and MAS KS. The fact that crosslinking
regulation. Based on the structural features of MAS observed in all   between MAS ACP and MAS KS can be achieved by fully reduced
complexes, an iterative assembly line mechanism can be suggested   crosslinker 1 also indicates the fully reduced substrate preference of



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7798                                                                       8


[PDF physical page 9]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x


MAS-KS. In terms of substrate chain length, it is noteworthy that the  and kanamycin (Apex BioResearch Products) were used. For buffer
two substrate tunnels formed by the KS • KS’ dimer in complex B are   preparation, Tris base (Fisher Scientiﬁc), HCl (Fisher Scientiﬁc), NaCl
connected (Fig. 2f and Supplementary Fig. 29a), contributing to a   (RPI Research Products), glycerol (Honeywell Research Chemicals),
potential substrate tunnel sharing to accommodate C22-C28 myco-   imidazole (MP Biomedicals), maltose (Sigma Aldrich), MgCl2 (BDH
cerosic acids products. In contrast, FabB does not have shared tunnels.   Chemicals), Na2HPO4 (Fisher Scientiﬁc), KH2PO4 (Fisher Scientiﬁc), KCl
Its substrate chain length is controlled by a “back gate” consisting of   (Fisher Scientiﬁc), ATP (Thermos Scientiﬁc), DTT (Fisher Scientiﬁc),
two sets of Glu200 and Gln 113. The coordination of the “back gate”  and DMSO (Fisher Scientiﬁc) were used. For protein puriﬁcation, we
controls the size of the tunnels asymmetrically49. This negative coop-   used a sonicator (Ultrasonic Processor FS-600N), Ni-NTA columns
erativity contributes to the acceptance of long substrates in one tun-  (Thermo Scientiﬁc), amylose columns (New England BioLabs), 10 K,
nel, while the other tunnel  is limited to accept short substrates  30 K, 50 K, and 100 K MWCO spin concentrators (Amicon Millipore),
(Supplementary Fig. 43). After the condensation step at the KS domain,   3 K and 10 K MWCO Snake Skin dialysis tubing (Thermo Fisher), Hiload
the elongated substrate does not visit the AT domain, as the AT,   Superdex 200 pg (16 × 600) (GE Biosciences), HiLoad Superdex 75 pg
although  proximal,  strictly  accepts  methylmalonyl-CoA50.  This   (16 × 600) (GE Biosciences) size exclusion columns, and an FPLC
substrate-based control is different from type II ACPs, which sequester  (ÄKTA Pure). In reactions that contain crosslinkers 1–12 and ﬂuor-
acyl substrates, thereby altering the ACP binding interface and   escent probe 13 (dissolved in DMSO), the DMSO concentration was
achieving preferential binding with speciﬁc partner proteins through   kept below 1% in the ﬁnal reaction. The preparation of 1-13 was pre-
allostery51. Since type I ACPs do not sequester their acyl substrates, the   pared using previously published protocols20–22,55,56. Materials were
interactions with different domains are more likely guided by the   used with a purity >98% by NMR. Typically, stock solutions in DMSO
loaded acyl substrates, as proposed for the pikromycin PKS52.         were prepared fresh and used as is. For gel preparation or evaluation,
    Here we show how a dual covalent crosslinker in concert with  SDS (Sigma Aldrich), 40% acrylamide/bis-Acrylamide 29:1 (Fisher Sci-
cryo-EM can reveal previously inaccessible structural features of type I   entiﬁc), TEMED (Sigma Aldrich), APS (Fisher Scientiﬁc), Wide Range
PKSs. The crosslinked species can be reliably resolved at high resolu-   Gel Preparation Buffer (4×) (Nacalai Tesque), Mini-Protean TGX gel
tion due to constraints of dynamic movement in crosslinked mega-   (4–15%) (Bio-Rad), and 4–12% bis-Tris NuPage (Invitrogen) were used.
synthase compartments. The ability for a single crosslinker to interact   For gel imaging, UV transilluminator at 365 nm was used prior to
with more than one domain allows the collection of multiple com-   Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining. For gel-based crosslinking yield
plexes within a single data set that can be differentiated with particle   quantiﬁcation, Perfection V19 scanner (Epson) and ImageJ57 were used.
sorting and reconstruction. The versatility of this method parallels  When possible raw images were used to make the ﬁgures. Unedited gel
prior ﬁndings in type II synthases solved by X-ray crystallography,   images were used or provided in Supplementary Fig. 46.
hereby revealing the elegance of the type  I PKS organization and
control. Compared with non-speciﬁc  crosslinkers, dual covalent   Cloning of M. tuberculosis MAS and variants
crosslinkers offer not only the visualization of PPIs, but also substrate-   Primers for cloning were ordered from Integrated DNA Technologies.
protein interactions. Most importantly, covalent crosslinkers facilitate   Restriction enzymes, Gibson master mix, and T4 ligase were ordered
structural rigidiﬁcation, which gives rise to higher resolution density   from New England Biolabs. Sanger sequencing was performed by
maps. Most importantly, the dual site-selective crosslinking approach   Azenta Life Sciences. Wild-type MAS from M. tuberculosis H37Rv
used herein reveals structures of states actively trapped during their   (UniProt ID: I6Y231) in a pET21 vector (pET23) was provided by H.
enzymatic process. Recent studies, including those on human FAS53,54   Gramajo58. Excised KS from M. tuberculosis MAS was synthesized in
show that one can apply cryo-EM with high data content to reﬁne  pET28 as a codon-optimized construct by Twist Bioscience. The
structures resting at speciﬁc positions within the catalytic process,   boundaries of M. tuberculosis KS-LD-AT were determined through
including reduction at the ER, dehydration at the DH, condensation at   sequence alignment with MAS-like type  I PKS from M. smegmatis
the KS, and acyl transfer at the AT. The fact that these states are resting   (UniProt ID: A0R1E8). Excised KS-LD-AT tridomain was subcloned from
means that they do not necessarily provide accurate representations  pET23 into pET21 using Gibson cloning (NEB HiFi assembly) and
of substrate undergoing enzymatic processing, but dual site-selective   directly transformed into DH5α cells. Resulting colonies were grown
state trapping, as well as other approaches to enzymatically lock states   overnight in LB broth (5 mL) with ampicillin, miniprepped, and sent for
during their reactions do.                                         Sanger sequencing to conﬁrm proper insertion. The ACP of M. tuber-
    Using this technology, we reveal four informative MAS com-   culosis MAS was synthesized by Twist Bioscience in a pET21 expression
plexes from a single data set, visualizing both ACPs from the MAS   vector.
homodimer in action. We show the ACP binding interfaces with KS
and DH,  interactions with adjacent domains and  linkers, and   Expression and puriﬁcation of M. tuberculosis MAS
substrate-protein interactions. While the KS of MAS potentially   C-terminal His6-tagged recombinant MAS was expressed in E. coli
adopts a gating mechanism similar to type II KSs, DH rotation upon   BL21(DE3) similar to that previously described in refs. 20,21. A single
ACP crosslinking was identiﬁed as a potential DH gating mechanism.   colony with pET23 was cultured in LB broth (5 mL) with 100 mg/L of
Complexes A and D suggest that both catalytic chambers can not   ampicillin for 12 h at 37 °C. This culture was added into LB broth (1 L)
only be functional synchronously but also asymmetrically, con-   with 100 mg/L of ampicillin and incubated with shaking at 37 °C until
structing a model that allows the ACP trajectory to follow the   the OD600 reached 0.6–0.8. The culture was then cooled on ice fol-
sequential catalytic loop (transacylation, condensation, reduction,   lowed by induction with 0.5 mM IPTG (addition of 1 mL of 500 mM
and substrate reloading) controlled by substrate selectivity. The   IPTG) at 37 °C and left shaking for 18 h. Cell pellets were obtained
cross-protomer activity of ACP-KS interactions provides a model for   through centrifugation (4816 × g for 30 min). The cell pellets were
multidomain catalysis. Altogether, this study provides fundamental   resuspended in 25 mL cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris • HCl pH 7.4,
concepts and structural details of a mycocerosic acid-producing   150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol), submerged in ice, and lysed by sonication
machinery that offers potential as a therapeutic target.                   (1 s on and 3 s off cycle for 9 min). The lysate was then centrifuged at
                                                             4816 × g for 1 h. The resulting supernatant was loaded onto Ni-NTA
Methods                                                column (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and washed with 10 CV (column
General experimental methods                                 volume) of the lysis buffer followed by lysis buffer containing 10 mM
For protein expression, LB media (RPI Research Products), agar (RPI   imidazole (2 × 10 mL). Lysis buffer containing 250 mM imidazole was
Research Products), IPTG (Bio Pioneer), ampicillin (Fisher Scientiﬁc),   used to elute the protein. Dialysis with 10 K MWCO SnakeSkin tubing



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7798                                                                      9


[PDF physical page 10]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x


(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) was performed with lysis buffer (1 L) for 18 h  MAS mutant site-directed mutagenesis
at 4 °C. The dialyzed protein was then subjected to HiLoad Superdex  MAS mutants were made using Quikchange Mutagenesis. Primers
200 pg (16 × 600) (GE Biosciences) size exclusion column puriﬁed with  were ordered from Integrated DNA Technologies. Q5 Hot Start High
lysis buffer (50 mM Tris • HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol).   Fidelity polymerase and restriction enzyme DpnI were ordered from
Fractions containing pure MAS were collected and concentrated to  New England Biolabs. Whole-plasmid sequencing was performed by
32 mg/mL using a 100k Amicon Ultra spin concentrator (Millipore) and   Primordium Labs. Brieﬂy, PCR was performed for 35 cycles, followed
ﬂash frozen in aliquots for storage at −80 °C.                      by template digestion with DpnI at 37 °C for 3 h and inactivation at
                                                    80 °C for 20 min. Digested samples were directly transformed into
Expression and puriﬁcation of excised KS and excised KS-LD-AT   10-beta chemically competent cells and plated at 37 °C overnight
The expression and puriﬁcation of excised KS and excised KS-LD-AT   with the corresponding selection antibiotics. Colonies were screened
follow a common protocol. C-terminal His6-tagged recombinant   the following day by whole-plasmid sequencing to validate the
excised KS and excised KS-LD-AT20 were expressed in BL21(DE3) and   mutation.
cultured in LB broth (5 mL) with 100 mg/L of ampicillin for 12 h at
37 °C. The culture was added into LB broth (1 L) with 100 mg/L of   Expression and puriﬁcation of MAS mutants
ampicillin and incubated at 37 °C until the OD600 reached 0.6–0.8.  MAS mutants  Asp819Arg, Asp2050Arg, Arg2090Asp,  Glu79Lys,
The culture was then cooled on ice, followed by induction with   Asp819Ala,   Arg2032Asp,   Thr281Ala,   Thr279Ala,   Met417Phe,
0.5 mM IPTG (addition of 1 mL of 500 mM IPTG) at 37 °C and left   Asn421Ala, Ser1187Aal, Thr2046Val, Cys177Ala, and His929Ala were
shaking for 18 h. Cell pellets were obtained through centrifugation   prepared by a common protocol. C-terminal His6-tagged recombi-
(4816 × g for 30 min). The cell pellets were resuspended in 25 mL of   nant MAS mutants20 were expressed in BL21(DE3) cells and cultured in
cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris • HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 10% gly-  LB broth (5 mL) with 100 mg/L of ampicillin for 12 h at 37 °C. The
cerol), submerged in ice, and lysed by sonication (1 s on and 3 s off   culture was added into LB broth (1 L) with 100 mg/L of ampicillin and
cycle for 9 min). The lysate was then centrifuged at 4816 × g for 1 h.   incubated with shaking at 37 °C until the OD600 reached 0.6–0.8. The
The resulting supernatant was loaded onto a Ni-NTA column   culture was then cooled on ice, followed by induction with 0.5 mM
(0.5 mL/L of culture) (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and washed with 10   IPTG (addition of 1 mL of 500 mM IPTG) at 18 °C and left shaking for
CV of the lysis buffer, followed by lysis buffer containing 10 mM   18 h. Cell pellets were obtained through centrifugation (4816 × g for
imidazole (2 × 10 mL). Lysis buffer containing 250 mM imidazole  30 min). The cell pellets were resuspended in 25 mL of cold lysis
was used to elute the protein. Dialysis with 10 K MWCO SnakeSkin   buffer (50 mM Tris • HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol), sub-
tubing (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) was performed with lysis buffer  merged in ice, and lysed by sonication (1 s on and 3 s off cycle for
(1 L) for 18 h at 4 °C. The dialyzed protein was then subjected to  9 min). The lysate was then centrifuged at 4816 × g for 1 h. The
HiLoad Superdex 200 pg (16 × 600) (GE Biosciences) size exclusion   resulting supernatant was loaded onto a Ni-NTA column (0.5 mL/L of
column and puriﬁed with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris • HCl pH 7.4,   culture) (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and washed with 10 CV of the lysis
150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol). Fractions containing excised KS or   buffer,  followed  by  lysis  buffer  containing  10 mM  imidazole
excised KS-LD-AT were collected and concentrated to 32 mg/mL   (2 × 10 mL). Lysis buffer containing 250 mM imidazole was used to
using a 10k Amicon Ultra spin concentrator (Millipore) and ﬂash   elute the protein. Dialysis with 10 K MWCO SnakeSkin tubing (Thermo
frozen in aliquots for storage at −80 °C.                              Fisher Scientiﬁc) was performed with lysis buffer (1 L) for 18 h at 4 °C.
                                                        The dialyzed protein was then subjected to HiLoad Superdex 200 pg
Expression and puriﬁcation of excised ACP from MAS             (16 × 600) (GE Biosciences) size exclusion column and puriﬁed with
The expression and puriﬁcation of excised ACP adopted a reported    lysis buffer (50 mM Tris • HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol).
protocol59. C-terminal His6-tagged recombinant excised ACP was   Fractions containing pure MAS were collected and concentrated to
expressed in BL21(DE3) and cultured in LB broth (5 mL) with 100 mg/L   3 mg/mL using a 50k Amicon Ultra spin concentrator (Millipore) and
of ampicillin for 12 h at 37 °C. The culture was added into LB broth (1 L)   ﬂash frozen in aliquots for storage at −80 °C.
with 100 mg/L of ampicillin and incubated with shaking at 37 °C until
the OD600 reached 0.6–0.8. The culture was then cooled on ice fol-  MAS crosslinker loading and crosslinking
lowed by induction with 0.5 mM IPTG (addition of 1 mL of 500 mM   Crosslinkers 1, 2, or 3 (Supplementary Fig. 3) were loaded onto the
IPTG) at 37 °C and left shaking for 18 h. Cell pellets were obtained  ACP of apo-MAS by a one-pot chemoenzymatic method25,60. The
through centrifugation (4816 × g for 30 min). The cell pellets were   optimized reaction included 94.7 μL buffer (50 mM Tris • HCl pH 7.4,
resuspended in 25 mL of cool lysis buffer (8 mM Na2HPO4, 286 mM   150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol) 5 μL CoaA (1 mg/mL), 5 μL CoaD (1 mg/
NaCl, 1.4 mM KH2PO4, 2.6 mM KCl, and 1% SDS (w/v) pH 7.4), sub-   mL), 5 μL CoaE (1 mg/mL), 2.9 μL Sfp (6.9 mg/mL), 25 μL MgCl2
merged in ice, and lysed by sonication until the lysate turns clear (1 s on   (250 mM), 2.5 μL DTT (100 mM),53.3 μL ATP (75 mM), and 0.88 μL 1,
and 3 s off sonication cycle). The sonicated lysate was then chilled on   2, or 3 (from a 10 mM DMSO stock). In this step, crosslinkers are
ice for 1 h to cause SDS precipitation. To remove the SDS precipitates,   converted into CoA analogs of 1, 2, or 3 (primed crosslinkers) by
the cold lysate was centrifuged at 4816 × g for 30 min at 4 °C. The   CoaA, CoaD, and CoaE as described in Supplementary Fig. 4B. The
resulting supernatant was loaded onto a Ni-NTA-column (0.5 mL/L of   reaction was incubated at 23 °C for 2 h. Sequentially, 55.7 μL apo-MAS
culture) (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and washed with 10 CV of the   (31 μM) was added into the reaction mixture to generate a solution
washing buffer (8 mM Na2HPO4, 286 mM NaCl,  1.4 mM KH2PO4,   with 0.02 mg/mL CoaA, 0.02 mg/mL CoaD, 0.02 mg/mL CoaE,
2.6 mM KCl, 0.15% tween 20 (w/v), and 15 mM imidazole, pH 7.4) fol-   0.08 mg/mL Sfp, 25 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 16 mM ATP, and 35 μM 1,
lowed by elution buffer (1 mL × 7) (8 mM Na2HPO4, 286 mM NaCl,   2, or 3, 7 μM MAS, and buffer (50 mM Tris • HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl,
1.4 mM KH2PO4, 2.6 mM KCl, 0.15% tween 20 (w/v), and 500 mM imi-  10% glycerol). The reaction was then incubated at 37 °C for 1.5 h,
dazole, pH 7.4). Dialysis with 3 K MWCO SnakeSkin tubing (Thermo   followed by incubation at 23 °C for 18 h. The reaction mixture was
Fisher Scientiﬁc) was performed with dialysis buffer  (1 L) (8 mM   then subjected to puriﬁcation by HiLoad Superdex 200 pg (16 × 600)
Na2HPO4, 286 mM NaCl, 1.4 mM KH2PO4, 2.6 mM KCl, and 10% gly-   (GE Biosciences) size exclusion column with buffer (50 mM Tris • HCl
cerol) for 18 h at 4 °C. The dialyzed protein was collected and con-  pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl). Fractions containing the crosslinked com-
centrated to 3 mg/mL using a 3k Amicon Ultra spin concentrator   plexes were collected, diluted to 4.4 μM, and used immediately for
(Millipore) and ﬂash frozen in aliquots for storage at −80 °C.          cryo-EM sample preparation.




Nature Communications| (2025)16:7798                                                                              10


[PDF physical page 11]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x


Grid preparation for cryo-EM data collection                       default tight masking through the half maps was generated from
Holey carbon grids (Quantifoil, R1.2/1.3, Cu, 300 mesh) were glow   reﬁnement as the input volumes.
discharged, and 3.2 µL of 1 mg/mL crosslinked MAS sample was applied
to the grid in a Vitrobot Mk IV with the chamber at 4 °C and 95%  Complex D cryo-EM data processing
humidity. The grids were blotted, plunge frozen in liquid ethane, and   While processing the data for complex A, we observed a 3D class that
stored in liquid nitrogen until needed.                             corresponded to a single ACP = KS crosslink with a single ACP = DH
                                                                             crosslink. This map was used to generate templates, and particles were
Single particle cryo-EM data collection                             selected and extracted. The particles were passed through 2D classi-
Cryo-EM data were collected using a Titan Krios G4 operating at   ﬁcation to remove junk particles. We reasoned that the particle stacks
200 kV and equipped with a Selectris X energy ﬁlter and a Falcon 4   for complexes B and C likely also contained some particles that cor-
direct electron detector. A total of 3135 movies were collected at a   responded to this crosslinking state, so those particle stacks were
nominal magniﬁcation of 130,000×, nominal pixel size of 0.889 Å/px,  combined as well, duplicates were removed, and the full stack was
and dose of 55 e-/Å2 using the EPU software on a set of manually   used with the initial model from 3D classiﬁcation in a homogeneous
selected grid squares.                                          reﬁnement job. Subsequent rounds of 3D classiﬁcation were used to
                                                         remove particles not corresponding to the ACP = KS/ACP = DH state.
General cryo-EM data processing                            The ﬁnal stack of particles (19,622) was non-uniformly reﬁned in
Movie data was imported into cryo-SPARC, and movie frame alignment   C1 symmetry to generate a 6.15 Å map for complex D.
was performed using patch motion correction, and patch CTF was
used for CTF estimation. Exposures were curated to remove images   Structure modeling
with poor CTF ﬁts, large in-frame motion, or extremely thick ice. This  The AlphaFold predicted structure of MAS from M. bovis (AF-Q02251)
set of micrographs was used for all four maps reported in this study. All  was used as the starting model for complexes A–C, the condensation
particle processing was carried out in cryo-SPARC, and ﬁnal maps were  and modifying compartments (except the ACPs) were ﬁt individually
sharpened in Phenix using phenix.local_aniso_sharpen. The initial stack   into the maps using UCSF ChimeraX. The ACP domain model, also
of particles was picked using reference-free “blob” picking and sub-   from AF-Q02251, was ﬁt into the maps separately. The models were
sequent 2D-classiﬁcation to remove junk particles generated the initial   rejoined and manually remodeled in Coot. Density was observed for
stack of particles used in all subsequent operations. The resolution of   crosslinker 1 in all KS domains, including the shunt KS in complex B.
all maps was estimated based on the gold standard Fourier shell cor-   Ligand density within the DH domain of complex C was limited. After
relation (FSC) using a cutoff of 0.14361,62.                           modeling of 1, the structures were reﬁned using real-space reﬁnement
                                                                            in Phenix. All map-to-model validation was also carried out in Phenix.
Complex A cryo-EM data processing                             AlphaFold structure of MAS from M. bovis (UniProt ID: Q02251) con-
Initial classes representing side views where the full MAS particle was   tains one amino acid difference compared with our biological sample,
visible were selected and used as templates to select a new stack of  MAS from M. tuberculosis H37Rv (UniProt ID: I6Y231). Therefore,
particles. These were subjected to 2D classiﬁcation, where junk parti-   Cys213 from the AlphaFold model (UniProt ID: Q02251) was changed
cles were removed. These particles were used to ab initio reconstruct 4   into Ser213 (UniProt ID: I6Y231) in the ﬁnal model.
classes, and these classes were subsequently heterogeneously reﬁned
(~113k particles). The particles from the 3D class representing the full   Evaluating MAS mutation through screening crosslinking
MAS dimer were 3D classiﬁed twice, ﬁrst to remove remaining junk   efﬁciency
particles and second to select particles belonging to the doubly  We began by preparing a master mix of the coenzyme A analogue of 1
ACPs = KSs population (35,170  particles). This was non-uniformly   (Supplementary  Fig.  4). This was conducted using 9.7 μL buffer
reﬁned, enforcing C2 symmetry with pose marginalization to gen-   (50 mM Tris • HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol), 0.5 μL CoaA
erate a 3.87 Å reconstructed map for complex A63.                          (1 mg/mL), 0.5 μL CoaD (1 mg/mL), 0.5 μL CoaE (1 mg/mL), 0.07 μL Sfp
                                                                          (6.9 mg/mL), 2.5 μL MgCl2 (250 mM), 0.5 μL DTT (100 mM), 2.7 μL ATP
Complex B cryo-EM data processing                                (75 mM), and 0.5 μL 1 (from a 1 mM DMSO stock). The reaction was
The full initial stack of cleaned particles (~184k particles) Fourier   incubated at 37 °C for 2 h. We then used this master mix for each
cropped to 1.78 Å/px were used in an ab initio 3D-reconstruction job   reaction. Reactions were conducted by addition of 7.5 μL apo-MAS
with 3 classes, 1 class contained particles corresponding to the KS-LD-   (13 µM) or 7.5 μL apo-MAS mutant (13 μM), stored at 23 °C for 2 h.
AT domains (complex B), 1 class contained particles corresponding to   These reactions generated mixtures containing 0.02 mg/mL CoaA,
the DH-ΨKR-ER-KR domains (complex C), and 1 class captured addi-   0.02 mg/mL CoaD, 0.02 mg/mL CoaE, 0.02 mg/mL Sfp, 25 mM MgCl2,
tional junk particles. The class corresponding to the KS-LD-AT trido-   2 mM DTT, 8 mM ATP, and 20 μM 1, 4 μM MAS or 4 μM MAS mutant,
main, when reﬁned, showed strong map density for the ﬁrst crosslink  and buffer (50 mM Tris • HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol) at
and some weaker density for a second crosslink on the other proto-   their ﬁnal concentrations. The reaction was then incubated at 23 °C for
mer. The particles were then extracted at full resolution and passed   an additional 2 h. The experiments were conducted in triplicate and
through 3D classiﬁcation, and those corresponding to the double   evaluated by 6% SDS-PAGE. Using densitometry  calculations by
crosslink and those without any crosslinking were removed. The   ImageJ57, the crosslinking yield was determined by dividing crosslinked
remaining   particles  (34,615)  were  non-uniformly  reﬁned  in   (>290 kDa) band intensity by the total of crosslinked (>290 kDa) and
C1 symmetry, which generated a map for complex B at 3.22 Å.          uncrosslinked (226 kDa) band intensity.

Complex C cryo-EM data processing                             Crosslinking excised ACP from MAS in trans
The ab initio class containing particles corresponding to the DH-ΨKR-   Crosslinking in trans between ACP and excised KS, excised KS-LD-AT,
ER-KR domains was reextracted at full resolution and passed through    full MAS, or FabB follows a similar protocol. Crosslinkers were loaded
3D classiﬁcation to remove particles that did not have any crosslinking.   onto excised apo-ACP by a one-pot chemoenzymatic method25,60. The
The remaining  particles (35,969) were non-uniformly reﬁned in   reaction included 10.6 μL buffer (50 mM Tris • HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM
C1 symmetry, which generated a map for complex C at 3.74 Å. Density   NaCl, 10% glycerol), 29.4 μL excised ACP (0.17 mM), 0.5 μL CoaA (1 mg/
map demonstrated  in  all Complex C ﬁgures was generated by   mL), 0.5 μL CoaD (1 mg/mL), 0.5 μL CoaE (1 mg/mL), 1.4 μL Sfp (1.4 mg/
DeepEMhancer64 with training models included in the package and   mL),  2.5 μL MgCl2 (250 mM),  0.5 μL DTT (100 mM), 2 μL ATP



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7798                                                                                                          11


[PDF physical page 12]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x

(200 mM), and 2 μL 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 (from a 10 mM DMSO stock)  Data availability
(Supplementary Fig. 5). The mixture contains the following compo-   Single-particle cryo-EM maps for complexes A–D have been deposited
nents with ﬁnal concentrations of 0.1 mM excised ACP, 1 mM DTT,   in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank (EMDB) and the associated
0.01 mg/mL CoaA, 0.01 mg/mL CoaD, 0.01 mg/mL CoaE, 0.04 mg/mL   atomic model coordinates for complexes A-C in the Protein Data Bank
Sfp, 12.5 mM MgCl2 0.4 mM crosslinker, and 8 mM ATP. The reaction   (PDB) under accession codes EMDB-46504 and 9D2Y (complex A);
was incubated at 37 °C for 2 h. Excess probes were removed by 3 K  EMDB-46505 and 9D2Z (complex B); EMDB-46506 and 9D30 (complex
MWCO Amicon Ultra spin concentrator (Millipore), resulting in a crude   C); and EMDB-46507 (complex D). Summary data for these structures
crypto-ACP with a concentration of 0.1 mM. Sequentially, 10 μL of this   are presented in Supplementary Table 1. Source data are provided with
crypto-ACP (0.1 mM) mixture was added into 0.74 μL of excised KS   this paper.
(0.27 mM), excised KS-LD-AT (0.27 mM), full MAS (0.27 mM), or FabB
(0.27 mM) in 9.2 μL buffer (50 mM Tris • HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 10%  References
glycerol). The resulting reaction mixture containing 0.05 mM excised    1.   Furin, J., Cox, H. & Pai, M. Tuberculosis. Lancet 393,
ACP, 0.01 mM KS containing protein (excised KS, excised KS-LD-AT,       1642–1656 (2019).
full MAS, or FabB) was incubated at 23 °C for 16 h. The in trans cross-   2.   Jaganath, D., Beaudry, J. & Salazar–Austin, N. Tuberculosis in chil-
linking was evaluated by 6% or 12% SDS-PAGE gel.                           dren. Infect. Dis. Clin. North. Am. 36, 49–71 (2022).
                                                                              3.   Wulandari, D. A., Hartati, Y. W., Ibrahim, A. U., Pitaloka, D. A. E. &
E. coli AcpP crosslinking with MAS and E. coli partner proteins        Irkham Multidrug–resistant tuberculosis. Clin. Chim. Acta 59,
Crosslinking between E. coli AcpP and full MAS, or E. coli type II partner       119701 (2024).
protein FabF (KS), FabF Cys163Ala (KS active site residue mutant),   4.  Khawbung, J. L., Nath, D. & Chakraborty, S. Drug resistant tuber-
FabG (KR), FabA (DH), FabI (ER), FabD (AT), excised KS, and full MAS        culosis: a review. Comp. Immunol. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 74,
follows a similar protocol. The expression, puriﬁcation, and prepara-       101574 (2012).
tion of E. coli type II apo-AcpP, crypto-AcpP, and partner proteins adopt   5.   Herbst, D. A., Jakob, R. P., Zähringer, F. & Maier, T. Mycocerosic acid
the same protocol as reported20. Crosslinkers were loaded onto AcpP       synthase exempliﬁes the architecture of reducing polyketide syn-
by a one-pot chemoenzymatic method25. This reaction included        thases. Nature 531, 533–537 (2016).
0.1 mM AcpP,  1 mM DTT, 0.01 mg/mL CoaA, 0.01 mg/mL CoaD,   6.   Mittal, E. et al. Mycobacterium tuberculosis virulence lipid PDIM
0.01 mg/mL CoaE, 0.04 mg/mL Sfp, 0.2 mM crosslinker 2, 3, 5, 6, or 8,         inhibits autophagy in mice. Nat. Microbiol. https://doi.org/10.1038/
and 8 mM ATP in buffer (50 mM Tris • HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 10%       s41564-024-01797-5. (2024).
glycerol). These reactions were incubated at 23 °C for 21 h. The reac-    7.   Finin, P., Khan, R. M. N., Oh, S., Boshoff, H. I. M. & Barry, C. E. 3rd
tion mixture was then puriﬁed by a HiLoad Superdex 75 pg (16 × 600)       Chemical approaches to unraveling the biology of mycobacteria.
(16 × 600) (GE Biosciences) size exclusion column through FPLC        Cell Chem. Biol. 18, 420–435 (2023).
(ÄKTA Pure) using a buffer containing 50 mM Tris • HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM   8.  Chandra, P., Grigsby, S. J. & Philips, J. A. Immune evasion and
NaCl, 10% glycerol to yield pure crypto-AcpP loaded with crosslinker 2,       provocation by mycobacterium tuberculosis. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
3, 5, 6, or 8 (Supplementary Fig. 3). Crypto-AcpPs were concentrated to       20, 750–766 (2022).
0.1 mM by a 3 K MWCO Amicon Ultra spin concentrator (Millipore),   9.   Rainwater, D. L. & Kolattukudy, P. E. Fatty acid biosynthesis in
ﬂashed frozen, and stored at −80 °C. A crosslinking reaction contains       Mycobacterium tuberculosis var. bovis Bacillus Calmette–Guérin.
the following components with their ﬁnal concentrations of 0.05 mM        Puriﬁcation and characterization of a novel fatty acid synthase,
crypto-AcpP with 0.01 mM FabF, 0.01 mM FabF Cys163Ala, 0.01 mM       mycocerosic acid synthase, which elongates n–fatty acyl–CoA with
FabG, 0.01 mM FabA, 0.01 mM FabI, 0.01 mM FabD, 0.01 mM excised       methylmalonyl–CoA. J. Biol. Chem. 260, 616–623 (1985).
KS, or 0.01 mM full MAS. The crosslinking was evaluated by 6% or 12%   10.  Chopra, T. & Gokhale, R. S. Polyketide versatility in the biosynthesis
SDS-PAGE gel (Supplementary Figs. 5–6).                                    of complex mycobacterial cell wall lipids. Methods Enzymol. 459,
                                                                259–229 (2009).
Evaluation for the integrity of MAS and MAS mutants                  11.  Herbst, D. A., Townsend, C. A. & Maier, T. The architectures of
Potential protein misfolding in MAS and MAS mutants were evaluated         iterative type I PKS and FAS. Nat. Prod. Rep. 35, 1046–1069 (2018).
by labeling with ﬂuorescent probe 13 (Fig. 3 and Supplementary    12.  Zheng, Z., Gay, D. C., Demeler, B., White, M. A. & Keatinge–Clay, A.
Fig. 44). The labeling reaction contains a ﬁnal concentration of 4 μM of         T. Divergence of multimodular polyketide synthases revealed by a
MAS, 4 μM of MAS mutants, or 4 μM of denatured MAS with 0.02 mM       didomain structure. Nat. Chem. Biol. 8, 615–621 (2012).
13, 20 μM Sfp, 8 mM ATP, and 25 mM MgCl2 in buffer (50 mM Tris • HCl   13.  Cogan, D. P. et al. Mapping the catalytic conformations of an
pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol). After 3 h of incubation at 25 °C,       assembly–line polyketide synthase module. Science 374,
samples were evaluated with  native 4–15% Mini-PROTEAN RGX       729–734 (2021).
(BioRad) gels at 150 V for 1 h. The resulting gels were imaged with a UV   14.  Bagde, S. R., Mathews, I. I., Fromme, J. C. & Kim, C. Y. Modular
transilluminator at 365 nm (ﬂuorescence) prior to Coomassie Brilliant       polyketide synthase contains two reaction chambers that operate
Blue staining (total protein) (Supplementary Fig. 44).                       asynchronously. Science 374, 723–729 (2021).
                                                                                  15.  Kim, S. K. et al. Structure and dynamics of the essential endogenous
SDS PAGE and native PAGE gel analyses                               mycobacterial polyketide synthase Pks13. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 30,
SDS PAGE analyses were conducted with in-house prepared 6% gels or      296–308 (2023).
commercially prepared gradient SDS PAGE. SDS PAGE gels (Supple-   16.  Tittes, Y. U. et al. The structure of a polyketide synthase bimodule
mentary Fig. 45) were developed to identify the crosslinked products.        core. Sci. Adv. 8, eabo6918 (2022).
Full gel images are used for all ﬁgures unless otherwise noted, and    17.  Wang, J. et al. Structural basis for the biosynthesis of lovastatin. Nat.
copies of these gels are in Supplementary Fig. 46. Conventional run-      Commun. 12, 867 (2021).
ning buffers were used unless noted otherwise.                            18.  Finzel, K., Lee, D. J. & Burkart, M. D. Using modern tools to probe the
                                                                             structure–function relationship K.of fatty acid synthases. Chem-
Reporting summary                                             biochem 16, 528–547 (2015).
Further information on research design is available in the Nature   19.  Chen, A., Jiang, Z. & Burkart, M. D. Enzymology of standalone
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.                         elongating ketosynthases. Chem. Sci. 13, 4225–4238 (2022).




Nature Communications| (2025)16:7798                                                                                       12


[PDF physical page 13]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x


20.  Jiang, Z. et al. Masked cerulenin enables a dual–site selective pro-    41.  Dodge, G. J. et al. Structural and dynamical rationale for fatty acid
     tein crosslink. Chem. Sci. 14, 10925–11093 (2023).                       unsaturation in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 116,
21.  Konno, S., La Clair, J. J. & Burkart, M. D. Trapping the complex          6775–6783 (2019).
    molecular machinery of polyketide and fatty acid synthases with     42. Leesong, M., Henderson, B. S., Gillig, J. R., Schwab, J. M. & Smith, J.
    tunable silylcyanohydrin crosslinkers. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.          L. Structure of a dehydratase-isomerase from the bacterial pathway
     57, 17009–17013 (2018).                                                      for biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids: two catalytic activities in
22.  Ishikawa, F., Haushalter, R. W., Lee, D. J., Finzel, K. & Burkart, M. D.      one active site. Structure 4, 253–264 (1996).
     Sulfonyl 3–alkynyl pantetheinamides as mechanism–based          43. Zhang, L. et al. Crystal structure of FabZ-ACP complex reveals a
     cross–linkers of acyl carrier protein dehydratase. J. Am. Chem. Soc.      dynamic seesaw-like catalytic mechanism of dehydratase in fatty
     135, 8846–8849 (2013).                                                acid biosynthesis. Cell. Res. 26, 1330–1344 (2016).
23.  Tallorin, L. et al. Trapping of the enoyl–acyl carrier protein           44. Schubert, H. L., Li, F., Hill, C. P. & Schmidt, E. W. The structure of full-
    reductase–acyl carrier protein interaction. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138,        length AFPK supports the ACP linker in a role that regulates iterative
    3962–3965 (2016).                                                     polyketide and fatty acid assembly. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 122,
24. Chen, A. et al. Visualizing the interface of biotin and fatty acid bio-       e2419884122 (2025).
     synthesis through SuFEx probes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 146, 1388–1395   45. Weissman, K. J. Uncovering the structures of modular polyketide
     (2024).                                                                synthases. Nat. Prod. Rep. 32, 436–453 (2015).
25.  Worthington, A. S. & Burkart, M. D. One–pot chemo–enzymatic      46. Zheng, J., Fage, C. D., Demeler, B., Hoffman, D. W. & Keatinge-Clay,
     synthesis of reporter–modiﬁed proteins. Org. Biomol. Chem. 4,           A. T. The missing linker: a dimerization motif located within poly-
    44–46 (2006).                                                          ketide synthase modules. ACS Chem. Biol. 8, 1263–1270 (2013).
26. van Wyk, M. & Strauss, E. One-pot preparation of coenzyme A        47.  Hirsch, M., Fitzgerald, B. J. & Keatinge-Clay, A. T. How cis-
    analogues via an improved chemo-enzymatic synthesis of pre-CoA        Acyltransferase Assembly-Line Ketosynthases Gatekeep for Pro-
     thioester synthons. Chem. Commun. 4, 398–400 (2008).               cessed Polyketide Intermediates. ACS Chem. Biol. 16, 2515–2526
27.  Nava, A. A., Roberts, J., Haushalter, R. W., Wang, Z. & Keasling, J. D.        (2021).
    Module-based polyketide synthase engineering for de novo poly-    48. Ray, K. A., Saif, N. & Keatinge-Clay, A. T. Modular polyketide syn-
     ketide biosynthesis. ACS Synth. Biol. 12, 3148–3155                      thase ketosynthases collaborate with upstream dehydratases to
     (2023).                                                                               install double bonds. Chem. Commun. 60, 8712–8715 (2024).
28. Su, L. et al. Engineering the stambomycin modular polyketide       49. Chen, A. et al. Mechanism-based cross-linking probes capture the
    synthase yields 37-membered mini-stambomycins. Nat. Comm. 13,        Escherichia coli ketosynthase FabB in conformationally distinct
    515 (2022).                                                                   catalytic states. Acta Crystallogr. D. Struct. Biol. 78, 1171–1179 (2022).
29. Soohoo, A. M., Cogan, D. P., Brodsky, K. L. & Khosla, C. Structure    50. Rainwater, L. & Kolattukudy, P. E. Synthesis of mycocerosic acids
    and mechanisms of assembly-line polyketide synthases. Annu. Rev.       from methylmalonyl coenzyme A by cell-free extracts of Myco-
    Biochem. 93, 471–498 (2024).                                         bacterium tuberculosis var. bovis BCG. J. Biol. Chem. 258, 2979–2985
30. Cogan, D. P. et al. Structural basis for intermodular communication         (1983).
     in assembly-line polyketide biosynthesis. Nat. Chem. Biol. https://    51.  Sztain, T. et al. Decoding allosteric regulation by the acyl carrier
    doi.org/10.1038/s41589-024-01709-y. (2024).                              protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 18, e2025597118 (2021).
31.  Buyachuihan, L., Stegemann, F. & Grininger, M. How acyl carrier     52. Whicher, J. R. et al. Structural rearrangements of a polyketide syn-
     proteins (ACPs) direct fatty acid and polyketide biosynthesis.            thase module during its catalytic cycle. Nature 510, 560–564
    Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 63, e202312476 (2024).                       (2014).
32. Worthington, A. S., Porter, D. F. & Burkart, M. D. Mechanism–based   53. Choi, W. et al. Structural dynamics of human fatty acid synthase in
     crosslinking as a gauge for functional interaction of modular syn-        the condensing cycle. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-
     thases. Org. Biomol. Chem. 8, 1769–1772 (2010).                     08782-w (2012).
33. Mindrebo, J. T. et al. Gating mechanism of elongating               54.  Schultz, K. et al. Snapshots of acyl carrier protein shuttling in
    β–ketoacyl–ACP synthases. Nat. Commun. 11, 1727 (2020).            human fatty acid synthase. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
34. Mindrebo, J. T. et al. Structure and mechanistic analyses of the          025-08587-x (2025).
    gating mechanism of elongating ketosynthases. ACS Catal. 11,       55.  Ishikawa, F., Haushalter, R. W. & Burkart, M. D. Dehydratase-speciﬁc
    6787–6799 (2021).                                                probes for fatty acid and polyketide synthases. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
35. Zanon, P. R. A. et al. Proﬁling the proteome-wide selectivity of           134, 769–772 (2012).
     diverse electrophiles ChemRxiv. https://doi.org/10.26434/           56. Worthington, A. S., Rivera, H., Torpey, J. W., Alexander, M. D. &
    chemrxiv-2021-w7rss-v2 (2021).                                            Burkart, M. D. Mechanism-based protein cross-linking probes to
36. Lowry, B., Li, X., Robbins, T., Cane, D. E. & Khosla, C. A. Turnstile          investigate carrier protein-mediated biosynthesis. ACS Chem. Biol.
    mechanism for the controlled growth of biosynthetic intermediates          1, 687–691 (2006).
    on assembly line polyketide synthases. ACS Cent. Sci. 2,             57.  Schneider, A., Rasband, W. S. & Eliceiri, K. W. NIH Image to ImageJ:
    14–20 (2016).                                                 25 years of image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 671–675 (2012).
37.  Grininger, M. Enzymology of assembly line synthesis by modular    58. Menendez-Bravo, S., Comba, S., Sabatini, M., Arabolaza, A. & Gra-
    polyketide synthases. Nat. Chem. Biol. 19, 401–415 (2023).               majo, H. Expanding the chemical diversity of natural esters by
38. Nguyen, C. et al. Trapping the dynamic acyl carrier protein in fatty       engineering a polyketide-derived pathway into Escherichia coli.
    acid biosynthesis. Nature 505, 427–431 (2014).                        Metab. Eng. 24, 97–106 (2014).
39. Shen, S. et al. A back-door Phenylalanine coordinates the stepwise   59. Schlager, B., Straessle, A. & Hafen, E. Use of anionic denaturing
    hexameric loading of acyl carrier protein by the fatty acid bio-           detergents to purify insoluble proteins after overexpression. BMC
     synthesis enzyme β-hydroxyacyl-acyl carrier protein dehydratase         Biotechnol. 12, 95 (2012).
     (FabZ). Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 128, 5–11 (2019).                     60. Finzel, K., Beld, J., Burkart, M. D. & Charkoudian, L. K. Utilizing
40. Brignole, E. J., Smith, S. & Asturias, F. J. Conformational ﬂexibility of       mechanistic cross-linking technology to study protein-protein
    metazoan fatty acid synthase enables catalysis. Nat. Struct. Mol.           interactions: an experiment designed for an undergraduate bio-
     Biol. 16, 190–197 (2009).                                             chemistry lab. J. Chem. Educ. 94, 375–379 (2017).




Nature Communications| (2025)16:7798                                                                                      13


[PDF physical page 14]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x

61.  Punjani, A., Rubinstein, J. L., Fleet, D. J. & Brubaker, M. A. cryoS-    Additional information
    PARC: algorithms for rapid unsupervised cryo-EM structure deter-   Supplementary information The online version contains
     mination. Nat. Methods 14, 290–296 (2017).                       supplementary material available at
62.  Rubinstein, J. L. & Brubaker, M. A. Alignment of cryo-EM movies of   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63024-x.
     individual particles by optimization of image translations. J. Struct.
     Biol. 192, 188–195 (2015).                                    Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
63.  Punjani, A., Zhang, H. & Fleet, D. J. Non-uniform reﬁnement: adap-   Michael D. Burkart.
     tive regularization improves single-particle cryo-EM reconstruction.
     Nat. Methods 17, 1214–1221 (2020).                              Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anon-
64. Sanchez-Garcia, R. et al. DeepEMhancer: a deep learning solution   ymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A
     for cryo-EM volume post-processing. Commun. Biol. 4, 874 (2021).   peer review ﬁle is available.

Acknowledgements                                           Reprints and permissions information is available at
The authors acknowledge the facilities of the UC San Diego cryo-EM     http://www.nature.com/reprints
facility, part of the Goeddel Family Technology Sandbox, along with the
scientiﬁc and technical assistance of facility staff members Dr. Mariusz   Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
Matyszewski and Dr. Inga Kuschnerus. We also acknowledge J. Noel       isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
(Salk Institute), D. Lyumkis (Salk Institute), S. Konno (UC San Diego), D.O.
Passos (Salk Institute), and A. Patel (UC San Diego) for initial studies on  Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
D.H. crosslinking21 of MAS. This study was supported by NIH              Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
R01GM095970 to MDB and facilitated by a cryo-EM Seed Grant from the   adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
UC San Diego Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry. G.W.H. was   long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
supported by K12HL141956.                                            source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
                                                             changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
Author contributions                                                 article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
Z.J., J.J.L., and M.D.B. designed the research. Z.J., G.W.H., and J.A.C.      indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
produced the samples. Z.J., J.A.C., and J.H. conducted crosslinking and   included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
mutational studies. Z.J. and G.W.H. prepared the samples for cryoEM.    use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
G.W.H. and Z.J. carried out the cryoEM data collection. Z.J., G.W.H.,      use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
J.J.L., and M.D.B. analyzed the cryoEM data. J.J.L. and M.D.B. guided the   holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
project. M.D.B. supervised the project. Z.J., G.W.H., J.J.L., and M.D.B.      licenses/by/4.0/.
wrote the manuscript with input from all authors.
                                        © The Author(s) 2025
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.





Nature Communications| (2025)16:7798                                                                                   14