
[PDF physical page 1]
          Journal of
    Fungi


Review
Biosynthesis of Fungal Natural Products Involving Two
Separate Pathway Crosstalk

Guangzhi Dai, Qiyao Shen, Youming Zhang and Xiaoying Bian *



                               Helmholtz International Lab for Anti-Infectives, Shandong University-Helmholtz Institute of Biotechnology,
                                      State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao 266237, China;
                                daiguangzhi@sdu.edu.cn (G.D.); syndeeyao@foxmail.com (Q.S.); zhangyouming@sdu.edu.cn (Y.Z.)
                                     * Correspondence: bianxiaoying@sdu.edu.cn


                                Abstract: Fungal natural products (NPs) usually possess complicated structures, exhibit satisfactory
                                    bioactivities, and are an outstanding source of drug leads, such as the cholesterol-lowering drug
                                 lovastatin and the immunosuppressive drug mycophenolic acid. The fungal NPs biosynthetic
                             genes are always arranged within one single biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC). However, a rare but
                                  fascinating phenomenon that a crosstalk between two separate BGCs is indispensable to some fungal
                               dimeric NPs biosynthesis has attracted increasing attention. The hybridization of two separate BGCs
                              not only increases the structural complexity and chemical diversity of fungal NPs, but also expands
                                the scope of bioactivities. More importantly, the underlying mechanism for this hybridization process
                                        is poorly understood and needs further exploration, especially the determination of BGCs for each
                              building block construction and the identiﬁcation of enzyme(s) catalyzing the two biosynthetic
                              precursors coupling processes such as Diels–Alder cycloaddition and Michael addition. In this
                               review, we summarized the fungal NPs produced by functional crosstalk of two discrete BGCs,
                         and highlighted their biosynthetic processes, which might shed new light on genome mining for
                               fungal NPs with unprecedented frameworks, and provide valuable insights into the investigation of
                              mysterious biosynthetic mechanisms of fungal dimeric NPs which are constructed by collaboration
Citation: Dai, G.; Shen, Q.; Zhang, Y.;    of two separate BGCs.

Bian, X. Biosynthesis of Fungal
Natural Products Involving Two      Keywords: biosynthetic pathway crosstalk; natural product; biosynthetic gene cluster; polyketide;
Separate Pathway Crosstalk. J. Fungi     fungi; bioactivity
2022, 8, 320. https://doi.org/

10.3390/jof8030320


Academic Editors: Tao Feng and
Frank Surup                         1. Introduction
                             Fungi produce a plethora of chemically diverse natural products (NPs) with various
Received: 27 February 2022
                                bioactivities and a wide variety of applications in medicine and agriculture [1]. Because ofAccepted: 17 March 2022
Published: 21 March 2022              this, fungal NPs have been historically recognized as an invaluable source of inspiration
                               for the development of drug leads for the treatment of infections and cancer, as well as the
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral   prevention of crop damage, such as lovastatin (the cholesterol-lowering drug), mycophe-
with regard to jurisdictional claims in   nolic acid (the immunosuppressive drug), and pyripyropene A (the insecticide) [2–4]. In
published maps and institutional afﬁl-   addition, fungal NPs with novel molecular scaffolds provide excellent templates for the
iations.
                           chemical synthesis of new bioactive compounds [5].
                                 In fungi, the natural products are commonly synthesized by the genes arranged in
                          a contiguous fashion as a biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) [6]. The core biosynthetic en-
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.  zymes encoded by the BGCs mainly include polyketide synthases (PKSs), non-ribosomal
Licensee MDPI, Basel,  Switzerland.   peptide synthetases (NRPSs), terpene synthases, and ribosomally synthesized and post-
This article is an open access article   translationally modiﬁed peptide (RiPP) biosynthetic enzymes to enlarge the variety of
distributed  under  the  terms  and   carbon skeletons of the products. Tailoring enzymes such as the monooxygenase, hy-
conditions of the Creative Commons   droxylase, and methyltransferase further increase the diversity and complexity of the
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://   molecules [7]. With the development of genome sequencing technology, bioinformatic
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/    methods, genome mining algorithms, and scalable expression platforms, the genomic-
4.0/).                       driven approaches have revolutionized NPs discovery, greatly expand the access to the





J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320. https://doi.org/10.3390/jof8030320                                               https://www.mdpi.com/journal/jof


[PDF physical page 2]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                             2 of 16



                          chemical repertoire of fungal-derived NPs, and provide unprecedented opportunities to
                              investigate their biosynthetic mechanisms [8]. Several vital factors that regulate the expres-
                            sion of fungal BGCs, including the environmental signals, transcriptional regulation, and
                             epigenetic regulation, have been summarized by Keller [9], which might be instructive for
                      genome mining and activation of the silent BGCs.
                                 In most reported studies, the microbial NPs biosynthetic pathways are generally
                         completed by one single BGC. However, in some interesting but rare cases, the products
                         have been demonstrated to be constructed via the hybridization of two precursors, which
                             are biosynthesized by two separate BGCs. For instance, the antithrombotic myxadazoles, a
                           family of novel chimeric compounds isolated from Myxococcus sp. SDU36, consists of N-
                                  ribityl 5,6-dimethylbenzimidazole and a linear fatty acid chain endowed with an isoxazole
                               ring. Interestingly, a non-canonical PKS/NRPS biosynthetic pathway and the vitamin
                        B12 metabolism pathway were proved to interwind together through the construction of
                           isoxazole-benzimidazole hybrids [10]. Tasikamides, recently isolated from Streptomyces
                                 tasikensis P46, contain a rare hydrazone group that joins the cyclic peptide scaffold to
                        an alkyl 5-hydroxylanthranilate (AHA) moiety. This research also addressed that the
                             biosynthesis of tasikamides required the coupling of two separate gene clusters, with one
                   BGC encoding a NRPS pathway for assembling the cyclic peptide scaffold, and the other
                   BGC encoding the AHA-synthesizing pathway [11]. These works illustrate that functional
                               crosstalk between two different biosynthetic pathways is not only of considerable value in
                             increasing the structural diversity of NPs, but also a more effective way to construct new
                        drug leads of natural origin.
                                  Several key issues need to be considered when we investigate the biosynthetic mecha-
                        nism of two separate BGC co-participation in NP biosynthesis: (a) identiﬁcation of each
                   BGC and characterization of the necessary gene function; (b) isolation of sufﬁcient quantity
                             of key intermediates through gene knockout, enzymatic catalyzation, and heterologous
                            expression; and (c) determination of whether the coupling process of the two separate
                     BGCs is spontaneous or enzymatic. Thus, in-depth understanding of the biosynthetic
                       mechanism for the convergence of two distinct biosynthetic pathways will provide an
                              alternative to accelerate the discovery of NPs with novel skeletons, as well as shed new
                                 light on which enzyme(s) could catalyze the formation of C-C, C-N, or N-N bonds that link
                       two biosynthetic precursors together. In this mini-review, we summarized some fungal
                     NPs with novel skeletons produced by the crosstalk between two discrete biosynthetic
                         gene clusters, mainly including polyketides, meroterpenoids, and non-ribosomal peptides.
                  We highlighted their biosynthetic processes, which might provide valuable insights into
                            the coupling mechanism of two separate BGCs in fungal NP biosynthesis.

                                   2. Fungal Polyketide Biosynthesis Involving Two Separate Pathway Crosstalk
                                   2.1. The Biosynthesis of Penilactones A and B

                           The representative examples about non-enzymatic Michael addition mediated the
                           coupling process of polyketide–polyketide hybrids were highly oxygenated fungal polyke-
                              tides penilactones A (1) and B (2), which were ﬁrstly isolated from an Antarctic deep-sea
                          derived fungus Penicillium crustosum PRB-2 by Li and co-workers [12]. The biosynthetic
                       pathway was proposed to be originated from the hybridization of one o-quinone methide
                              unit (5) and a γ-butyrolactone moiety through 1,4-Michael addition to complete the carbon
                             skeleton construction of 1 and 2. A biomimetic total synthesis was subsequently achieved
                               to conﬁrm the biosynthetic hypothesis [13]. Considering the enzymes for Michael addition
                           involved in 1 and 2 biosynthesis have not been reported yet, Li and co-workers identiﬁed
                       two separate BGCs (termed as cla and tra BGCs in this review) responsible for the biosyn-
                               thesis of 1 and 2 through the gene deletion and heterologous expression in Aspergillus
                              nidulans [14]. The core non-reducing polyketide synthase (NR-PKS) ClaF in the cla BGC is
                             responsible for the biosynthesis of crucial intermediate clavatol (3) (Figure 1). The nonheme
                            FeII/2-oxoglutarate-dependent oxygenase ClaD oxidized 3 into hydroxyclavatol (4), which
                           spontaneously underwent dehydration into the crucial intermediate o-quinone methide (5).


[PDF physical page 3]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                             3 of 16



                          For tra BGC, a hybrid polyketide synthase-nonribosomal peptide synthetase (PKS-NRPS)
                        TraA and a trans-acting enoyl reductase (ER) TraG collaboratively catalyzed the formation
                             of crustosic acid (6) precursor. The nonheme FeII/2-oxoglutarate-dependent oxygenase
                       TraH subsequently catalyzed the oxidative decarboxylation of 6 into dehydroterrestric
                               acid, the terminal double-bond of which was ﬁnally reduced by the ﬂavin-dependent
                           oxidoreductase TraD into an important intermediate terrestric acid (7) [15]. The results
                              of precursors feeding experiments in ∆traA mutant conﬁrmed that both 6 and 7 were the
                        on-pathway intermediates, and could be transformed into 5-carboxylmethyltetronic acid
                                 (8) and 5-methyltetronic acid (9), respectively. The fascinating issue associated with the
                             biosynthesis of 1 and 2 is which enzyme(s) could catalyze the Michael addition to couple
                       two building blocks together. Surprisingly, incubation of 8 with 4 in water at 25 ◦C led
                             to the formation of penilactone D (10) as the major product, and 2 as the minor product
                            (Figure 1). Incubation of 9 with 4 generated peniphenone D (11) as the major product
                            as well as 1 as the minor product. Both 10 and 11 were separately incubated with 4, the
                           formation of 1 and 2 could be observed (Figure 1). These results unambiguously indicated
                              that the Michael addition involving in the biosynthesis of 1 and 2 is nonenzymatic and
                          could happen spontaneously.





                              Figure 1. The biosynthetic pathway of fungal polyketides penilactones A (1) and B (2). The Michael
                               addition that triggers the coupling of cla and tra BGCs is nonenzymatic.

                                 In general, the combination of enzymatic and nonenzymatic reactions originated
                         from the crosstalk between two separate biosynthetic pathways signiﬁcantly enriched the
                              structural diversity of fungal NPs. The biosynthesis of fungal polyketides penilactones A
                        and B provides an excellent example to investigate that how two different BGCs interwind
                                at a gene cluster level.

                                   2.2. The Biosynthesis of Dalmanol A and Acetodalmanol A

                           The mantis-associated fungus Daldinia eschscholzii TL01 is known to produce novel
                            polyketides including dalmanol A (12) and acetodalmanol A (13) with immunosuppressive
                              bioactivity [16–18]. The structural characteristic of 12 and 13 implied that their carbon
                             skeletons construction involved in co-participation of two building blocks naphthalene and
                         chromane. Tan and co-workers conducted the pioneering work to identify two separate
                     BGCs (termed as chr and nap BGCs in this review) by gene deletion as well as heterologous


[PDF physical page 4]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                             4 of 16



                           expression [19]. The chr BGC is responsible for chromane biosynthesis and the nap BGC
                            biosynthesizes naphthalene. This work addressed the two-gene-cluster crosstalk based
                             biosynthetic pathways of dalmanol A and acetodalmanol A (Figure 2).





                              Figure 2. The biosynthetic pathway of fungal polyketides dalmanol A (12) and acetodalmanol A (13).

                                 In plants and fungi, the assembly of chromane-based aromatic polyketides have been
                           reported to be biosynthesized by both type III PKS and partially reducing type I PKS
                         (PR-PKS) [20,21]. The results of the quantitative reverse transcription PCR analysis, tar-
                           geted gene deletion, and heterologous expression experiments supported that the PR-PKS
                     ChrA and the keto-reductase ChrB are indeed responsible for the formation of vital in-
                           termediate 1-(2,6-dihydroxyphenyl)but-2-en-1-one (PBEO,14) (Figure 2). Thus, the genes
                         encoding PR-PKS ChrA, the keto-reductase ChrB, and a transporter constitute the chr
                      BGC, which is located on Scaffold_36 in the genome (Figure 2). The NR-PKS gene pksTL
                             in Daldinia eschscholzii TL01 has been conﬁrmed to be responsible for the biosynthesis of
                          naphthalene-based polyketide 1,3,6,8-tetrahydroxynaphthalene (4HN, 15) by gene dele-
                               tion [22]. Co-expression of the NR-PKS pksTL and 4HN reductase 4HNR in A. oryzae led to
                             the accumulation of 1,3,6-tetrahydroxynaphthalene (3HN, 16), a biosynthetic precursor for
                            the assembly of dalesconols, which are polyketides also isolated from Daldinia eschscholzii
                          TL01. The genes encoding the NR-PKS pksTL, 4HN reductase 4HNR, two transcription
                                factors, and a laccase constitute the nap BGC, which is within Scaffold_20 in the genome
                       and locates at least 493 kb away from the chr BGC. Only when pksTL, chrA, and chrB were
                           co-introduced into A. oryzae, the polyketides 12 and 13 could be successfully produced.
                       The critical biosynthetic process for the coupling of chr and nap BGCs was proposed to
                         be the epoxidation of PBEO (14) to the proposed intermediate 17 (Figure 2). The results


[PDF physical page 5]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                             5 of 16



                              of enzymatic activity inhibition experiments revealed an unspeciﬁc P450 monooxygenase
                             located elsewhere in the genome of A. oryzae host might be responsible for the epoxidation
                              of 14 to 17, which triggered the cross-cluster coupling of both chr and nap BGCs.
                                   Overall, this work further illustrated that two separated BGCs crosstalk is a promising
                            access to improve the structural diversity of fungal NPs. Understanding the regulatory
                       mechanism of the multiple-gene-cluster coupling is of great signiﬁcance in establishing
                            the synthetic biology approaches to discover NPs with novel skeletons and potential
                              biological activities.

                                   2.3. The Biosynthesis of Azasperpyranone A

                               Azaphilones, a group of structurally related fungal polyketides, contain a highly
                         oxygenated bicyclic pyrone quinone moiety, and exhibit a broad range of bioactivities
                           including anticancer, antifungal, and antiviral activities [23]. Azasperpyranone A (18),
                             recently isolated from A. terreus, contains a highly oxygenated pyranoquinone moiety
                            possessing a 6/6/6/6 tetracyclic ring system, and shows potential anticancer activity [24].
                            Scrutiny of the structural feature of azasperpyranone An (18) revealed that two building
                           blocks 5-methyl orsellinic aldehyde (19) and preasperpyranone (20) are the biosynthetic
                             precursors. Lu and co-workers have identiﬁed two separate BGCs by gene deletion,
                            including the BGC A responsible for polyhydric phenol formation and the BGC B involving
                            the azaphilonoid scaffold construction (Figure 3) [24].





                              Figure 3. The biosynthetic pathway of fungal polyketide azasperpyranone A (18).

                                  In a previous study, the full-length, intron-free open reading frames of two core genes
                       ATEG_03629 and ATEG_03630 from BGC A, which encode a NR-PKS and a NRPS-like
                        enzyme, respectively, were co-transformed into Saccharomyces cerevisiae to produce the
                            intermediate 19 (Figure 3) [25]. Then the FAD-dependent monooxygenase (FMO) encoded
                       by ATEG_03635 gene catalyzed the hydroxylation of 19 to afford the intermediate 21,
                        which was subsequently oxidized into the crucial precursor 22 by the P450 monooxygenase
                        encoded by ATEG_03631 gene. In BGC B, the two core genes ATEG_07659 encoding a
                            highly reducing PKS (HR-PKS) and ATEG_07661 encoding a NR-PKS were heterologously
                            co-expressed in A. nidulans to produce 23 [26,27]. Compound 23 was rapidly converted into
                        an important precursor preasperpyranone 20 by the FMO encoded by gene ATEG_07662.
                        The remaining gap for the entire biosynthetic pathway of azasperpyranone A is that which
                      enzyme could couple the two vital intermediates 20 and 22 together by catalyzing the


[PDF physical page 6]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                             6 of 16



                          formation of C-C and C-O bonds. Deletion of the gene ATEG_03636 with unknown func-
                             tion abolished the production of 18, but accumulated two precursors 19 and 20, which
                           implied the formation of 18 was more likely catalyzed by ATEG_03636 rather than caused
                        by the spontaneous reaction between 20 and 22 (Figure 3). The authors also found that the
                       ATEG_07667 in BGC B could indirectly regulate the cluster-speciﬁc regulators ATEG_03638
                             in BGC A and ATEG_07666 in BGC B to collaboratively synthesize the anti-cancer com-
                      pound 18. This interesting collaborative model in the fungal NPs biosynthesis provides
                     new clues for the investigation of regulatory mechanism for other novel natural products
                        which were biosynthesized by two separate BGCs crosstalk.

                                   3. Fungal Meroterpenoids Biosynthesis Involving Two Separate Pathway Crosstalk
                          The Biosynthesis of Austinol

                              Meroterpenoids are an important class of fungal NPs [28], some of them have been
                          developed as the drug candidate for treatment of Alzheimer’s disease such as territrem [29],
                       and the drug lead for insecticide such as pyripyropene A [30]. Fungal meroterpenoids are
                             usually biosynthesized by a single BGC which encodes a polyketide synthase, a terpene cy-
                                  clase, a prenyltransferase, and other essential tailoring enzymes to produce polyketide and
                            terpenoid precursors [31]. Deletion of sumO gene, encoding the small ubiquitin-like protein
                    SUMO, signiﬁcantly altered the proﬁles of secondary metabolites in A. nidulans. Austinol
                               (23) and dehydroaustinol (24) were identiﬁed from the ∆sumO mutant [32]. Nielsen et al.
                             ﬁrst reported the NR-PKS AusA responsible for the formation of polyketide precursor
                             3,5-dimethylorsellinic acid (DMOA) (25) in austinol biosynthesis [33]. This conclusion
                      was also veriﬁed by Wang et al. [34]. Interestingly, Wang and co-workers found that no
                            prenyltransferase gene was located near NR-PKS gene ausA, which suggested that the
                          genes responsible for the biosynthesis of 23 and 24 might be separated in the genome of
                          A. nidulans LO2026 [34]. Using the UbiA sequence as a query to blast the prenyltrans-
                              ferase homologs in the genome of A. nidulans, Wang et al. found the top two candidate
                          genes AN9259.4 (designated as ausN, on chromosome VIII) and AN8142.4. Deletion of
                        ausN abolished the production of 23 and 24, and accumulated the polyketide precursor
                               25. By a set of gene deletions around ausA and ausN, they identiﬁed the two separate
                       BGCs: the BGC A containing the necessary genes ausA-D and the BGC B consisting of
                            the biosynthetic genes ausE-N. The biosynthetic pathway for 23 and 24 was also proposed
                            (Figure 4). Firstly, the polyketide synthase AusA is responsible for the formation of 25,
                           then the aromatic prenyltransferase AusN catalyzed the C-alkylation of 25 using farnesyl
                          pyrophosphate to form intermediate 26. The epoxidase AusM catalyzed the epoxidation of
                            the prenylated polyketide intermediate 26, followed by cyclization catalyzed by a terpene
                             cyclase AusL to form the tetracyclic intermediate 27. The formation mechanism of the
                            lactone system and spiro-ring in compound 28 has been investigated by Abe group [35].
                       The co-operation of the non-heme iron-dependent dioxygenase AusE, the hydroxylase
                        AusB, and the Baeyer–Villiger monooxygenase AusC transformed the substrate 27 into
                          28 [35]; The hypothetical protein AusJ might be responsible for the acid-catalyzed keto-
                           rearrangement and ring contraction of the tetraketide portion in intermediate 28 to generate
                            intermediate 29. The authors speculated that the AusK is responsible for reducing the C-5′
                           keto of 29 to hydroxyl group, and the hypothetical protein AusH might function as an
                             accessory enzyme collaboratively working with AusK to alter AusK stereospeciﬁcity for its
                          product 30. The Baeyer−Villiger monooxygenase AusI inserted an oxygen atom between
                            the C-4′ and vicinal carbon at C-3′ of 30 to create a lactone ring in 31. Finally, the P450
                       monooxygenase AusG might catalyze the C-11 hydroxylation of 31 to form ﬁnal product
                             austinol (23) (Figure 4).
                          DMOA-derived fungal meroterpenoids possess complicated structures and attracted
                               researchers’ attention to investigate the biosynthetic pathway. Some fungal meroterpenoids
                         such as anditomin and andrastin have been studied in detail [36–38]. All of the necessary
                          genes for anditomin or andrastin biosynthesis are clustered in one single BGC. However,
                             the biosynthesis of austinol and dehydroaustinol in A. nidulans LO2026 needs the pathway


[PDF physical page 7]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                             7 of 16



                               crosstalk between BGC A and BGC B. This provides an intriguing and valuable insight that
                           fungi could use a variety of strategies to expand the skeletal diversiﬁcation and subtlety
                             regulate the crosstalk between separate biosynthetic pathways to multiply the number of
                     NPs produced by these BGCs.





                              Figure 4. The biosynthetic pathway of fungal meroterpenoids austinol (23) and dehydroaustinol
                                   (24) in A. nidulans LO2026.

                                   4. Fungal Non-Ribosomal Peptide Biosynthesis Involving Two Separate
                       Pathway Crosstalk
                                   4.1. The Biosynthesis of Spirotryprostatin A

                       Many NPs bearing the spiro-carbon system exhibit potential biological activities. In-
                            trigued by the privileged structure and usefulness of spiro carbon system, a great deal of
                              attention has been paid to their catalytic enantioselective synthesis [39,40]. Understanding
                            the mechanism of spiro-carbon biosynthesis and identifying the versatility of enzymes
                             responsible for the spiro-carbon formation are also of great signiﬁcance. Spirotryprostatins
                          belong to non-ribosomal peptides that isolated from A. fumigatus, and known for their
                          pharmaceutical importance and application in cancer treatment [41]. The formation of
                            the spiro-ring moiety in spirotryprostatins remained unknown and aroused Watanabe
                       and co-workers’ interest to solve this mystery [42]. The authors utilized S. cerevisiae and
                          A. niger as the heterologous hosts to efﬁciently express the whole biosynthetic pathways
                             of spirotryprostatins, and obtained crucial intermediates to identify two pathways for
                             spiro-carbon formation, namely an epoxide route catalyzed by the FMO FqzB and a radical
                            route catalyzed by the cytochrome P450 FtmG (Figure 5) [42]. Spirotryprostatins possess
                            the diketopiperazine frameworks, and show the structural similarity to fumitremorgins
                       and fumiquinazolines, suggesting the peptide backbone of these compounds could be
                            biosynthesized by the NRPS using L-proline and L-tryptophan as the biosynthetic precur-
                              sors [43,44]. When ftmA-E ﬁve genes were expressed in A. niger, no intermediates featuring
                             the spiro-carbon were isolated, implying other indispensable genes are needed to be intro-
                          duced. Based on the prior researches about the biosynthetic mechanism of spiro-carbon
                          formation [45–47], the authors creatively introduced the FMO FqzB-encoding gene fqzB,
                        which is located within the fumiquinazoline BGC (designed as fqz BGC in this review), into
                            the A. niger/ ftmA-E mutant, and successfully isolated pirotryprostatin A (32) (Figure 5).


[PDF physical page 8]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                             8 of 16



                             In vitro enzymatic assay revealed that FqzB could transform fumitremorgin C (33) into
                          32 by epoxidation mediated semipinacol-type rearrangement (Figure 5). These fascinating
                               results not only emphasize the important function of FMOs as the intersection to trigger
                            the coupling of two separate BGCs, but also highlight that the crosstalk between different
                             biosynthetic pathways allows the structural diversiﬁcation in NP biosynthesis.





                              Figure 5. The biosynthetic pathway of fungal non-ribosomal peptide spirotryprostatin A (32). The
                   FMO FqzB from the fqz BGC catalyzes the formation of spiro-carbon in spirotryprostatin A.

                                   4.2. The Biosynthesis of Echinocandin B

                               Echinocandins, a family of fungal lipohexapeptides, are ﬁrstly isolated from Emeri-
                                    cella rugulosa NRRL 11440, and exhibit excellent antifungal activities to the opportunistic
                           pathogenic Candida strains. Structural modiﬁcations of echinocandin B (34), especially for
                            the fatty acid moiety, successfully led to the generation of FDA-approved drug anidula-
                             fungin, which is a semisynthetic derivative of 34 and contains a substituted terphenyl acyl
                             chain. To better understand how microbes use simple precursors to synthesize complex
                        NPs, Tang and co-workers performed the groundbreaking work to identify and charac-
                               terize the BGC of echinocandin B [48]. Four nonproteinogenic amino acids including
                            4R,5R-dihydroxyl-L-ornithine, 3S-hydroxyl-4S-methyl-L-proline, 4R-hydroxyl-L-proline,
                       and 3S,4S-dihydroxyl-L-homotyrosine, as well as a long chain fatty acyl amide were con-
                            tained in echinocandin B (Figure 6). These unusual structural units implied an interesting
                             biosynthetic mechanism of echinocandin B.
                          By bioinformatics analysis, the NRPS EcdA containing six modules was identiﬁed.
                      Gene deletion of ecdA conﬁrmed its vital role in the peptide backbone formation of
                          echinocandin B. Other biosynthetic genes, such as ecdI encoding a fatty-acyl-AMP lig-
                            ase (EcdI), ecdG and ecdK encoding two α-ketoglutarate dependent oxygenases, and ecdH
                         encoding a heme-iron-dependent cytochrome P450 oxygenase, were all in proximity to
                          ecdA to constitute the ecd BGC. However, the genes responsible for the biosynthesis of L-
                          homotyrosine were not present in the vicinity of ecd BGC, indicating a separate BGC should
                             reside elsewhere in the genome. The putative 2-(4-hydroxybenzyl)-malic acid (36) is pro-


[PDF physical page 9]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                             9 of 16



                         posed to be the biosynthetic intermediate of L-homotyrosine (39) (Figure 6). Considering the
                            isopropyl-malate synthase (IPMS) is reported to catalyze the condensation of α-ketovalerate
                         with acetyl-CoA in the leucine biosynthesis, one IPMS homology in E. rugulosa genome
                      was proposed to catalyze the condensation of 4-hydroxyphenyl-pyruvate and acetate to
                         form 36. Using the IPMS gene from Mycobacterium tuberculosis as BLAST query, the authors
                              successfully identiﬁed the hty BGC, which is about 42.5 kb away from the ecd BGC, encod-
                           ing four enzymes for de novo generation of the special building block L-homotyrosine
                             (Figure 6) [48]. The isopropyl malate dehydrogenase HtyA catalyzed aldol-type conden-
                             sation of 4-hydroxyphenyl-pyruvate (35) and acetyl-CoA to form 36. Then, the aconitase
                       homology HtyD executed the isomerization of 36 to 3-(4-hydroxybenzyl)-malic acid (37).
                               Thereafter, 37 underwent decarboxylation and oxidation to form 2-oxo-4-(4-hydroxybenzyl)
                           butanoic acid (38) by isopropyl malate dehydrogenase homologue HtyC. Finally, the
                           transaminase HtyB catalyzed the transamination of 38 to form 39. In general, the biosynthe-
                                   sis of echinocandin B needs the coupling of two sperate BGCs, the ecd and hty BGCs. The hty
                   BGC provides an important biosynthetic precursor L-homotyrosine which was recognized
                       by the fourth A domain of the NRPS EcdA. Understanding the biosynthetic mechanism
                             of echinocandin B will facilitate us to take advantage of synthetic biology techniques to
                            bioengineer NRPSs to generate bioactive compounds [49–51].





                              Figure 6. The biosynthetic pathway of fungal non-ribosomal peptide echinocandin B (34). The
                               separate hty BGC is responsible for the L-homotyrosine moiety formation.

                                   5. Representative Fungal NPs Might Be Biosynthesized by Two Separate
                        Pathways Crosstalk
                                   5.1. Delitschiapyrone A

                                   Delitschiapyrone A (40) is a fungal polyketide bearing an unprecedented 6/6/7/5/6-fused
                             pentacyclic ring system (Figure 7), and isolated from a solid culture of the leaf-associated


[PDF physical page 10]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                            10 of 16



                         fungus Delitschia sp. FL1581 [52]. The absolute conﬁguration of 40 was determined by
                             spectroscopic analysis, X-ray crystallography data, and experimental and calculated ECD.
                 A naphthalenone unit and an α-pyrone moiety were proposed to be linked together via the
                           Diels–Alder addition followed by an α-ketol-type rearrangement to forge the pentacylic
                             ring system of 40 (Figure 7), which suggested the biosynthetic pathway of 40 might be con-
                           cerned with the crosstalk between two separate BGCs (one for naphthalenone biosynthesis
                       and the other for α-pyrone biosynthesis). A bioinspired total synthesis of delitschiapy-
                           rone A has been achieved by simply stirring a heterogeneous mixture of two Diels−Alder
                               substrates, which gave a hint that the intermolecular Diels−Alder reaction might be spon-
                            taneous. Recently, Houk and co-workers investigated the mechanisms and dynamics of
                             biosynthetic formation of 40 by density functional theory (DFT) calculations and qua-
                                 siclassical molecular dynamics simulations with DFT and xTB, and drew a conclusion
                              that 40 is not formed from the proposed Diels−Alder/α-ketol rearrangement cascade but
                            instead formed directly from a single cycloaddition reaction [53], which is of great signiﬁ-
                          cance to the subsequent study on the biosynthetic pathway of 40 through gene deletion,
                           heterologous expression, and enzymatic assays.





                              Figure 7. The proposed biosynthetic pathway of delitschiapyrone A (40).

                                   5.2. Herpotrichone A

                              Herpotrichone A (41) is a fungal polyketide isolated from the isopod-associated fun-
                        gus Herpotrichia sp. SF09 with an unprecedented pentacyclic 6/6/6/6/3 skeleton, and
                        shows outstanding anti-neuro inﬂammatory activities in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced
                         BV-2 microglial cells (Figure 8) [54]. Interestingly, compound 41 is also an intermolecu-
                                 lar [4 + 2] adduct that involves the coupling of epoxycyclohexenone and α-pyrone two
                           building blocks via the Diels–Alder addition.  Recently, the biosynthetic pathways of
                          epoxycyclohexenone-derived fungal polyketides trichoxide, sordarial, and ﬂavoglaucin
                        have been investigated in detail, which provide new insights into the biosynthesis of
                            the naphthalenone unit in 41 [55–57]. The biosynthesis of some fungal α-pyrone-linked
                     NPs such as alternapyrones and citreoviridin have been reported. The α-pyrone moiety
                              in alternapyrones and citreoviridin is indeed formed by the spontaneous intramolecular
                               cyclization of PKS AlpA and CtvA, respectively [58,59]. Thus, herpotrichone A might share
                             the similar strategy to forge the α-pyrone unit by utilization of an unidentiﬁed PKS. Overall,
                           fungal NPs with intermolecular Diels–Alder addition features usually have novel carbon
                               skeletons. The unexpected architectures of these compounds may open an interesting topic
                          such as the characterization of two separate BGCs crosstalk, and discovery of more fungal
                            intermolecular Diels–Alderases.

                                   5.3. Citrifuran A

                                  Citrifuran A (42) is produced by the centipede intestine-associated Aspergillus sp.
                          through solid fermentation (Figure 7), and showed moderate inhibitory activities against
                         LPS-induced NO production in RAW 264.7 macrophages [60]. The novel skeleton of
                                citrifuran A was constructed by coupling of azaphilone and furanone moieties via Michael
                           addition (Figure 9). It is obvious that the two separate BGCs’ crosstalk is indispensable
                             to the biosynthesis of 42. The furanone moiety was also contained in fungal polyketide
                            gregatin A. For gregatin A biosynthesis, a single PKS GrgA with the aid of a trans-acting


[PDF physical page 11]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                            11 of 16



                            enoylreductase GrgB could biosynthesize the C4 and C11 carbon chains. More interestingly,
                          a predicted hydrolase GrgF is responsible for the fusion two carbon chains to produce the
                          furanone skeleton of gregatin A [61]. This unusual chain-fusing reaction might be also
                              suitable for the biosynthesis of furanone scaffold in 42 (Figure 9). The fungal polyketide-
                          derived mycotoxin citrinin also possesses azaphilone building block. The individual
                              biosynthetic steps of citrinin have been studied by a combination of targeted gene knockout
                       and heterologous gene expression in A. oryzae [62], which might provide new clues for
                             investigation of the biosynthetic mechanism of 42. Though the biosynthetic pathways for
                           azaphilone and furanone have been investigated, the enzyme for catalyzation of Michael
                            addition has not yet been identiﬁed, and needs further exploration.





                              Figure 8. The proposed biosynthetic pathway of herpotrichone A (41).





                              Figure 9. The proposed biosynthetic pathway of citrifuran A (42).

                                   5.4. Acautalide A

                          The fungal polyketide acautalide A (43) is produced from the solid-state cul-
                             tivation of isopod Armadillidium vulgare-associated Acaulium sp. H-JQSF on rice
                       medium, and exhibits neuroprotective bioactivity with antiparkinsonic potential in the
                           1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium-challenged nematode model [63]. The architectural fea-
                             tures of 43 indicated that two biosynthetic precursors 10-keto-acaudiol and octadeca-
                               9,11,13-trienoic acid intertwined together through intermolecular Diels–Alder cycloaddi-
                             tion (Figure 10). The 10-keto-acaudiol unit is proposed to be an early-stage precursor
                             in the biosynthesis of acaulide and acaulins, two fungal macrodiolides previously iso-
                             lated from the Acaulium sp. H-JQSF [64,65]. However, the biosynthetic mechanism of
                            10-keto-acaudiol remains unclear. The octadeca-9,11,13-trienoic acid motif might be de-
                           rived from the biosynthesis of fungal polyunsaturated fatty acids, either biosynthesized
                        from the fungal desaturation of octadecanoic acids in rice. Interestingly, the obtained
                          43 was in enantiomerically pure form, thus the Diels–Alder cycloaddition might be truly
                           enzymatic. A fungal Diels–Alderase could be expected to catalyze the intermolecular
                               [4 + 2]-cycloaddition in the assembly line of 43 [63].


[PDF physical page 12]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                            12 of 16





                              Figure 10. The proposed biosynthetic pathway of acautalide A (43).

                                   6. Discussion

                         One reason that fungi endow great potentials to produce natural products with com-
                            plex structures and excellent biological activities might be ascribed to the complex metabolic
                            regulatory networks and interaction of different biosynthetic gene clusters. Understand-
                           ing how simple precursors are synthesized and assembled together to construct complex
                            natural products in organisms may promote the development of new combinational and
                             synthetic biology strategies to create new molecules.
                           Over the course of evolution, fungi have evolved different strategies to increase the
                              diversity of their NPs to protect themselves and acclimatize to the surrounding ecological
                         environment [66]. For example, a great progress has been made in the discovery and
                             identiﬁcation of fungal NPs with homo-dimeric or hetero-dimeric skeletons, which effec-
                               tively expand structural diversity of NPs and accelerates the occurrence of new biological
                                  activities. For fungal homodimer NPs, the building blocks are mostly biosynthesized by
                         one single BGC, and catalyzed by the crucial enzymes including cytochrome P450 enzymes,
                            intermolecular Diels–Alderases, and multicopper oxidases to afford the homo-dimeric
                              skeletons, such as the rugulosin A, bisorbicillinol, and viriditoxin biosynthesis [67–70]. On
                             the contrary, a rare but intriguing phenomenon is that two different building blocks, usually
                        produced by two separate BGCs, were coupled together to generate fungal heterodimers
                         NPs. However, the underlying mechanisms including how two structural units are biosyn-
                               thesized, and whether the two BGCs crosstalk process is enzymatic or spontaneous are still
                           mysterious and need further exploration. The coupling reactions between the two different
                            building blocks are various. The Diels–Alder reaction and Michael addition reaction have
                         been reported to splice the separate biosynthetic precursors together [14,52]. To in-depth
                          understand the biosynthetic process of two separate BGC crosstalk, we should characterize
                            the biosynthetic gene function in two BGCs and acquire crucial biosynthetic precursors
                         through gene knockout and heterologous expression. With the important intermediates
                              in hand, we can further investigate whether this hybridization process is spontaneous or
                            enzymatic. However, the determination of which enzymes responsible for the two separate
                   BGC crosstalk process is sometimes challenging, because the corresponding biosynthetic
                          genes might not be located within the two gene clusters, and distributed elsewhere in the
                       genome of targeted strain. Moreover, these enzymes may be hypothetical proteins, and it is
                              difﬁcult to be identiﬁed through bioinformatic analysis.
                                 In general, more endeavors are needed to carry out the research for the discovery
                             of fungal heterodimer NPs constructed by two building blocks, which not only provides
                        an outstanding opportunity for investigation of the currently underestimated hidden
                             biosynthetic crosstalk, but also facilitates the discovery of new BGCs, new regulatory
                         mechanisms, and enzyme catalysts with novel catalytic mechanisms.


                           Author Contributions: Conceptualization, G.D. and X.B.; writing—original draft preparation, G.D.;
                           writing—review and editing, G.D. and X.B.; discussion of the contents, G.D.; Q.S.; Y.Z., and X.B.;
                            funding acquisition, G.D. and X.B. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
                                the manuscript.


[PDF physical page 13]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                            13 of 16




                            Funding: This research was funded by National Key R&D Program of China (2019YFA0905700),
                              National Natural Science Foundation of China (32100040, 32070060), the Shandong Provincial Nat-
                                ural Science Foundation, China (ZR2019JQ11), and Qingdao Postdoctoral Application Research
                                  Project (62450070311109).

                                 Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

                           Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

                           Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.

                             Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

                          Abbreviations

                    NP        natural product
                     BGC       biosynthetic gene cluster
                        PKS       polyketide synthase
                        NR-PKS   non-reducing polyketide synthase
                        HR-PKS   highly reducing polyketide synthase
                      NRPS     non-ribosomal peptide synthetases
                           RiPP       post-translationally modiﬁed peptide
                   FMO     FAD-dependent monooxygenase
                       ER        enoyl reductase
                  AHA      alkyl 5-hydroxylanthranilate
                        IPMS      isopropyl-malate synthase
                  DMOA    3,5-dimethylorsellinic acid
                         LPS       lipopolysaccharide
                      PBEO     1-(2,6-dihydroxyphenyl)but-2-en-1-one
                       DFT       density functional theory

References

1.   González-Medina, M.; Owen, J.R.; El-Elimat, T.; Pearce, C.J.; Oberlies, N.H.; Figueroa, M.; Medina-Franco, J.L. Scaffold diversity
     of fungal metabolites. Front. Pharmacol. 2017, 8, 180. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.   Ma, S.M.; Li, J.W.; Choi, J.W.; Zhou, H.; Lee, K.K.; Moorthie, V.A.; Xie, X.; Kealey, J.T.; Da Silva, N.A.; Vederas, J.C.; et al. Complete
     reconstitution of a highly reducing iterative polyketide synthase. Science 2009, 326, 589–592. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.   Zhang, W.; Du, L.; Qu, Z.; Zhang, X.; Li, F.; Li, Z.; Qi, F.; Wang, X.; Jiang, Y.; Men, P.; et al. Compartmentalized biosynthesis of
     mycophenolic acid. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2019, 116, 13305–13310. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.    Itoh, T.; Tokunaga, K.; Matsuda, Y.; Fujii, I.; Abe, I.; Ebizuka, Y.; Kushiro, T. Reconstitution of a fungal meroterpenoid biosynthesis
     reveals the involvement of a novel family of terpene cyclases. Nat. Chem. 2010, 2, 858–864. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.   Karageorgis, G.; Foley, D.J.; Laraia, L.; Waldmann, H. Principle and design of pseudo-natural products. Nat. Chem. 2020, 12,
     227–235. [CrossRef]
6.   Osbourn, A. Secondary metabolic gene clusters: Evolutionary toolkits for chemical innovation. Trends Genet. 2010, 26, 449–457.
     [CrossRef]
7.   Smanski, M.J.; Zhou, H.; Claesen, J.; Shen, B.; Fischbach, M.A.; Voigt, C.A. Synthetic biology to access and expand nature’s
     chemical diversity. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2016, 14, 135–149. [CrossRef]
8.   van Santen, J.A.; Kautsar, S.A.; Medema, M.H.; Linington, R.G. Microbial natural product databases: Moving forward in the
     multi-omics era. Nat. Prod. Rep. 2021, 38, 264–278. [CrossRef]
9.    Keller, N.P. Fungal secondary metabolism: Regulation, function and drug discovery. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2019, 17, 167–180.
     [CrossRef]
10.   Li, Y.; Zhuo, L.; Li, X.; Zhu, Y.; Wu, S.; Shen, T.; Hu, W.; Li, Y.Z.; Wu, C. Myxadazoles, Myxobacterium-derived isoxazole-
     benzimidazole hybrids with cardiovascular activities. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 2021, 60, 21679–21684. [CrossRef]
11.  Ma, G.L.; Candra, H.; Pang, L.M.; Xiong, J.; Ding, Y.; Tran, H.T.; Low, Z.J.; Ye, H.; Liu, M.; Zheng, J.; et al. Biosynthesis of
     tasikamides via pathway coupling and diazonium-mediated hydrazone formation.  J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2022, 144, 1622–1633.
     [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.  Wu, G.W.; Ma, H.Y.; Zhu, T.J.; Li, J.; Gu, Q.Q.; Li, D.H. Penilactones A and B, two novel polyketides from Antarctic deep-sea
     derived fungus Penicillium crustosum PRB-2. Tetrahedron 2012, 68, 9745–9749. [CrossRef]
13.  Spence, J.T.; George, J.H. Biomimetic total synthesis of ent-penilactone A and penilactone B. Org. Lett. 2013, 15, 3891–3893.
     [CrossRef] [PubMed]


[PDF physical page 14]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                            14 of 16




14.  Fan, J.; Liao, G.; Kindinger, F.; Ludwig-Radtke, L.; Yin, W.B.; Li, S.M. Peniphenone and penilactone formation in Penicillium
     crustosum via 1,4-Michael additions of ortho-quinone methide from hydroxyclavatol to γ-butyrolactones from crustosic acid. J.
    Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141, 4225–4229. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.  Fan, J.; Liao, G.; Ludwig-Radtke, L.; Yin, W.B.; Li, S.M. Formation of terrestric acid in Penicillium crustosum requires redox-assisted
     decarboxylation and stereoisomerization. Org. Lett. 2020, 22, 88–92. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.  Zhang, Y.L.; Zhang, J.; Jiang, N.; Lu, Y.H.; Wang, L.; Xu, S.H.; Wang, W.; Zhang, G.F.; Xu, Q.; Ge, H.M.; et al. Immunosuppressive
     polyketides from mantis-associated Daldinia eschscholzii. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 5931–5940. [CrossRef]
17.  Zhang, Y.L.; Ge, H.M.; Zhao, W.; Dong, H.; Xu, Q.; Li, S.H.; Li, J.; Zhang, J.; Song, Y.C.; Tan, R.X. Unprecedented immunosup-
     pressive polyketides from Daldinia eschscholzii, a mantis-associated fungus. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 2008, 47, 5823–5826.
     [CrossRef]
18.  Zhang, A.H.; Tan, R.; Jiang, N.; Yusupu, K.; Wang, G.; Wang, X.L.; Tan, R.X. Selesconol, a fungal polyketide that induces stem cell
      differentiation. Org. Lett. 2016, 18, 5488–5491. [CrossRef]
19.  Zhou, Z.Z.; Zhu, H.J.; Lin, L.P.; Zhang, X.; Ge, H.M.; Jiao, R.H.; Tan, R.X. Dalmanol biosyntheses require coupling of two separate
     polyketide gene clusters. Chem. Sci. 2018, 10, 73–82. [CrossRef]
20.  Hertweck, C. The biosynthetic logic of polyketide diversity. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 2009, 48, 4688–4716. [CrossRef]
21.  Abe, I.; Oguro, S.; Utsumi, Y.; Sano, Y.; Noguchi, H. Engineered biosynthesis of plant polyketides: Chain length control in an
     octaketide-producing plant type III polyketide synthase. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 12709–12716. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.  Fang, W.; Ji, S.; Jiang, N.; Wang, W.; Zhao, G.Y.; Zhang, S.; Ge, H.M.; Xu, Q.; Zhang, A.H.; Zhang, Y.L.; et al. Naphthol radical
     couplings determine structural features and enantiomeric excess of dalesconols in Daldinia eschscholzii. Nat. Commun. 2012,
      3, 1039. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.  Bowen, J.I.; Wang, L.; Crump, M.P.; Willis, C.L. Core steps to the azaphilone family of fungal natural products. ChemBioChem
     2021, 22, 3027–3036.
24.  Huang, X.; Zhang, W.; Tang, S.; Wei, S.; Lu, X. Collaborative biosynthesis of a class of bioactive azaphilones by two separate gene
      clusters containing four PKS/NRPSs with transcriptional crosstalk in fungi. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 2020, 59, 4349–4353.
     [CrossRef]
25.  Wang, M.; Beissner, M.; Zhao, H. Aryl-aldehyde formation in fungal polyketides: Discovery and characterization of a distinct
     biosynthetic mechanism. Chem. Biol. 2014, 21, 257–263. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.  Chiang, Y.M.; Szewczyk, E.; Davidson, A.D.; Keller, N.; Oakley, B.R.; Wang, C.C. A gene cluster containing two fungal polyketide
     synthases encodes the biosynthetic pathway for a polyketide, asperfuranone, in Aspergillus nidulans. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131,
     2965–2970. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.  Chiang, Y.M.; Oakley, C.E.; Ahuja, M.; Entwistle, R.; Schultz, A.; Chang, S.L.; Sung, C.T.; Wang, C.C.; Oakley, B.R. An efﬁcient
     system for heterologous expression of secondary metabolite genes in Aspergillus nidulans. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135, 7720–7731.
     [CrossRef]
28.  Zhao, M.; Tang, Y.; Xie, J.; Zhao, Z.; Cui, H. Meroterpenoids produced by fungi: Occurrence, structural diversity, biological
      activities, and their molecular targets. Eur. J. Med. Chem. 2021, 209, 112860. [CrossRef]
29.  Moodie, L.W.K.; Sepˇci´c, K.; Turk, T.; FrangeŽ, R.; Svenson, J. Natural cholinesterase inhibitors from marine organisms. Nat. Prod.
     Rep. 2019, 36, 1053–1092. [CrossRef]
30.  Omura, S.; Tomoda, H.; Kim, Y.K.; Nishida, H. Pyripyropenes, highly potent inhibitors of acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase
    produced by Aspergillus fumigatus. J. Antibiot. 1993, 46, 1168–1169. [CrossRef]
31.   Barra, L.; Abe, I. Chemistry of fungal meroterpenoid cyclases. Nat. Prod. Rep. 2021, 38, 566–585. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.  Szewczyk, E.; Chiang, Y.M.; Oakley, C.E.; Davidson, A.D.; Wang, C.C.; Oakley, B.R. Identiﬁcation and characterization of the
     asperthecin gene cluster of Aspergillus nidulans. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2008, 74, 7607–7612. [CrossRef]
33.  Nielsen, M.L.; Nielsen, J.B.; Rank, C.; Klejnstrup, M.L.; Holm, D.K.; Brogaard, K.H.; Hansen, B.G.; Frisvad, J.C.; Larsen, T.O.;
     Mortensen, U.H. A genome-wide polyketide synthase deletion library uncovers novel genetic links to polyketides and meroter-
     penoids in Aspergillus nidulans. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2011, 321, 157–166. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.  Lo, H.C.; Entwistle, R.; Guo, C.J.; Ahuja, M.; Szewczyk, E.; Hung, J.H.; Chiang, Y.M.; Oakley, B.R.; Wang, C.C. Two separate gene
      clusters encode the biosynthetic pathway for the meroterpenoids austinol and dehydroaustinol in Aspergillus nidulans. J. Am.
     Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 4709–4720. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.  Matsuda, Y.; Awakawa, T.; Wakimoto, T.; Abe, I. Spiro-ring formation is catalyzed by a multifunctional dioxygenase in austinol
     biosynthesis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135, 10962–10965. [CrossRef]
36.  Matsuda, Y.; Wakimoto, T.; Mori, T.; Awakawa, T.; Abe, I. Complete biosynthetic pathway of anditomin: Nature’s sophisticated
     synthetic route to a complex fungal meroterpenoid. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 15326–15336. [CrossRef]
37.  Zhang, X.; Wang, T.T.; Xu, Q.L.; Xiong, Y.; Zhang, L.; Han, H.; Xu, K.; Guo, W.J.; Xu, Q.; Tan, R.X.; et al. Genome mining and
     comparative biosynthesis of meroterpenoids from two phylogenetically distinct fungi. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 2018, 57,
     8184–8188. [CrossRef]
38.  Matsuda, Y.; Quan, Z.; Mitsuhashi, T.; Li, C.; Abe, I. Cytochrome P450 for citreohybridonol synthesis: Oxidative derivatization of
     the andrastin scaffold. Org. Lett. 2016, 18, 296–299. [CrossRef]
39.  Xu, P.W.; Yu, J.S.; Chen, C.; Cao, Z.Y.; Zhou, F.; Zhou, J. Catalytic enantioselective construction of spiro quaternary carbon
      stereocenters. ACS Catalysis 2019, 9, 1820–1882. [CrossRef]


[PDF physical page 15]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                            15 of 16




40.   Zi, W.; Zuo, Z.; Ma, D. Intramolecular dearomative oxidative coupling of indoles: A uniﬁed strategy for the total synthesis of
     indoline alkaloids. Acc. Chem. Res. 2015, 48, 702–711. [CrossRef]
41.  Cui, C.B.; Kakeya, H.; Osada, H. Novel mammalian cell cycle inhibitors, spirotryprostatins A and B, produced by Aspergillus
      fumigatus, which inhibit mammalian cell cycle at G2/M phase. Tetrahedron 1996, 52, 12651–12666. [CrossRef]
42.  Tsunematsu, Y.; Ishikawa, N.; Wakana, D.; Goda, Y.; Noguchi, H.; Moriya, H.; Hotta, K.; Watanabe, K. Distinct mechanisms for
     spiro-carbon formation reveal biosynthetic pathway crosstalk. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2013, 9, 818–825. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.   Yin, W.B.; Baccile, J.A.; Bok, J.W.; Chen, Y.; Keller, N.P.; Schroeder, F.C. A nonribosomal peptide synthetase-derived iron(III)
    complex from the pathogenic fungus Aspergillus fumigatus. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135, 2064–2067. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.  Yan, D.; Chen, Q.; Gao, J.; Bai, J.; Liu, B.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, L.; Zhang, C.; Zou, Y.; Hu, Y. Complexity and diversity generation in
     the biosynthesis of fumiquinazoline-related peptidyl alkaloids. Org. Lett. 2019, 21, 1475–1479. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.  Gao, X.; Chooi, Y.H.; Ames, B.D.; Wang, P.; Walsh, C.T.; Tang, Y. Fungal indole alkaloid biosynthesis: Genetic and biochemical
     investigation of the tryptoquialanine pathway in Penicillium aethiopicum. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 2729–2741. [CrossRef]
46.  Haynes, S.W.; Ames, B.D.; Gao, X.; Tang, Y.; Walsh, C.T. Unraveling terminal C-domain-mediated condensation in fungal
     biosynthesis of imidazoindolone metabolites. Biochemistry 2011, 50, 5668–5679. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.   Li, S.; Fineﬁeld, J.M.; Sunderhaus, J.D.; McAfoos, T.J.; Williams, R.M.; Sherman, D.H. Biochemical characterization of NotB as an
    FAD-dependent oxidase in the biosynthesis of notoamide indole alkaloids. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 788–791. [CrossRef]
48.  Cacho, R.A.; Jiang, W.; Chooi, Y.H.; Walsh, C.T.; Tang, Y. Identiﬁcation and characterization of the echinocandin B biosynthetic
     gene cluster from Emericella rugulosa NRRL 11440. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 16781–16790. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.  Zhong, L.; Diao, X.; Zhang, N.; Li, F.; Zhou, H.; Chen, H.; Bai, X.; Ren, X.; Zhang, Y.; Wu, D.; et al. Engineering and elucidation of
     the lipoinitiation process in nonribosomal peptide biosynthesis. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 296. [CrossRef]
50.   Kegler, C.; Bode, H.B. Artiﬁcial splitting of a non-ribosomal peptide synthetase by inserting natural docking domains. Angew.
     Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 2020, 59, 13463–13467. [CrossRef]
51.  Bozhueyuek, K.A.J.; Watzel, J.; Abbood, N.; Bode, H.B. Synthetic zippers as an enabling tool for engineering of non-ribosomal
     peptide synthetases. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 2021, 60, 17531–17538. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.  Luo, J.G.; Wang, X.B.; Xu, Y.M.; U’Ren, J.M.; Arnold, A.E.; Kong, L.Y.; Gunatilaka, A.A. Delitschiapyrone A, a pyrone-
     naphthalenone adduct bearing a new pentacyclic ring system from the leaf-associated fungus Delitschia sp. FL1581. Org.
      Lett. 2014, 16, 5944–5947. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53.  Zou, Y.; Houk, K.N. Mechanisms and dynamics of synthetic and biosynthetic formation of delitschiapyrones: Solvent control of
    ambimodal periselectivity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2021, 143, 11734–11740. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.  Han, W.B.; Wang, G.Y.; Tang, J.J.; Wang, W.J.; Liu, H.; Gil, R.R.; Navarro-Vázquez, A.; Lei, X.; Gao, J.M. Herpotrichones A and B,
    two intermolecular [4 + 2] adducts with anti-neuroinﬂammatory activity from a Herpotrichia species. Org. Lett. 2020, 22, 405–409.
     [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.  Zhao, Z.; Ying, Y.; Hung, Y.S.; Tang, Y. Genome mining reveals Neurospora crassa can produce the salicylaldehyde sordarial. J. Nat.
     Prod. 2019, 82, 1029–1033. [CrossRef]
56.  Nies, J.; Ran, H.; Wohlgemuth, V.; Yin, W.B.; Li, S.M. Biosynthesis of the prenylated salicylaldehyde ﬂavoglaucin requires
     temporary reduction to salicyl alcohol for decoration before reoxidation to the ﬁnal product. Org. Lett. 2020, 22, 2256–2260.
     [CrossRef]
57.   Liu, L.; Tang, M.C.; Tang, Y. Fungal highly reducing polyketide synthases biosynthesize salicylaldehydes that are precursors to
     epoxycyclohexenol natural products. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141, 19538–19541. [CrossRef]
58.   Lin, T.S.; Chiang, Y.M.; Wang, C.C. Biosynthetic pathway of the reduced polyketide product citreoviridin in Aspergillus terreus var.
     aureus revealed by heterologous expression in Aspergillus nidulans. Org. Lett. 2016, 18, 1366–1369. [CrossRef]
59.   Li, H.; Hu, J.; Wei, H.; Solomon, P.S.; Vuong, D.; Lacey, E.; Stubbs, K.A.; Piggott, A.M.; Chooi, Y.H. Chemical ecogenomics-guided
     discovery of phytotoxic α-pyrones from the fungal wheat pathogen Parastagonospora nodorum. Org. Lett. 2018, 20, 6148–6152.
     [CrossRef]
60.   Yin, G.P.; Wu, Y.R.; Yang, M.H.; Li, T.X.; Wang, X.B.; Zhou, M.M.; Lei, J.L.; Kong, L.Y. Citrifurans A-D, four dimeric aromatic
     polyketides with new carbon skeletons from the fungus Aspergillus sp. Org. Lett. 2017, 19, 4058–4061. [CrossRef]
61.  Wang, W.G.; Wang, H.; Du, L.Q.; Li, M.; Chen, L.; Yu, J.; Cheng, G.G.; Zhan, M.T.; Hu, Q.F.; Zhang, L.; et al. Molecular Basis for
     the Biosynthesis of an Unusual Chain-Fused Polyketide, Gregatin A. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2020, 142, 8464–8472. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.  He, Y.; Cox, R.J. The molecular steps of citrinin biosynthesis in fungi. Chem. Sci. 2016, 7, 2119–2127. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63.  Tong, Z.W.; Xie, X.H.; Wang, T.T.; Lu, M.; Jiao, R.H.; Ge, H.M.; Hu, G.; Tan, R.X. Acautalides A-C, neuroprotective Diels-Alder
     adducts from solid-state cultivated Acaulium sp. H-JQSF. Org. Lett. 2021, 23, 5587–5591. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.  Wang, T.T.; Wei, Y.J.; Ge, H.M.; Jiao, R.H.; Tan, R.X. Acaulide, an osteogenic macrodiolide from Acaulium sp. H-JQSF, an
     isopod-associated fungus. Org. Lett. 2018, 20, 1007–1010. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.  Wang, T.T.; Wei, Y.J.; Ge, H.M.; Jiao, R.H.; Tan, R.X. Acaulins A and B, trimeric macrodiolides from Acaulium sp. H-JQSF. Org. Lett.
     2018, 20, 2490–2493. [CrossRef]
66.   Jensen, P.R. Natural products and the gene cluster revolution. Trends Microbiol. 2016, 24, 968–977. [CrossRef]
67.   Pradeepraj, D.; Li, S.Y. Functional expression and regulation of eukaryotic cytochrome P450 enzymes in surrogate microbial cell
      factories. Eng. Microbiol. 2022, 2, 100011. [CrossRef]


[PDF physical page 16]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 320                                                                                                            16 of 16




68.   Kahlert, L.; Bassiony, E.F.; Cox, R.J.; Skellam, E.J. Diels-Alder reactions during the biosynthesis of sorbicillinoids. Angew. Chem.
       Int. Ed. Engl. 2020, 59, 5816–5822. [CrossRef]
69.  Han, Y.B.; Bai, W.; Ding, C.X.; Liang, J.; Wu, S.H.; Tan, R.X. Intertwined biosynthesis of skyrin and rugulosin A underlies the
     formation of cage-structured bisanthraquinones. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2021, 143, 14218–14226. [CrossRef]
70.  Hu, J.; Li, H.; Chooi, Y.H. Fungal dirigent protein controls the stereoselectivity of multicopper oxidase-catalyzed phenol coupling
     in viriditoxin biosynthesis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141, 8068–8072. [CrossRef]