                                C.L. Steele et al. / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 438 (2005) 1–10                              9

                                                     aminomutase. The lack of any sequence similarity to the
                                                                 lysine aminomutase provides additional evidence that
                                                          they do not share a similar catalytic mechanism. On the
                                                          other hand, the considerable similarity of PAM to PAL
                                                             suggests a  similar  catalytic mechanism. An enzyme
                                                      noted to be similar to PAL, HAL (EC 4.3.3, Accession
                                                  No. M35140), was crystallized to 2.1Å, enabling a model
                                                            of the active site and catalytic mechanism [27]. Their
                                                  model suggests that the PAM amino acid motif ASG-
                                                              174-6, autocatalytically forms a unique 4-methylidene-
                                                          imidazole-5-one (MIO) group which is proposed to be
                                                            the catalytic electrophile. Further spectrophotometric
                                                          evidence indicates that plant PALs also have an MIO
                                                    group [28]. Recently, using site directed mutagenesis and
                                                            protein modeling based on the HAL paper a group con-
                                                Wrmed the HAL model and the active site for PAL [29].
                                                The comparisons of the PAM sequence and two PAL
                                                         sequences to a HAL sequence (data not shown) indicate
                                                             that all 11 amino acids proposed as active site residues
                                                            are conserved in PAM and both PAL sequences, how-
                                                                  ever, both PAM and PAL have two amino acid diVer-
                                                          ences from HAL, a His to Lue-108 and a Glu to Gln-459
                                                                 substitutions. Additionally, all 11 active site residues are
                                                    found in regions of high amino acid homology increas-
                                                            ing the probability of their contributing to catalysis.
                                                       Thus, using the similarity of PAM to PAL and HAL, 11
                                                 amino acid residues identiWed in Fig. 3 are predicted to
                                                  form the enzymatic active site.
                                                   The recent cloning of the taxoid C-13 O-phenylpropa-
                                                                noyltransferase [11], pam, becomes the third of the four
Fig. 5. Demonstration of authentic  -phenylalanine production. LC/     proposed genes directly involved in C-13 side-chain biosyn-
MS/MS analyses of authentic standard mix ( -phenylalanine and   -       thesis to be cloned and characterized. With the knowledge
phenylalanine) and partially puriWed recombinant PAM assay. Panel 1      of the side-chain biosynthetic pathway in hand, it may soon
illustrates the total diode array trace of the authentic standard mix.
                                                  become possible to optimize the production of Taxol andPanel 2 illustrates the total diode array trace of the partially puriWed
PAM assay sample. Panel 3 illustrates the total ion chromatograph      to generate Taxol analogs with enhanced qualities.
(TIC) for LC/MS/MS (daughters of m/z 166) of  -phenylalanine and
 -phenylalanine in standard mix. The inset panel 3A shows MS/MS
daughter ion spectrum for peak A. and the inset panel 3B shows the     Acknowledgments
MS/MS daughter ion spectrum for peak B. Panel 4 illustrates the TIC
for LC/MS/MS (daughters of m/z 166) of  -phenylalanine and  -phen-
ylalanine in PAM assay sample. The inset panel 4A shows MS/MS     We gratefully acknowledge Stephen Tindall (Argo
daughter ion spectrum for peak A and the inset panel 4B shows the      BioAnalytica) for peptide sequencing eVort, and the staV
MS/MS daughter ion spectrum for peak B.                            at Phyton, Inc. for providing the Taxus cell cultures.


seems to be low since taxoid molecules are found in a     References
limited number of plant species; however, the fact that
 -phenylalanine has also been shown to be incorpo-          [1] T.M. Mekhail, M. Markman, Expert Opin. Pharmacother. 3
rated into the benzoic acid moiety of the side chain           (2002) 755–766.
                                                                                                [2] A.L. Fields, C.D. Runowicz, Cancer Invest. 21 (2003) 148–156.
opens an additional role for PAM as an entrance to ben-
                                                                                                 [3] D. Miles, G. von Minckwitz, A.D. Seidman, Oncologist 7 (Suppl.
zoic acid biosynthesis [8]. Although benzoic acid is incor-            6) (2002) 13–19.
porated    into   numerous   secondary   metabolism          [4] M.E. Wall, M.C. Wani, Am. Chem. Soc. Symp. Ser. 583 (1995) 18–23.
compounds found throughout the plant kingdom, the          [5] K.C. Nicolaou, Z. Yang, J.J. Liu, H. Ueno, P.G. Nantermet, R.K.
biosynthesis of benzoic acid is poorly understood [24–26].          Guy, C.F. Claiborne, J. Renaud, E.A. Couladouros, K. Paulvan-
                                                                            nan, Nature 367 (1994) 630–634.
  The ability of PAM to be active without the need of
                                                                                                 [6] R.A. Holton, R.J. Biediger, P.D. Boatman, in: M. SuVness (Ed.),
cofactors provides biochemical evidence that PAM does           Taxol: Science and Applications, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,
not use a catalytic mechanism similar to the lysine           1995, pp. 97–121.