6                               C.L. Steele et al. / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 438 (2005) 1–10

   Next, amino acid sequencing of the puriWed PAM was     enzymes  activities that  elute early  in the gradient
performed. N-terminal sequencing was performed on the     before PAM.
intact protein, and seven additional peptide sequences        In order to conclusively identify  -phenylalanine as
were  generated from  reverse HPLC-puriWed  tryptic     the product of PAM, the recombinant enzyme was
fragments. The peptide sequences obtained are indicated      partially puriWed and used for enzymatic conversion of
on Fig. 3.                                                   -phenylalanine  to    -phenylalanine.  The  reaction
                                                        products and authentic standard mix were analyzed
Cloning and heterologous expression of pam cDNA           using LC/MS/MS (Fig. 5). These analyses demonstrate
                                                              that  -phenylalanine is the product from the partially
  The PCR synthesis and functional expression of a     puriWed recombinant PAM enzyme.
PAM cDNA was accomplished using a three-step pro-
cess. First, 3 RACE was performed to amplify the 3
portion of the PAM cDNA, using forward degenerate
primers designed to the internal peptide sequence in     Discussion
combination  with  a Lambda  Zap-speciWc  primer.
Sequencing of the two RACE products (approximately        In this report, the novel enzyme catalyzing the Wrst
600 and 800 bp) demonstrated that both fragments were      biosynthetic step leading to the Taxol side-chain, PAM
100% identical through to the poly(A) tail of the 600 bp     has been puriWed to apparent homogeneity and thor-
fragment, indicating that the fragments are the result of     oughly characterized. The cloned cDNA has been con-
diVerent poly(A) addition sites present in the pam gene.      clusively demonstrated to be the pam gene by presence
Second, a 5 RACE reaction resulted in a 2.2 kb ampli-     of all eight-peptide sequences generated from the puri-
con representing the 5 portion of the pam cDNA. Third,     Wed active PAM protein (Fig. 3) and the presence of
the full-length pam cDNA was synthesized, cloned, and   PAM activity in extracts of E. coli containing the cloned
sequenced.                                     pam cDNA (Fig. 4). The product of the recombinant
  The predicted product of pam encodes a 687 amino   PAM was demonstrated  to be   -phenylalanine  via
acid residue protein with a calculated pI of 5.63 and   LCMS analysis (Fig. 5). Sequence analysis demonstrates
molecular weight of 75.3kDa. Similarity searches indi-      that pam is distinct from the closely related pal (Table 3),
cate that the pam gene product is most similar to phenyl-     and functional expression conWrmed PAM (as opposed
alanine ammonia-lyase genes  (Fig.  3). The multiple     to PAL) activity. Finally, using the active sites residues
sequence alignments and the scientiWc literature on PAL     identiWed by the crystal structure of HAL in conjunction
implicate the involvement of 11 amino acids in the PAM     with sequence alignments and mutagenesis studies with
enzymatic active site (Fig. 3). With an experimentally    PAL, the active site residues of PAM are proposed.
validated pam gene in hand, analysis of the similarity         Interestingly,  similarity  searches  using  the PAM
searches indicates that one gene fragment annotated as a     deduced amino acid sequence failed to show any rela-
G. biloba pal is instead most likely a pam gene (Table 3      tionship to the lysine aminomutase genes or any other
and Discussion).                                     aminomutase gene cloned to date. Table 2 compares and
  The full-length T. chinensis pam cDNA was trans-      contrasts the enzyme characteristics of PAM, lysine ami-
ferred into an E. coli expression vector, pBMS2000     nomutase, and PAL. The homodimeric structure and
[18]. Induction of expression using IPTG indicated the     estimated monomeric molecular weight (»80 kDa) sup-
presence of a »75 kDa band in the cells containing the      ports the novelty of PAM from other aminomutases
PAM cDNA (Fig. 2B). Following expression, E. coli     such as lysine aminomutase, which exhibits a monomeric
lysates harboring the recombinant pam gene construct     molecular weight of 48 kDa and hexameric quaternary
and pBMS2000 plasmid control were assayed and only      structure [21,22]. Lysine aminomutase activity has been
the recombinant PAM demonstrated functional PAM    shown to be dependent on two cofactors, PLP and SAM,
activity (Fig.  4). Both E. coli extracts were further     whereas the puriWed PAM was demonstrated to be
puriWed using ammonia sulfate fractionation and high      cofactor independent [21,22].
resolution ion exchange chromatography. PAM assays         Similarity searches instead indicate that PAM, an
of the ammonia sulfate fractionation were identical to     aminomutase,  is more closely related to an ammonia
the crude enzyme assays indicating the Wve additional      lyase, PAL, than other aminomutases such as the lysine
peaks from 2  to 4 min were due  to endogenous     aminomutase. Fig. 3 shows an alignment of PAM with
enzymatic activity using the exogenously added   -      the two proteins (both PAL sequences: pal-At, A. thali-
phenylalanine as a substrate. The ammonia sulfate-     ana Pal1 and pal-Pt, Pinus taeda Pal1) that resulted in
puriWed  recombinant PAM  sample  was  further      the highest similarity scores during BLAST searches
puriWed using high resolution ion exchange chroma-     with PAM. PAL is one of the most extensively studied
tography. PAM assays of the fractions indicate that     enzymes in plant secondary metabolism and is the Wrst
four  of  the unknown  peaks  are from  separable     committed step  in the phenylpropanoid biosynthetic