2                               C.L. Steele et al. / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 438 (2005) 1–10





Fig. 1. A proposed pathway of the C13 Taxol side-chain biosynthesis. The Wrst committed step of side-chain synthesis (left column) is the conversion
of  -phenylalanine to  -phenylalanine by PAM. The portion derived directly from  -phenylalanine is boxed in the Taxol molecule, and feeding stud-
ies suggest that the benzoate moiety attached to the C-13 side chain is also derived from  -phenylalanine [8]. Approximately eight steps are involved
in the diterpene synthesis (right column) that leads to baccatin III.


is plant cell culture. Recent advances in Taxol produc-     sion is of particular interest since feeding studies indicate
tion using induction with methyl jasmonate, inhibition      that  -phenylalanine is incorporated into both the phe-
of other growth regulators, and other technological      nylisoserine and benzoate moieties of the side chain
breakthroughs have brought the use of Taxus cell cul-     outlined in Fig. 1 [8,13]. Thus, PAM may catalyze a rate-
ture to commercial reality [7].                                  limiting step for Taxol production at commercial scales
  The Taxol molecule (Fig. 1) primarily consists of two     and  is a potential target for genetic engineering to
components: the taxane ring moiety derived from the      increase the yield of Taxol biosynthesis. Moreover, char-
terpenoid pathway and C-13 side chain derived from      acterization of this enzyme is critical to understand the
the phenylpropanoid pathway  [8]. The  biosynthetic     nature of Taxol side-chain biosynthesis. In this paper,
pathway involves more than 12 enzymatic steps from at     the puriWcation and characterization of the PAM pro-
least four classes of enzymes, hydoxylases, acyltransfer-      tein  is described as well as the cloning of the PAM
ases, taxadiene synthase, and phenylalanine aminomu-   cDNA and its functional expression in a heterologous
tase  [9]. Tremendous progress has been made in the      host.
cloning and functional expression of the genes corre-
sponding to these enzymes, including the recent discov-
ery  of  two  of  the  genes  involved  in  side-chain     Experimental procedures
biosynthesis [10,11].
  The conversion of  -phenylalanine to  -phenylala-      Cell culture
nine by phenylalanine aminomutase (PAM)3 was dem-
onstrated  in  the  soluble  fraction  of crude  cell-free       Taxus chinensis cell suspensions were kindly provided
extracts of T. brevifolia stems in 1998 [12]. The conver-     by Phyton (Ithaca, NY). Cell cultures were maintained
                                                  and grown as previously described [7]. Cell suspension
  3                                                was exchanged into Taxol production medium for 6   Abbreviations  used: PAM,  phenylalanine  aminomutase; PAL,
phenylalanine ammonia-lyase; HAL, histidine ammonia-lyase; PCR,     days before they were harvested and frozen as previously
polymerase chain reaction; RACE, rapid ampliWcation of cDNA ends.      described [7].