
[PDF physical page 1]
Review
Next-Generation Drug Discovery to Combat
Antimicrobial Resistance

Guoqing Niu1,2,3,* and Wenli Li4,5,*


The widespread emergence of antibiotic-resistant pathogens poses a severe threat to public   Highlights
health. This problem becomes even worse with a coincident decline in the supply of new antibi-    Microorganisms from new sources,
otics. Conventional bioactivity-guided natural product discovery has failed to meet the urgent    such as those from extreme terres-
need for new antibiotics, largely due to limited resources and high rediscovery rates. Recent ad-     trial environments and marine eco-
vances in cultivation techniques, analytical technologies, and genomics-based approaches have    systems, as well as those in associ-
greatly expanded our access to previously underexploited microbial sources. These strategies    ation with mammals, invertebrates,
will enable us to access new reservoirs of microorganisms and unleash their chemical potentials,   and plants, hold great promise for
                                                                                                             the discovery of novel drugs.
thus opening new opportunities for the discovery of next-generation drugs to address the
growing concerns of antimicrobial resistance.                                                        High-throughput miniaturized cul-
                                                                                                                     ture methods may  facilitate the
New Sources of Microbial Natural Products                                                             culture of the vast majority of un-
Antimicrobial resistance (see Glossary) presents a major healthcare problem worldwide. It is esti-    cultivated microorganisms.
mated that antimicrobial resistance contributes annually to approximately 700 000 deaths across
                                                                                                  Metabolomics    and    metab-
the world. This number may rise to 10 million with 100 trillion US$ annual economic burden by
                                                                                                   ologenomics    enable     high-
2050 [1]. Though the precision of the estimates is questionable, it is well acknowledged that urgent
                                                                                                       throughput  screening  of  natural
action is required to curb the growing emergence and prevalence of antimicrobial resistance [2]. To    products  from  diverse  environ-
reverse this trend, innovative approaches are required to advance our understanding of the underly-    mental samples.
ing mechanism of antimicrobial resistance. More importantly, we need to strengthen the ongoing ef-
forts to search for new antimicrobial drugs to combat antimicrobial-resistant pathogens.                 Large-scale genome mining  offers
                                                                                                       unprecedented  opportunities   for
                                                                                                                           exploitation   of   uncharacterized
Natural products offer exceptional chemical diversity with a wide variety of biological activities, and
                                                                                                               biochemical pathways embedded in
thus have been the most promising sources for drug discovery and development [3,4]. It has been
                                                                                                                             cultivated  and  as-yet-uncultivated
shown that over 50% of all agents currently in clinical use are either natural products or derivatives                                                                                                               microorganisms.
thereof [5]. Traditional sources of microbial natural products include: ﬁlamentous actinomycetes,
Myxobacteria, Cyanobacteria, Pseudomonas, and Bacillus, as well as ﬁlamentous fungi [5,6]. In recent   Pathway refactoring represents a
years, there has been a growing interest in natural products from other underexplored sources, such    versatile strategy for the discovery,
as the underrepresented genera of actinomycetes [7], microorganisms from marine ecosystems [8],    combinatorial  biosynthesis,  and
and those in association with mammals [9], invertebrates [10,11], and plants [12,13]. Though these     titer improvement of new bioactive
                                                                                                                      natural products.
sources are considered to be very promising, the discovery of new classes of antibiotics has been hin-
dered by two major challenges: our inability to culture the vast majority of environmental microorgan-
isms and our inefﬁciencies to identify unknown metabolites in a high-throughput format.


We herein give a timely update on high-throughput screening approaches and highlight approaches
involving genome-scale screening in native producers and pathway refactoring in versatile surrogate
hosts. Application of these strategies and approaches enables us to delve further into previously under-   1Biotechnology Research Center,
                                                                                                               Southwest University, Chongqing 400715,
exploited sources, identify new reservoirs of microorganisms, and unlock their chemical potentials. These   China
approaches can be broadly applicable to many microorganisms from diverse sources for next-generation   2Chongqing Key Laboratory of Plant
drug discovery to combat the ever-increasing challenge of antimicrobial resistance.                        Resource Conservation and Germplasm
                                                                                                                               Innovation, Southwest University,
                                                                                                     Chongqing 400715, China
High-Throughput Screening of Natural Products from Underexplored Habitats              3State Cultivation Base of Crop Stress
Novel Cultivating Techniques for Isolating Microbial Species                                       Biology for Southern Mountainous Land,
                                                                                               Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Most important antimicrobial agents in use are derived from cultivated microorganisms. However,   Southwest University, Chongqing 400715,
only a tiny fraction of microorganisms can be readily cultivated using current laboratory culturing   China
techniques [14,15]. It is therefore necessary to devise novel cultivation methods to gain access to   4Key Laboratory of Marine Drugs, Ministry
                                                                                                                                of Education of China, School of Medicine
the vast majority of uncultivated microorganisms that can be explored for novel bioactive natural  and Pharmacy, Ocean University of China,
products (Figure 1). Many empirical methods have been developed to culture a variety of uncultivated  Qingdao 266003, China




                                   Trends in Biochemical Sciences, November 2019, Vol. 44, No. 11  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibs.2019.05.005  961
                                                              ª 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.


[PDF physical page 2]
microorganisms [16]. For example, a synthetic medium, mimicking human nasal secretions, was used   5Laboratory for Marine Drugs and
for simulating the growth of Staphylococcus aureus, a commensal in the human nose [17]. Subse-   Bioproducts, Qingdao National
                                                                                                                      Laboratory for Marine Science and
quent screening of a collection of nasal Staphylococcus isolates led to the identiﬁcation of lugdunin,   Technology, Qingdao 266237, China
a novel thiazolidine-containing cyclic peptide antibiotic with potent antimicrobial activity against a   *Correspondence:
wide range of Gram-positive bacteria, including methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), glycopep-   niu062376@swu.edu.cn,
                                                                                                                         liwenli@ouc.edu.cn
tide-intermediate resistant S. aureus (GISA), and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE) [18]. Since
nutritional requirements of the vast majority of microorganisms are unknown, several in situ cultiva-
tion strategies have been devised by using different devices, such as hollow-ﬁber membrane cham-
bers, I-tip, and diffusion chambers [19–21]. Of note is the strategy based on diffusion chambers that
have been used for growth of previously uncultivated microorganisms from marine ecosystems
[21,22]. This strategy enabled the discovery of lassomycin, a cyclic peptide with potent activity against
drug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis [23]. It has been further modiﬁed with an array of minia-
ture diffusion chambers to facilitate high-throughput isolation of microbial species that are otherwise
inaccessible by conventional cultivation methods [24,25], leading to the discovery of teixobactin, a
novel nonribosomal depsipeptide with potent antimicrobial activity against many Gram-positive bac-
teria, including MRSA and VRE [26]. Another miniaturized method is a microﬂuidics-based workﬂow
that allows the cultivation of a previously unidentiﬁed genus of the Ruminococcaceae family [27].
Recently, a high-throughput cultivation strategy based on porous aluminum oxide chips was devised
to isolate human gut bacteria [28]. Cultivated microorganisms can be maintained in the laboratory
either as monoculture or culture collections (Figure 1).


It is noteworthy that the current repertoire of culture techniques is still limited. To address this issue, efforts
have also been geared towards cataloguing the large current sets of culture media. MediaDB is a data-
base of deﬁned media that have been used for cultivating organisms with sequenced genomes [29], while
KOMODO (known media database) is a database that encompasses almost the entire collection of exist-
ing microbial culture media in the DSMZ, one of the largest bioresource centers worldwide [30]. These
resources may be useful for future endeavors to culture novel microbial species.


Novel Integrated Methods for Large-Scale Detection and Identiﬁcation of Metabolites

To explore chemical diversity of cultivated microorganisms, both monoculture and culture collections
can be subjected to mass spectrometry (MS)-based metabolomics (Figure 1), which is used for large-
scale detection and identiﬁcation of specialized metabolites in a biological sample or system [31].
The major challenge of this approach is the annotation of detected chemical signatures and subse-
quent dereplication. It is therefore imperative to develop effective high-throughput screening plat-
forms for the dereplication of known compounds. The tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS)-based
molecular networking is a powerful tool to guide molecular characterization based on the MS/MS
fragmentation patterns of molecules, enabling the detection and visualization of large groups of me-
tabolites [32]. Molecular networking has been integrated as a central component of the Global Nat-
ural Products Social Molecular Networking (GNPS), a public online platform for analysis of MS/MS
data [33]. GNPS enables rapid dereplication of the MS/MS data generated against a public or
user-curated reference library of mass spectra. For example, MS/MS-based molecular networking
of Streptomyces sp. QL37 led to the identiﬁcation of 11 new angucyclines with unique features
[34]. Beyond looking at a speciﬁc strain, molecular networking allows for the screening of a group
of closely related strains. For example, six rare Streptomyces strains isolated from the unexplored
Macaronesia Atlantic region have been subjected to molecular networking, leading to the discovery
of a class of novel metabolites and new analogues of napyradiomycin and marinone [35]. Moreover,
molecular networking analysis of a collection of 260 Pseudomonas strains from ecologically diverse
sources led to the discovery of poaeamide B and three bananamide analogues [36]. Analysis of coral,
algal, and fungal mat holobionts from coral reefs revealed that each type of holobiont had distinct
mass shift proﬁles, offering insights into high molecular diversity on coral reefs [37]. In another study,
analysis of 146 marine Salinispora and Streptomyces strains provided insight into the distribution of
both known and unknown metabolites, highlighting species- and genus-speciﬁc metabolite produc-
tion on a larger scale [38]. These studies facilitate the prioritization of strains for future MS-guided nat-
ural product discovery efforts. Other metabolomic approaches are based on either nuclear magnetic





962   Trends in Biochemical Sciences, November 2019, Vol. 44, No. 11


[PDF physical page 3]
                                                                              Glossary
                                                                                                                Antimicrobial resistance: the
                                                                                                                                       ability of microbes, such as bac-
                                                                                                                                         teria, viruses, fungi, and parasites,
                                                                                                                  to resist the effects of antimicro-
                                                                                                                               bials that once could successfully
                                                                                                                             treat them.
                                                                                                                Biosynthetic gene clusters
                                                                                                           (BGCs): genes responsible for the
                                                                                                                  biosynthesis of specialized me-
                                                                                                                         tabolites are usually grouped
                                                                                                            together on contiguous stretches
                                                                                                                       of DNA to form biosynthetic gene
                                                                                                                                clusters.
                                                                                                       Environmental DNA (eDNA):
                                                                       DNA that is extracted directly
                                                                                                     from a variety of environmental
                                                                                                          samples, such as soil, water, and
                                                                                                  even air.
                                                                                                 Genome-scale screening: a large-
                                                                                                                     scale screening that is carried out
                                                                                                                          at the whole genome level.
                                                                                                         Global Natural Products Social
                                                                                                         Molecular Networking (GNPS): a
                                                                                                                  public online platform for analysis
                                                                                                                       of tandem mass spectrometry
                                                                                                 (MS/MS) data that enables rapid
                                                                                                                   dereplication of the MS/MS data
                                                                                                     generated against a public or
                                                                                                               user-curated reference library of
                                                                                              mass spectra.
                                                                                                      High-throughput elicitor
                                                                                                           screening (HiTES): a high-
                                                                                                       throughput method for identi-
                                                                                                                       fying elicitors of silent gene clus-
                                                                                                                                      ters. This approach starts with the
                                                                                                                   introduction of a reporter gene
                                                                                                                         into the BGC of interest, allowing
                                                                                                       a rapid read-out for its expression.
                                                                                                            Small molecule libraries are then
                                                                                                      screened to identify candidate
                                                                                                                                          elicitors.
                                                                                                      High-throughput screening: a
                                                                                                                         scientiﬁc method relevant to the
                                                                                                              ﬁelds of chemistry and biology, in
                                                                                                       which hundreds of thousands of
                                                                                                    samples are subjected to experi-
                                                                                                      mental tests.
                                                                                                  Metabologenomics: a method
                                                                                                                       that combines genomics and me-
                                                                                                          tabolomics to discover new natu-
                                                                                                                                              ral products and their BGCs. This
                                                                                                   approach starts with detection
                                                                                             and classiﬁcation of BGCs from
                                                                                                sequenced microbial genomes.
                                                                                                                          Similar BGCs are grouped into
                                                                                            gene cluster families (GCFs),
                                                                                                       which are then correlated with
                                                                                                                            liquid chromatography–mass
                                                                                                          spectrometry (LC–MS) metab-
                                                                      TrendsTrends inBiochemicalBiochemical SciencesSciences                       olomics data.
                                                                                                     Metabolomics: a comprehensive
Figure 1. Culture-Dependent Strategies in the Discovery of Novel Natural Products.                            analysis of the entire set of me-
Microorganisms from diverse environmental sources can be cultivated by using high-throughput cultivation     tabolites in a biological sample or
techniques based on miniature diffusion chambers, microﬂuidic chips, or porous aluminum oxide chips. The    system to discover networks and

                                                          (Figure legend continued at the bottom of the next page.)



                                                                          Trends in Biochemical Sciences, November 2019, Vol. 44, No. 11  963


[PDF physical page 4]
resonance (NMR) or proteomics [39,40], which further facilitate the identiﬁcation and dereplication of     interactions between metabo-
detected compounds for the discovery of promising antimicrobial drugs.                                            lites. This approach mainly relies
                                                                                            on mass spectrometry (MS), an
                                                                                                                             analytical technique that ionizes
Genome-Scale Screening of Novel Natural Products Embedded in Microbial Genomes    chemicals and sorts the ions
High-throughput DNA sequencing technologies have resulted in an explosion of microbial genome    based on their mass-to-charge
sequences, and many bioinformatic tools have been developed to identify putative biosynthetic     ratio that measures the masses
                                                                                                                      within a sample.
gene clusters (BGCs) dedicated to the biosynthesis of natural products [41]. Genome sequencing
                                                                                                         Molecular networking: a tech-
of multiple well-known actinomycetes has revealed an exceptional abundance of BGCs, predicted    nique that guides the molecular
to direct the biosynthesis of diverse natural products far more than the number of characterized nat-     characterization based on the MS/
ural products [42]. Similar observations have also been made with strains from a wide range of taxo-   MS fragmentation patterns of
nomic groups, including Gram-negative bacteria [43], ﬁlamentous fungi [44], as well as human    molecules, enabling the detection
                                                                                             and visualization of large groups
commensal, and unculturable environmental microorganisms [8,45,46]. It has become clear that a                                                                                                                       of metabolites.
plethora of previously undiscovered natural products could be mined from the enormous reservoir     Multidrug-resistant (MDR): mi-
of uncharacterized BGCs. However, in most cases, these BGCs are expressed inefﬁciently or not at    crobes resistant to multiple
all [47,48]. The major challenge is to effectively process the massive sequencing data, prioritize target     antimicrobials.
                                                                                                            Natural products: chemical com-
BGCs, activate their expression, and correlate them to chemical entities.
                                                                                             pounds or substances produced
                                                                                                by organisms from natural sour-
To capitalize on this biosynthetic potential, bioprospecting of natural products may focus on a spe-     ces. They are also referred to as
ciﬁc microbial strain (genome mining), a collection of multiple strains from a speciﬁc microbial species    secondary metabolites or
(pan-genome mining), or collective microorganisms from environmental samples (metagenome min-     specialized metabolites that are
                                                                                                          not directly involved in the normal
ing) [49]. Of note is that genome mining and pan-genome mining are culture-dependent strategies,                                                                                                          growth, development, or repro-
while metagenome mining is a culture-independent strategy.                                            duction of an organism.
                                                                                               Pathway refactoring: a rational
                                                                                                                   strategy that applies a plug and
Genome Mining of a Speciﬁc Microbial Strain
                                                                                                                play workﬂow to redesign and
Extensive studies have been performed with genome mining of a speciﬁc microbial strain and various     reconstruct target pathways for
strategies have been summarized in several excellent and comprehensive reviews [47,48,50]. These    the production of natural
strategies include: optimization of culture conditions, genetic manipulation of transcriptional regula-    products.
                                                                                                             Uncultivated microorganisms:
tors, CRISPR–Cas9-mediated insertion of constitutive promoters, ribosome engineering, heterolo-                                                                                                       microorganisms that cannot be
gous expression, use of small molecule elicitors, perturbation of epigenetic control, and coculture     cultivated using current culturing
with other microorganisms. For illustration purposes, we herein only highlight several recent studies.    techniques in the laboratory.
For example, genome mining of Photorhabdus luminescens, a Gammaproteobacterium associated
with nematodes, uncovered a hybrid nonribosomal peptide synthetase-like-pteridine synthase
BGC, leading to the discovery of new pteridine metabolites, pepteridines [51]. Genome mining of
marine-derived Streptomyces youssouﬁensis OUC6819 and a thermophilic fungus Myceliophthora
thermophila resulted in the identiﬁcation of terpenylated diketopiperazines [52] and UCS1025A pyr-
rolizidinone [53]. Of special note is a high-throughput elicitor screening approach (HiTES). This
approach starts with the introduction of a reporter gene into the BGC of interest, allowing a rapid
read-out for its expression. The reporter strain is then subjected to high-throughput screening of
small molecule libraries for identifying candidate elicitors. Application of this method has uncovered
14 novel specialized products in Streptomyces albus J1074 [54], two novel specialized products in
Streptomyces hiroshimensis [55], a novel lanthipeptide in Saccharopolyspora cebuensis [56], and
nine specialized metabolites with potentially therapeutic bioactivities in diverse microorganisms
[57]. It is noteworthy that specialized metabolites from S. hiroshimensis and S. cebuensis exhibited
selective growth-inhibitory activity against difﬁcult to treat Gram-negative bacteria [55,56].


Pan-genome Mining of a Collection of Closely Related Microbial Strains

Different from genome mining, pan-genome mining focuses on a collection of multiple strains from a
speciﬁc or closely related microbial species (Figure 1). Several pan-genome mining studies have shed




isolated strain or collection of strains are subjected to metabolomics based on mass spectrometry (MS), nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR), or proteomics for screening of novel bioactive natural products. Alternatively,
genome mining of a speciﬁc microbial strain or pan-genome mining of a collection of closely related strains
results in the discovery of novel bioactive natural products.




964   Trends in Biochemical Sciences, November 2019, Vol. 44, No. 11


[PDF physical page 5]
light on the diversity and distribution of BGCs responsible for the biosynthesis of natural products.
For example, a pan-genomic analysis of 75 strains from three closely related species of the marine
actinomycete genus Salinispora revealed high levels of chemical diversity among marine actinomy-
cetes and provided insight into the distributions and evolutionary histories of biosynthetic pathways
in relation to the strains in which they reside [58]. Subsequent studies have been enlarged to include
119 strains of Salinispora, revealing a high degree of BGC novelty with an extraordinary biosynthetic
diversity [59]. Further, a pan-genomic analysis of 20 Rhodococcus strains, along with eight taxonomic
relatives, including seven Mycobacterium strains and a single Amycolicicoccus strain, revealed that
Rhodococci harbor a great number of BGCs, of which most are clade-speciﬁc with a high potential
to synthesize novel natural products [7]. These studies reinforce the exceptional biosynthetic capacity
and broad diversity of microorganisms at population level.


Metagenome Mining of Collective Environmental Microorganisms

Distinct from genome mining and pan-genome mining, metagenome mining offers unprecedented op-
portunities for exploitation of the vast majority of biochemical pathways embedded in diverse environ-
mental microorganisms. This strategy involves the construction of a metagenomic library with environ-
mental DNA (eDNA) samples and screening of the library for novel chemical entities  [60]. The
metagenomic library can then be subjected to sequence- or function-based screening (Figure 2).
Sequence-based screening uses PCR-based sequence tags to proﬁle biosynthetic pathways present in
eDNA samples [61]. The sequence tags are PCR amplicons generated with degenerate primers targeting
conserved biosynthetic genes. PCR amplicons generated using primers targeting either ketosynthase do-
mains of polyketide synthase (PKS) or adenylation domains of nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS)
have been used to assess biosynthetic diversity in soil microbiomes around the globe, revealing that
soil microbiomes harbor extensive and largely unexplored chemical diversity [62]. Screening diverse
soil and marine samples with conserved sequence tags has resulted in the identiﬁcation of many prom-
ising compounds, such as malacidins active against multidrug-resistant (MDR) Gram-positive pathogens,
and kanglemycins active against rifamycin-resistant M. tuberculosis and S. aureus [63,64].


Function-based screening is a straightforward way to ﬁnd target BGCs and/or their biochemical
products through the detection of readily visible phenotypes (Figure 2). For example, screening of
metagenomic libraries has resulted in the discovery of metatricycloene [65], and three novel chloram-
phenicol derivatives [66]. Of note is that the chloramphenicol derivatives display antimicrobial activity
against MRSA [66]. To facilitate function-based screening, reporter strains of Escherichia coli and
S. albus J1074 have been generated to serve as hosts for metagenomic library construction [67,68].
These reporter strains carry a 40-phosphopantetheinyl transferase (PPTase)-dependent blue pigment
synthase, BpsA, in the absence of native gene encoding PPTase. Since PPTases are required for acti-
vating peptidyl carrier protein (PCP) and acyl carrier protein (ACP) domains of NRPS and PKS en-
zymes, PPTase-dependent indigoidine color production has been explored as a tool to identify meta-
genomic clones harboring NRPS, PKS, and NRPS/PKS hybrid BGCs [67,68].


Resistance-Based Screening Strategies

Another interesting approach is the utilization of antibiotic resistance to pinpoint antibiotic pro-
ducers. This is based on the notion that antibiotic producers need to evolve a self-protection mech-
anism against the compounds they are producing. Two different resistance-based strategies have
been used for the discovery of novel natural products. The ﬁrst strategy exploited vancomycin-resis-
tance traits of actinomycetes to identify and select glycopeptide antibiotic (GPA) producers, leading
to the identiﬁcation pekiskomycin, a novel glycopeptide antibacterial compound with potent activity
against VRE [69]. Another strategy is based on the observation that antibiotic-producing bacteria
often duplicate genes encoding target proteins to confer resistance, and the resistance genes are
usually within or adjacent to the corresponding antibiotic BGCs. Querying the genomes of 86 Salinis-
pora strains for duplicated resistance genes resulted in the identiﬁcation of a group of unusual thio-
tetronic acid natural products [70]. A similar strategy has been used for the discovery of a natural
product herbicide with a new mode of action [71]. These strategies can not only identify novel natural
products, but can also provide insights into the modes of action of the identiﬁed natural products.




                                                                          Trends in Biochemical Sciences, November 2019, Vol. 44, No. 11  965


[PDF physical page 6]
                                                                     TrendsTrends inBiochemicalBiochemical SciencesSciences


Figure 2. Culture-Independent Strategies in the Discovery of Novel Natural Products.
This strategy starts with the construction of metagenomic libraries with DNAs extracted from diverse environmental
sources. The libraries are subjected to sequence-based screening for biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) of interest
or function-based screening for clones of interest. Alternatively, the libraries are subjected to metabologenomics
analyses. These strategies open up new opportunities for natural product discovery without the need to isolate
microbial strains.





966   Trends in Biochemical Sciences, November 2019, Vol. 44, No. 11


[PDF physical page 7]
Systematic Analysis of Gene Clusters

To maximize the exploration of biosynthetic potentials, a systematic analysis and curation of BGCs is
required. The Integrated Microbial Genomes Atlas of Biosynthetic gene Clusters (IMG-ABC) and the
Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic Gene cluster (MIBiG) repository have been proposed for
comprehensive catalogues of natural products with experimentally characterized BGCs [72,73].
Moreover, a systematic analysis of uncharacterized BGCs has been performed with bacteria
[74,75], plant leaf microbiome [12], and the human microbiome [46,76], as well as hundreds of micro-
organisms from soil ecosystems [45]. Analysis of 1154 sequenced bacterial genomes has identiﬁed 33
351 BGCs belonging to 905 BGC families, with the vast majority uncharacterized [74]. Additionally, a
systematic analysis of 830 sequenced Actinobacteria has revealed a total of 11 422 gene clusters
comprising 4122 gene cluster families [75]. To illustrate the utility of this approach, a systematic iden-
tiﬁcation and analysis of BGCs has been performed with metagenomic sequencing data generated
from 752 samples collected from ﬁve main body sites of healthy subjects of the Human Microbiome
Project (HMP) [46]. A total of 3118 BGCs have been identiﬁed in the sequenced microbiota of healthy
individuals, indicating that the human microbiome harbors a rich and diverse array of BGCs. Further
characterization resulted in the identiﬁcation of a new thiopeptide antibiotic, lactocillin, from a prom-
inent member of the vaginal microbiota [46], and protease inhibitors from the gut microbiota [76]. Of
special note is that lactocillin has potent antibacterial activity against a range of Gram-positive
vaginal pathogens [46]. These studies open up new opportunities for natural product discovery
from environmental sources and the multitude of bacteria within us.


Coupling Metabolomic Proﬁles to Gene Clusters

As previously mentioned, a large number of BGCs can be readily identiﬁed with available bioinfor-
matics tools. However, it is a big challenge to connect these BGCs to their corresponding products
in a high-throughput fashion. To address this challenge, metabologenomics starts with grouping
similar BGCs from diverse sources into gene cluster families (GCFs), which are then scored against
liquid chromatography (LC)–MS/MS metabolomics data from the same strain collections (Figure 2).
This approach has been validated by correlating 27 known natural products to their cognate BGCs
[75], and has allowed the identiﬁcation of many new bioactive natural products including retimycin
A and tyrobetaines from actinomycetes [77,78]. Another interesting approach to identify potential
novel natural products is the synthetic-bioinformatic natural product (syn-BNP) discovery approach:
natural products are chemically synthesized based on predictive structure from a bioinformatic anal-
ysis of sequenced bacterial BGCs. This approach enabled the discovery of humimycins and paenimu-
cillin C with respective antimicrobial activity against clinical isolates of MRSA and MDR Acinetobacter
baumannii [79,80], as well as an antifungal agent with activity against diverse fungal pathogens [81]. In
combination with molecular networking and computational tools, these approaches hold great
promise for the discovery of novel bioactive natural products.


Pathway Refactoring in Versatile Surrogate Hosts

Pathway refactoring applies a plug and play synthetic biology strategy to redesign and reconstruct
target BGCs. This approach generally starts with identiﬁcation of gene clusters using computational
tools, followed by reconstruction of target gene clusters using in vitro DNA assembly methods, and
selection of appropriate heterologous hosts [82]. The key step in this strategy is to use a set of well-
characterized promoters and the in vitro DNA assembler method to reconstruct the target BGC (Fig-
ure 3). Over the past decades, a number of well-characterized native and engineered promoters have
been used for the overexpression of target genes in actinomycetes [83]. To probe more versatile pro-
moters, it is reasonable to compare a set of native promoters in the model Streptomyces species
[84,85]. The alternative strategy is to construct a comprehensive library of synthetic promoters for ac-
tinomycetes as well as other hosts [86–88]. For example, a systematic evaluation of 200 native or syn-
thetic promoters and 200 ribosomal binding sites (RBSs) provides a universal toolbox of synthetic
modular regulatory elements to drive the expression of target genes at various levels in Streptomyces
[86]. In another study, combinatorial promoters were designed from scratch by combining different
promoter cores with different synthetic operators for precise gene expression in E. coli [87]. Alterna-
tively, a library of 168 synthetic bidirectional promoters has been generated in the yeast Pichia




                                                                          Trends in Biochemical Sciences, November 2019, Vol. 44, No. 11  967


[PDF physical page 8]
                                                                    TrendsTrends inBiochemicalBiochemical SciencesSciences



                                                                    (Figure legend at the bottom of the next page.)



968   Trends in Biochemical Sciences, November 2019, Vol. 44, No. 11


[PDF physical page 9]
pastoris, allowing for multigene coexpression optimization [88]. Next, target BGCs can be recon-
                                                                                                 Outstanding Questions
structed by a variety of in vitro DNA assembly methods, including modiﬁed Gibson assembly, nontyp-
                                                                                           Our current repertoire of culturing
ical restriction enzyme-mediated MASTER (methylation-assisted tailorable ends rational) ligation,
                                                                                                          techniques is still limited. How can
site-speciﬁc recombination-based tandem assembly (SSRTA) method, and DNA assembler based
                                                                                   we ﬁnd effective high-throughput
on homologous recombination in Saccharomyces cerevisiae [89]. Appropriate surrogate hosts are
                                                                                                   approaches   to   cultivate   the
then required for the expression of assembled BGCs to direct the biosynthesis of novel natural prod-    vast  majority  of  environmental
ucts. Well-characterized hosts include the engineered derivatives of model Streptomyces [90,91] and    microorganisms?
Aspergillus species [92]. To illustrate the feasibility of this strategy, a BGC encoding putative polycy-
                                                                              How can we more effectively iden-
clic tetramate macrolactam (PTM) from Streptomyces griseus was reconstructed by inserting six
                                                                                                                                                         tify and dereplicate unknown me-
constitutive promoters upstream of each gene within the gene cluster. The refactored gene cluster
                                                                                                                        tabolites   in  a  high-throughput
was assembled via the DNA assembler method and then transferred into Streptomyces lividans for
                                                                                                          format?
heterologous expression, leading to the discovery of three novel PTMs [93]. This strategy has also
been used successfully to discover more PTMs [94] and other bioactive molecules [95,96].          How can we more effectively pro-
                                                                                                              cess  and  curate  the  mass  of
                                                                                                     sequencing data amidst the accu-
Other than identifying new chemical entities, pathway refactoring has also be used for combinatorial
                                                                                                          mulating  collection  of  microbial
biosynthesis to generate novel compounds [92,97,98] and for titer improvement of the potent anti-
                                                                                    genome sequences?
MRSA WAP-8294A compounds and bottromycins [99,100]. Furthermore, this strategy has been
used for reconstruction of complex plant-derived biochemical pathways in yeast-based platforms    There is a rich reservoir of BGCs
[101,102]. Pathway refactoring represents a robust approach to circumvent issues with culturing    identiﬁed   with   available   bio-
and genetic manipulation of native producers that are either genetically recalcitrant or uncultivated    informatic tools. How can we effec-
                                                                                                                                     tively pinpoint target gene clusters
microorganisms. This strategy has potentially broad applications and high-throughput capacity for
                                                                                             and prioritize them for the discov-
the discovery of new classes of antibiotics.
                                                                                                                  ery of those that encode novel nat-
                                                                                                                              ural products?
Concluding Remarks
                                                                                             The  resistance-based  strategies
Antimicrobial resistance represents one of the most challenging problems for public health [103]. Central    hold great promise for the natural
to this problem is our limited understanding of the underlying antibiotic mechanisms and a severe    product discovery. Apart from the
shortage in the provision of new classes of antimicrobial drugs. Microbial natural products are the most   two strategies mentioned in this re-
important source of diverse chemical agents with broad biological activities. Over the past several de-    view, are there other strategies that
cades, the traditional bioactivity-guided natural product discovery platform has largely been exhausted.    can be used in the near future?
Nevertheless, recent advances in novel cultivation techniques, genomics, and bioinformatics approaches,
in combination with high-throughput analytical technologies, strengthen our ability to gain access to pre-
viously underexplored microbial sources and their enormous chemical potentials. Many innovative strate-
gies have been devised and used successfully for high-throughput screening of novel bioactive natural
products from otherwise inaccessible sources. Since the vast majority of microorganisms remain unculti-
vated due to a limited repertoire of culture techniques, there is an urgent need for the development of
innovative approaches, such as microbial culturomics [104] and targeted phenotypic culturing [105].
Importantly, great efforts should be geared towards developing high-throughput cultivation techniques.
Signiﬁcant progress in genomics has had a transformational impact on natural product discovery. Howev-
er, there is still much room for further improvements in genome-scale screening efforts. Of note is the syn-
ergistic cluster mining that represents a promising new avenue for the discovery of synergistic drugs
through genomics-driven natural product discovery [11]. Though there are many questions that remain
to be answered (see Outstanding Questions), further innovations in these technological platforms can
address large-scale natural product characterization projects and thereby substantially expand the reper-
toire of novel natural products that will ultimately expedite the search for new therapeutic agents.


Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31870061,
U1706206, 31570032, and 3161101522), grants from Chongqing Science and Technology Commission



Figure 3. Pathway Refactoring in the Discovery of Novel Natural Products.
Microbial genome sequences from environmental samples and databases are subjected to bioinformatic analysis
for identiﬁcation of biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs). BGCs of interest are then assembled by using in vitro DNA
assembly methods. The cassettes may come from the same BGC or multiple BGCs. Heterologous expression of the
refactored BGCs results in the discovery of novel bioactive natural products. Abbreviation: P, promoter.




                                                                          Trends in Biochemical Sciences, November 2019, Vol. 44, No. 11  969


[PDF physical page 10]
(cstccxljrc201904, cstc2018jcyjAX0066, and cstc2017jcyjAX0467), a grant from Technology Project of
Qingdao (17-3-3-44-nsh), a start-up grant from Southwest University (SWU117015), and the Funda-
mental Research Funds for the Central Universities (XDJK2018B029).


References
   1. Wellcome Trust and UK Government. (2016) Review     21. Kaeberlein, T. et al. (2002) Isolating ‘uncultivable’
    on Antimicrobial Resistance – Tackling Drug-             microorganisms in pure culture in a simulated
     Resistant Infections Globally: Final Report and              natural environment. Science 296, 1127–1129
    Recommendations, Wellcome Trust and UK            22. Steinert, G. et al. (2014) Application of diffusion
    Government                                        growth chambers for the cultivation of marine
   2. de Kraker, M.E. et al. (2016) Will 10 million people         sponge-associated bacteria. Mar. Biotechnol. (NY)
     die a year due to antimicrobial resistance by 2050?         16, 594–603
    PLoS Med. 13, e1002184                                23. Gavrish, E. et al. (2014) Lassomycin, a ribosomally
   3. Harvey, A.L. et al. (2015) The re-emergence of             synthesized cyclic peptide, kills Mycobacterium
     natural products for drug discovery in the genomics         tuberculosis by targeting the ATP-dependent
      era. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 14, 111–129                  protease ClpC1P1P2. Chem. Biol. 21, 509–518
   4. Shen, B. (2015) A new golden age of natural            24. Berdy, B. et al. (2017) In situ cultivation of previously
     products drug discovery. Cell 163, 1297–1300              uncultivable microorganisms using the ichip. Nat.
   5. Newman, D.J. and Cragg, G.M. (2016) Natural             Protoc. 12, 2232–2242
     products as sources of new drugs from 1981 to         25. Nichols, D. et al. (2010) Use of ichip for high-
     2014. J. Nat. Prod. 79, 629–661                         throughput in situ cultivation of ‘uncultivable’
   6. Katz, L. and Baltz, R.H. (2016) Natural product              microbial species. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76,
     discovery: past, present, and future. J. Ind.               2445–2450
     Microbiol. Biotechnol. 43, 155–176                      26. Ling, L.L. et al. (2015) A new antibiotic kills
   7. Ceniceros, A. et al. (2017) Genome-based               pathogens without detectable resistance. Nature
     exploration of the specialized metabolic capacities         517, 455–459
     of the genus Rhodococcus. BMC Genomics 18, 593     27. Ma, L. et al. (2014) Gene-targeted microﬂuidic
   8. Agarwal, V. et al. (2017) Metagenomic discovery of          cultivation validated by isolation of a gut bacterium
     polybrominated diphenyl ether biosynthesis by              listed in Human Microbiome Project’s Most Wanted
     marine sponges. Nat. Chem. Biol. 13, 537–543              taxa. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111, 9768–9773
   9. Wang, L. et al. (2019) Natural products from            28. Versluis, D. et al. (2019) High throughput cultivation-
    mammalian gut microbiota. Trends Biotechnol. 37,       based screening on porous aluminum oxide chips
     492–504                                                  allows targeted isolation of antibiotic resistant
 10. Chevrette, M.G. et al. (2019) The antimicrobial          human gut bacteria. PLoS One 14, e0210970
     potential of Streptomyces from insect                   29. Richards, M.A. et al. (2014) MediaDB: a database of
     microbiomes. Nat. Commun. 10, 516                      microbial growth conditions in deﬁned media. PLoS
 11. Arp, J. et al. (2018) Synergistic activity of cosecreted      One 9, e103548
     natural products from amoebae-associated             30. Oberhardt, M.A. et al. (2015) Harnessing the
     bacteria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 115, 3758–         landscape of microbial culture media to predict new
    3763                                               organism-media pairings. Nat. Commun. 6, 8493
 12. Helfrich, E.J.N. et al. (2018) Bipartite interactions,       31. Hollywood, K.A. et al. (2018) Metabolomics tools for
      antibiotic production and biosynthetic potential of         the synthetic biology of natural products. Curr.
     the Arabidopsis leaf microbiome. Nat. Microbiol. 3,        Opin. Biotechnol. 54, 114–120
    909–919                                                 32. Fang, J. and Dorrestein, P.C. (2014) Emerging mass
 13. Ueoka, R. et al. (2018) Genome-based identiﬁcation        spectrometry techniques for the direct analysis of
     of a plant-associated marine bacterium as a rich            microbial colonies. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 19,
     natural product source. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.        120–129
     57, 14519–14523                                        33. Wang, M. et al. (2016) Sharing and community
 14. Stewart, E.J. (2012) Growing unculturable bacteria.         curation of mass spectrometry data with Global
      J. Bacteriol. 194, 4151–4160                               Natural Products Social Molecular Networking. Nat.
 15. Handelsman, J. et al. (1998) Molecular biological           Biotechnol. 34, 828–837
     access to the chemistry of unknown soil microbes: a     34. Wu, C. et al. (2019) Lugdunomycin, an angucycline-
    new frontier for natural products. Chem. Biol. 5,           derived molecule with unprecedented chemical
    R245–R249                                                   architecture. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 58, 2809–
 16. Pham, V.H. and Kim, J. (2012) Cultivation of              2814
     unculturable soil bacteria. Trends Biotechnol. 30,       35. Bauermeister, A. et al. (2019) Intra-clade
    475–484                                           metabolomic proﬁling of MAR4 Streptomyces from
 17. Krismer, B. et al. (2014) Nutrient limitation governs         the Macaronesia Atlantic region reveals a source of
     Staphylococcus aureus metabolism and niche              anti-bioﬁlm metabolites. Environ. Microbiol. 21,
     adaptation in the human nose. PLoS Pathog. 10,          1099–1112
    e1003862                                                36. Nguyen, D.D. et al. (2016) Indexing the
 18. Zipperer, A. et al. (2016) Human commensals            Pseudomonas specialized metabolome enabled
     producing a novel antibiotic impair pathogen             the discovery of poaeamide B and the
     colonization. Nature 535, 511–516                      bananamides. Nat. Microbiol. 2, 16197
 19. Aoi, Y. et al. (2009) Hollow-ﬁber membrane             37. Hartmann, A.C. et al. (2017) Meta-mass shift
    chamber as a device for in situ environmental             chemical proﬁling of metabolomes from coral reefs.
      cultivation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75, 3826–3833         Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114, 11685–11690
 20. Jung, D. et al. (2014) Application of a new cultivation     38. Crusemann, M. et al. (2017) Prioritizing natural
     technology, I-tip, for studying microbial diversity in        product diversity in a collection of 146 bacterial
     freshwater sponges of Lake Baikal, Russia. FEMS            strains based on growth and extraction protocols.
     Microbiol. Ecol. 90, 417–423                                      J. Nat. Prod. 80, 588–597





970   Trends in Biochemical Sciences, November 2019, Vol. 44, No. 11


[PDF physical page 11]
39. Markley, J.L. et al. (2017) The future of NMR-based        subsequent fermentation for optimized production.
   metabolomics. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 43, 34–40         Methods Mol. Biol. 1539, 99–144
40. Gubbens, J. et al. (2014) Natural product                61. Chang, F.Y. et al. (2013) Discovery and synthetic
    proteomining, a quantitative proteomics platform,          refactoring of tryptophan dimer gene clusters from
    allows rapid discovery of biosynthetic gene clusters        the environment. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 17906–
    for different classes of natural products. Chem. Biol.        17912
    21, 707–718                                             62. Lemetre, C. et al. (2017) Bacterial natural product
41. Medema, M.H. and Fischbach, M.A. (2015)                 biosynthetic domain composition in soil correlates
   Computational approaches to natural product             with changes in latitude on a continent-wide scale.
    discovery. Nat. Chem. Biol. 11, 639–648                    Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114, 11615–11620
42. Nett, M. et al. (2009) Genomic basis for natural         63. Peek, J. et al. (2018) Rifamycin congeners
   product biosynthetic diversity in the actinomycetes.        kanglemycins are active against rifampicin-resistant
    Nat. Prod. Rep. 26, 1362–1384                             bacteria via a distinct mechanism. Nat. Commun. 9,
43. Masschelein, J. et al. (2017) Antibiotics from Gram-        4147
    negative bacteria: a comprehensive overview and       64. Hover, B.M. et al. (2018) Culture-independent
    selected biosynthetic highlights. Nat. Prod. Rep. 34,         discovery of the malacidins as calcium-dependent
   712–783                                                       antibiotics with activity against multidrug-resistant
44. Keller, N.P. (2019) Fungal secondary metabolism:          Gram-positive pathogens. Nat. Microbiol. 3,
    regulation, function and drug discovery. Nat. Rev.         415–422
    Microbiol. 17, 167–180                                  65. Iqbal, H.A. et al. (2016) Natural product discovery
45. Crits-Christoph, A. et al. (2018) Novel soil bacteria         through improved functional metagenomics in
    possess diverse genes for secondary metabolite           Streptomyces. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138, 9341–9344
    biosynthesis. Nature 558, 440–444                       66. Nasrin, S. et al. (2018) Chloramphenicol derivatives
46. Donia, M.S. et al. (2014) A systematic analysis of            with antibacterial activity identiﬁed by functional
    biosynthetic gene clusters in the human                 metagenomics. J. Nat. Prod. 81, 1321–1332
   microbiome reveals a common family of antibiotics.     67. Owen, J.G. et al. (2012) A functional screen for
    Cell 158, 1402–1414                                      recovery of 40-phosphopantetheinyl transferase and
47. Ren, H. et al. (2017) Breaking the silence: new              associated natural product biosynthesis genes from
    strategies for discovering novel natural products.        metagenome libraries. Environ. Microbiol. 14,
    Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 48, 21–27                       1198–1209
48. Mao, D. et al. (2018) Recent advances in activating      68. Bitok, J.K. et al. (2017) Identiﬁcation of biosynthetic
    silent biosynthetic gene clusters in bacteria. Curr.        gene clusters from metagenomic libraries using
   Opin. Microbiol. 45, 156–163                          PPTase complementation in a Streptomyces host.
49. Niu, G. (2018) Genomics-driven natural product         FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 364, fnx155
    discovery in actinomycetes. Trends Biotechnol. 36,      69. Thaker, M.N. et al. (2013) Identifying producers of
   238–241                                                      antibacterial compounds by screening for antibiotic
50. Liu, G. et al. (2013) Molecular regulation of antibiotic         resistance. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 922–927
    biosynthesis in Streptomyces. Microbiol. Mol. Biol.      70. Tang, X. et al. (2015) Identiﬁcation of thiotetronic
    Rev. 77, 112–143                                         acid antibiotic biosynthetic pathways by target-
51. Park, H.B. et al. (2017) Genome mining unearths a          directed genome mining. ACS Chem. Biol. 10,
    hybrid nonribosomal peptide synthetase-like-            2841–2849
    pteridine synthase biosynthetic gene cluster. eLife      71. Yan, Y. et al. (2018) Resistance-gene-directed
    6, e25229                                                discovery of a natural-product herbicide with a new
52. Yao, T. et al. (2018) Genome mining of              mode of action. Nature 559, 415–418
    cyclodipeptide synthases unravels unusual tRNA-       72. Hadjithomas, M. et al. (2017) IMG-ABC: new
   dependent diketopiperazine-terpene biosynthetic          features for bacterial secondary metabolism
    machinery. Nat. Commun. 9, 4091                           analysis and targeted biosynthetic gene cluster
53. Li, L. et al. (2018) Genome mining and assembly-line         discovery in thousands of microbial genomes.
    biosynthesis of the UCS1025A pyrrolizidinone             Nucleic Acids Res. 45, D560–D565
    family of fungal alkaloids. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140,       73. Medema, M.H. et al. (2015) Minimum information
   2067–2071                                          about a biosynthetic gene cluster. Nat. Chem. Biol.
54. Xu, F. et al. (2017) Discovery of a cryptic antifungal          11, 625–631
   compound from Streptomyces albus J1074 using       74. Cimermancic, P. et al. (2014) Insights into
    high-throughput elicitor screens. J. Am. Chem. Soc.        secondary metabolism from a global analysis of
    139, 9203–9212                                            prokaryotic biosynthetic gene clusters. Cell 158,
55. Moon, K. et al. (2019) Bioactivity-HiTES unveils            412–421
    cryptic antibiotics encoded in actinomycete             75. Doroghazi, J.R. et al. (2014) A roadmap for natural
    bacteria. ACS Chem. Biol. 14, 767–774                   product discovery based on large-scale genomics
56. Moon, K. et al. (2019) Cebulantin, a cryptic              and metabolomics. Nat. Chem. Biol. 10, 963–968
    lanthipeptide antibiotic uncovered using                76. Guo, C.J. et al. (2017) Discovery of reactive
    bioactivity-coupled HiTES. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.          microbiota-derived metabolites that inhibit host
    Engl. 58, 5973–5977                                      proteases. Cell 168, 517–526
57. Xu, F. et al. (2019) A genetics-free method for high-     77. Duncan, K.R. et al. (2015) Molecular networking
   throughput discovery of cryptic microbial               and pattern-based genome mining improves
    metabolites. Nat. Chem. Biol. 15, 161–168                 discovery of biosynthetic gene clusters and their
58. Ziemert, N. et al. (2014) Diversity and evolution of         products from Salinispora species. Chem. Biol. 22,
   secondary metabolism in the marine actinomycete        460–471
   genus Salinispora. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111,     78. Parkinson, E.I. et al. (2018) Discovery of the
   E1130–E1139                                             tyrobetaine natural products and their biosynthetic
59. Letzel, A.C. et al. (2017) Genomic insights              gene cluster via metabologenomics. ACS Chem.
    into specialized metabolism in the marine                    Biol. 13, 1029–1037
    actinomycete Salinispora. Environ. Microbiol. 19,        79. Chu, J. et al. (2016) Discovery of MRSA
   3660–3673                                                   active antibiotics using primary sequence from
60. Rebets, Y. et al. (2017) Cloning and expression of          the human microbiome. Nat. Chem. Biol. 12, 1004–
   metagenomic DNA in Streptomyces lividans and         1006





                                                                         Trends in Biochemical Sciences, November 2019, Vol. 44, No. 11  971


[PDF physical page 12]
 80. Vila-Farres, X. et al. (2018) An optimized synthetic-      93. Luo, Y. et al. (2013) Activation and characterization
     bioinformatic natural product antibiotic sterilizes           of a cryptic polycyclic tetramate macrolactam
     multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii-              biosynthetic gene cluster. Nat. Commun. 4, 2894
     infected wounds. mSphere 3, e00528-17                94. Saha, S. et al. (2017) Activation and characterization
 81. Vila-Farres, X. et al. (2017) Antimicrobials inspired           of a cryptic gene cluster reveals a cyclization
    by nonribosomal peptide synthetase gene clusters.        cascade for polycyclic tetramate macrolactams.
      J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139, 1404–1407                   Chem. Sci. 8, 1607–1612
 82. Zhang, X. et al. (2019) Unlocking the trove of            95. Freestone, T.S. et al. (2017) Discovery of a
     metabolic treasures: activating silent biosynthetic         phosphonoacetic acid derived natural product by
    gene clusters in bacteria and fungi. Curr. Opin.           pathway refactoring. ACS Synth. Biol. 6, 217–223
     Microbiol. 51, 9–15                                      96. Bauman, K.D. et al. (2019) Refactoring the cryptic
 83. Myronovskyi, M. and Luzhetskyy, A. (2016) Native          streptophenazine biosynthetic gene cluster unites
    and engineered promoters in natural product             phenazine, polyketide, and nonribosomal peptide
     discovery. Nat. Prod. Rep. 33, 1006–1019                   biochemistry. Cell Chem. Biol. 26, 724–736
 84. Luo, Y. et al. (2015) Systematic identiﬁcation of a        97. Ren, H. et al. (2018) Rapid discovery of glycocins
     panel of strong constitutive promoters from              through pathway refactoring in Escherichia coli.
     Streptomyces albus. ACS Synth. Biol. 4, 1001–1010      ACS Chem. Biol. 13, 2966–2972
 85. Li, S. et al. (2015) Genome-wide identiﬁcation and      98. Ren, H. et al. (2017) A plug-and-play pathway
     evaluation of constitutive promoters in                     refactoring workﬂow for natural product research in
     streptomycetes. Microb. Cell Fact. 14, 172                 Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
 86. Bai, C. et al. (2015) Exploiting a precise design of          Biotechnol. Bioeng. 114, 1847–1854
     universal synthetic modular regulatory elements to     99. Yu, L. et al. (2018) Yield improvement of the anti-
     unlock the microbial natural products in             MRSA antibiotics WAP-8294A by CRISPR/dCas9
     Streptomyces. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112,         combined with refactoring self-protection genes in
    12181–12186                                           Lysobacter enzymogenes OH11. ACS Synth. Biol. 7,
 87. Zong, Y. et al. (2017) Insulated transcriptional             258–266
     elements enable precise design of genetic circuits.    100. Eyles, T.H. et al. (2018) Rapid and robust yeast-
     Nat. Commun. 8, 52                                 mediated pathway refactoring generates multiple
 88. Vogl, T. et al. (2018) Engineered bidirectional           new bottromycin-related metabolites. ACS Synth.
     promoters enable rapid multi-gene co-expression           Biol. 7, 1211–1218
     optimization. Nat. Commun. 9, 3589                  101. Li, Y. et al. (2018) Complete biosynthesis of
 89. Li, L. et al. (2017) New strategies and approaches         noscapine and halogenated alkaloids in yeast. Proc.
      for engineering biosynthetic gene clusters of                Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 115, E3922–E3931
     microbial natural products. Biotechnol. Adv. 35,       102. Luo, X. et al. (2019) Complete biosynthesis of
    936–949                                              cannabinoids and their unnatural analogues in
 90. Yuzawa, S. et al. (2018) Short-chain ketone                  yeast. Nature 567, 123–126
     production by engineered polyketide synthases in    103. Crofts, T.S. et al. (2017) Next-generation
     Streptomyces albus. Nat. Commun. 9, 4569              approaches to understand and combat the
 91. Li, L. et al. (2019) aMSGE: advanced multiplex site-          antibiotic resistome. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 15,
     speciﬁc genome engineering with orthogonal            422–434
    modular recombinases in actinomycetes. Metab.      104. Lagier, J.C. et al. (2016) Culture of previously
     Eng. 52, 153–167                                        uncultured members of the human gut microbiota
 92. He, Y. et al. (2018) Recent advances in                  by culturomics. Nat. Microbiol. 1, 16203
     reconstructing microbial secondary metabolites       105. Browne, H.P. et al. (2016) Culturing of ‘unculturable’
     biosynthesis in Aspergillus spp. Biotechnol. Adv. 36,       human microbiota reveals novel taxa and extensive
    739–783                                                    sporulation. Nature 533, 543–546





972   Trends in Biochemical Sciences, November 2019, Vol. 44, No. 11