
[PDF physical page 1]
Editing Aspergillus terreus using the CRISPR-Cas9 system


Sra-Yh Shih1, Uffe Hasbro Mortensen2, Fang-Rong Chang1,3, and HsinYuan Tsai    1,4,*

1Department of Marine Biotechnology and Resources, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan
2DTU Bioengineering, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark
3Graduate Institute of Natural Products, College of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Downloaded
4Doctoral Degree Program in Marine Biotechnology, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan
*Corresponding author: E-mail: hyt@mail.nsysu.edu.tw                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      from


Abstract

CRISPR-Cas9 technology has been utilized in different organisms for targeted mutagenesis, offering a fast, precise and cheap approach
to speed up molecular breeding and study of gene function. Until now, many researchers have established the demonstration of applying
the CRISPR/Cas9 system to various fungal model species. However, there are very few guidelines available for CRISPR/Cas9 genome
editing in Aspergillus terreus. In this study, we present CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing in A. terreus. To optimize the guide ribonucleic
acid (gRNA) expression, we constructed a modified single-guide ribonucleic acid (sgRNA)/Cas9 expression plasmid. By co-transforming
an sgRNA/Cas9 expression plasmid along with maker-free donor deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), we precisely disrupted the lovB and
lovR genes, respectively, and created targeted gene insertion (lovF gene) and iterative gene editing in A. terreus (lovF and lovR genes).
Furthermore, co-delivering two sgRNA/Cas9 expression plasmids resulted in precise gene deletion (with donor DNA) in the ku70 and
pyrG genes, respectively, and efficient removal of the DNA between the two gRNA targeting sites (no donor DNA) in the pyrG gene. Our
results showed that the CRISPR/Cas9 system is a powerful tool for precise genome editing in A. terreus, and our approach provides a
great potential for manipulating targeted genes and contributions to gene functional study of A. terreus.

Key words: Aspergillus terreus; CRISPR-Cas9; genome-editing technology; marker-free donor DNA


Graphical Abstract                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  https://academic.oup.com/synbio/article/7/1/ysac031/6874534
                                                                                                                                   by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              University
                                                                                                                                   of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       China
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      user
                                                                                                                                   on
                                                                                                                                   28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          January
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2026





© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License (https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For
commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com


[PDF physical page 2]
2     Synthetic Biology, 2022, Vol. 7, No. 1


1. Introduction

Natural products produced by fungi are extensively applied to
medicine, food and agricultural areas, but the full potential is far
from being unleashed. One serious obstacle toward this goal is the
lack of tools allowing genetic analyses and manipulation of most
fungi. The filamentous fungus Aspergillus terreus is a well-known
producer of various secondary metabolites for pharmaceutical
importance (1, 2). For example, it produces the polyketide-derived
natural product lovastatin, which is the first cholesterol-lowering
medicine approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for
human use in hypercholesterolemia treatments (3). Moreover,
abundant biologically relevant compounds, such as itaconic acidand terretonin, and enzymes, such as cellulases and xylanases,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Downloaded
                                                                                           1. The                                                                                  genome-editing                                                                                          system                                                                                                                     in                                                                                                             A. terreus.                                                                                                    Gene editing                                                                                                                                               inare also produced by A. terreus, and all of them are being produced    Figure                                                                                                                                     A.                    from                                                                                      terreus was                                                                            performed                                                                                            using a                                                                                                  modified                                                                                                pFC332                                                                                                                    plasmid,                                                                                                         and A.                                                                                                                                                 nidulans
by industries (4–6).                                                               gpdA promoter of pFC332 plasmid was replaced by A. terreus gpdA
   To optimize the production of valuable secondary metabolites    promoter to express sgRNA. Circular and linear donor DNAs were
produced by A. terreus, random mutagenesis using ultraviolet (UV)    applied to enhance the precise genome editing. The inner primers were
light or chemical mutagens has been conducted for decades (7).    used to detect the donor DNA, and the combined inner primers with
                                                                        outer primers were used to validate the gene editing.
For instance, a high yield of lovastatin strain of A. terreus was
obtained from UV-based mutagenesis (8), and a high β-glucosidase
activity mutant strain of A. terreus was derived by ethyl methyl    single-stranded DNA and double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) (24) and
sulfonate treatment (9). However, random mutagenesis could cre-     (iv) using two guide ribonucleic acids (gRNAs) flanking the tar-
ate undesirable genetic changes in the host, and the process is    get site to achieve targeted genome editing at a high possibility
laborious and time-consuming. Moreover, recombinant deoxyri-     (25). In the present study, we described CRISPR/Cas9 genome edit-
bonucleic acid (DNA) technologies including split-marker and    ing in A. terreus based on the method developed by Nødvig et al.
fusion-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) approaches have been     (20). The genome-editing system used in this study is depicted
employed to manipulate the interest of genes in A. terreus (10). The    in Figure 1, and the plasmids used to produce mutants are listed
drawbacks for this approach are a shortage of selectable mark-    in Table 1. Using our procedure, we successfully performed tar-
ers and relatively low rates of site-specific recombination due to    geted gene insertion and gene deletion in wild-type A. terreus, and
the fact that Non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) repair pathway    auxotrophic and non-homologous end-joining–deficient strains
is predominant in most fungi (11–13). Therefore, the develop-   were generated. We expect that our methods will facilitate future
ment of highly efficient and precise approaches to perform genetic    research in A. terreus.
manipulation is desirable.
   CRISPR-Cas9 is a natural defense mechanism discovered in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            https://academic.oup.com/synbio/article/7/1/ysac031/6874534
bacteria and archaea (14), which has subsequently been developed
                                                     2. Materials and methods                                byas a powerful genome-editing tool. The method is widely used in
                                                     2.1                                                        Strains                                                  and                                                          growth                                                                         conditionsmany      organisms,                 including                         animals, filamentous                                               fungi                                           and plants.
                                                                           Aspergillus                                                                                         terreus                                                                       American                                                                                    Type                                                                                               Culture Collection (ATCC) 20542               OceanDue to         its simplicity                 and specificity,                                CRISPR-Cas9                                             technology                                                    has
been applied to different aspects of fungal research. For instance,   used in this study was retrieved from the ATCC (Manassas, VA,
CRISPR/Cas9 system has been utilized to study fungal pathogenic-    USA). The strain was routinely cultured on potato dextrose agar
ity (15), to facilitate genetic engineering for secondary metabolite    (PDA) at 28∘C. Escherichia coli DH5a was grown in Luria-Bertani                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     University
production (12) such as increased gibberellic acid production in   medium (5 g yeast extract, 10 g tryptone and 10 g NaCl per liter)      of
Fusarium fujikuroi (11) and boost pneumocandin B0 productivity in    at 37∘C. Transformed cells were screened in their corresponding
Glarea lozoyensis (16).                                   medium supplemented with antibiotics: 100 μg/ml hygromycin B               China
                                                                         for                                                                   A.                                                                                   terreus                                                           ATCC                                                                            20542 and                                                                                     100                                                                                         μg/ml                                                                                                            ampicillin                                                                                                                              for E.   Since DiCarlo                      et                            al. (2013)                           demonstrated                                             that                                              CRISPR/Cas9-
                                                                                                                                                                        coli DH5a.            user                                                       The                                                                  pyrG                                                                             deletion                                                                       mutants                                                                                were                                                                                                   tested                                                                                     on                                                                                PDA medium                                                                                                                    containingmediated        genome                   editing                        could                            be applied to                                             Saccharomyces                                                                        cere-
visiae (17), the approach was quickly introduced into a number    10 mM uracil, 100 μg/ml hygromycin B and 1 mg/ml 5-fluoroorotic      on
of filamentous fungi including Trichoderma reesei (18), Neurospora    acid (FOA).                                                         28
crassa (19), a number of Aspergillus species (20) and Penicillium
chrysogenum (21). Up to date, the CRISPR-Cas9 genome-editing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Januarymethods have been established in >40 fungal species (12, 22, 23),   2.2 Plasmid construction
and most of them were conducted using a single-guide ribonu-    Plasmids pFC332 (Plasmid #87845) and pFC334 (Plasmid #87846)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2026
cleic acid (sgRNA) and Cas9 to introduce a DNA double-strand   were obtained from Addgene (https://www.addgene.org/).  To
break into the target sequence and donor DNA with homology    reduce off-target mutations, the gRNA oligos were designed by
arms to introduce the desired genetic change (12). In contrast    using GTScan (https://gt-scan.csiro.au/) and blasted with the
to other Aspergillus species, relatively few genetic manipulation   whole genome sequence data of A. terreus ATCC 20542. The
methods have been established for A. terreus research.  Vari-   sgRNA/Cas9 expression plasmids were generated as described by
ous strategies have been considered for CRISPR genome editing    Nødvig et al. (20), with slight modifications. In detail, Aspergillus
in filamentous fungi, including  (i) introducing the donor DNA    nidulans gpdA promoter was replaced with the endogenous
containing a selectable marker,  (ii) performing genome editing    A. terreus gpdA promoter (26) to create a gRNA expression cas-
in a non-homologous end-joining–deficient strain,  (iii) applying    sette (Figure 1). The donor DNA fragments containing 500–1000
repair templates to different formats including circular, linear,   bp of homology arms on each side flanking the cut site were


[PDF physical page 3]
                                                                                                                                        S.-Y. Shih et al.    3


Table 1. Plasmids and donor DNA used to create mutations in this study

Targeted gene             First sgRNA                    Second sgRNA                 Donor DNA form                Edited size (bp)

lovB                    plovB-sg1/Cas9 plasmid           –                                  Circular                 −219           –
lovR                    –                                plovR-sg2/Cas9 plasmid            Circular                 −231           –
lovF                    plovF-sg1/Cas9 plasmid            –                                  Circular                +600           –
ku70                   pku70-sg1/Cas9 plasmid          pku70-sg2/Cas9 plasmid           Circular                 −943           –
pyrG                   ppyrG-sg1/Cas9 plasmid          ppyrG-sg2/Cas9 plasmid           Circular                 −834           –
pyrG                   ppyrG-sg1/Cas9 plasmid          ppyrG-sg2/Cas9 plasmid           Linear                   −834          −575
pyrG                   ppyrG-sg1/Cas9 plasmid          ppyrG-sg2/Cas9 plasmid           –                       −575           –




cloned into the pJET1.2 vector (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The    visualized by agarose gel electrophoresis and subjected to Sanger                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Downloaded
primers used in this study are given in Table S1.                    sequencing.                                                                                                             from
2.3 Preparation of protoplasts                       3. Results
Protoplasts of A. terreus were produced from 7-day-old cultures   3.1 Strategies for CRISPR-mediated genome
on PDA. The conidia were collected from three plate cultures   editing in A. terreus
with 5 ml of sterile distilled water containing 0.2% Tween 20 and   Only limited CRISPR-Cas9 genome-editing tools are available
then filtered through Miracloth. The resulting conidial suspen-    for A. terreus (28). We therefore decided to investigate whether
sions were incubated in 100 ml of Yeast Extract–Peptone–Dextrose   autonomous maintenance in Aspergillus-based plasmids encod-
medium (10 g yeast extract, 20 g peptone and 20 g dextrose per    ing both Cas9 and sgRNAs developed by Nødvig et al. (20) for gene
liter) at 28∘C and 200 rpm for 16 h. The culture was harvested    editing in a number of different Aspergilli could also be applied to
on gauze and digested in 25 ml of lysis buffer (1.2 M MgSO4,    A. terreus. With this aim, we firstly attempted to eliminate exon 5 of
10 mM sodium phosphate and pH 5.8) containing 35 mg/ml lysing    the lovB gene by CRISPR/Cas9-mediated DNA deletion. Two sgRNAs
enzymes (Sigma, L1412) at 28∘C with shaking at 100 rpm for 3 h.    targeting the exon 5 of the lovB gene were designed and cloned into
After filtration through Miracloth, the protoplasts were spun down   pFC332 plasmids. Transformants generated by co-transformation
at 1100 g for 5 min and adjusted to a final concentration of 1 × 107    of the two plasmids into A. terreus protoplasts were selected on
cells/ml in Sorbitol, Tris-HCl, CaCl2 buffer (1.2 M Sorbitol, 10 mM   PDA medium supplemented with hygromycin B. If the chromo-
Tris-HCl and pH 7.5, 10 mM CaCl2).                            somal DNA Double-Strand Break (DSB) end upstream of exon 5
                                                                                      is joined to the chromosomal end downstream of exon by NHEJ,
                                                            then exon 5 should be excised. To investigate this possibility, the
2.4 Polyethylene glycol (PEG)-mediated
                                                         genomic DNA of five transformants were extracted and analyzed
transformation
                                                           by PCR. However, despite the repeated attempts, we were unable                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  https://academic.oup.com/synbio/article/7/1/ysac031/6874534For transformation, 1 μg of sgRNA/Cas9 expression plasmid DNA    to obtain this deletion. We therefore examined the expression lev-
and 1 μg of donor plasmid DNA were added to 50 μl of protoplasts    els of cas9 in the transformants and in wild-type strains using     by
and incubated on ice for 15 min. Subsequently, 1 ml of polyethy-    reverse transcriptase PCR. As expected, expression of cas9 waslene glycol solution (60% PEG 4000, 50 mM CaCl2, 50 mM Tris-HCl    only detected in the transformants containing the CRISPR plasmid            Ocean
and pH 7.5) was added to the mixture and incubated at room    (Supplementary Figure S1). Importantly, the results demonstrated
temperature for 15 min. The PEG mixture was suspended in a    that cas9 could be expressed in A. terreus using our CRISPR/Cas9
molten osmotically stabilized medium (33% sucrose, Potato Dex-    vectors. To address the failure of genome editing in A. terreus,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              University
trose Broth and 0.75% agar) containing 100 μg/ml hygromycin B   we pursued three strategies: (i) we optimized sgRNA expression     of
and then poured into a Petri dish. After 72 h, the transformants    in A. terreus by replacing the A. nidulans gpdA promoter with the
were verified by PCR. For pyrG deletion, 10 mM uracil was added to   endogenous A. terreus gpdA promoter to drive expression of the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       China
the osmotically stabilized medium.                          sgRNA genes on the CRISPR plasmids;  (ii) to enhance homolo-
                                                           gous direct repair (HDR)–mediated genome editing, we included a         user
2.5 Validate transformants                             donor repair template in the co-transformation reactions to facil-     on
                                                                            itate HR-mediated repair of the Cas9-induced DNA DSBs; and (iii)     28To evaluate the transformation of donor DNA, the colony PCR
                                                                     to attain targeted genome editing at a high possibility, we alsowas performed. Inner primers located within the homology region
                                                                considered using two sgRNAs against the targeted gene.were used to detect the donor DNA. Outer primers located outside                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          January
the homology region of donor DNA were applied to validate the
gene editing (Figure 1). The mycelium was transferred into 20 μl   3.2 Gene deletion in A. terreus                                                          2026
of Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.5) in a PCR tube and incubated at 98∘C   By implementing the first two improvements of the CRISPR/Cas9
for 30 min. As PCR template, 2 μl of the supernatant was used.   method to create a deletion in A. terreus, the sgRNA/Cas9 plas-
The editing efficiency was estimated using PCR on genomic DNA    mid,  carrying an sgRNA targeting exon 5 of the lovB gene,
samples. The fungal genomic DNA was extracted as described pre-   was co-transformed with a donor plasmid into A. terreus. The
viously (27). The resulting DNA pellets were dissolved with 500 μl    circular donor plasmid with 550–650 bp homology arms was
of 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 1 M NaCl and 2 mM ethylenediaminete-    designed to introduce a 219-bp deletion into the lovB gene. After
traacetic acid, and the extraction procedure was repeated. The   hygromycin B selection, we first examined the transformants for
PCR was conducted under the following conditions: 95∘C for 3 min,    the presence of the donor plasmid by colony PCR. Specifically,
30 cycles of 95∘C for 30 s, 55∘C for 30 s and 72∘C for 1 min per 1    the amplification of a 281-bp fragment demonstrated that the
kb, with a final extension at 72∘C for 5 min. PCR products were    presence of the donor plasmid was confirmed in 11 of the 16


[PDF physical page 4]
4     Synthetic Biology, 2022, Vol. 7, No. 1


transformants. Genomic DNA was purified from the 11 colonies    diagnostic colony PCR analyses were applied to identify those that
and then analyzed for the presence of the deletion by PCR. Among    also contained the donor plasmid. Sixteen colonies were identified
the 11 clones, 4 clones were homokaryotic containing the desired    in this manner, and three clones contained the donor plasmid. For
deletion mutants, and 4 clones were heterokaryotic mutants   each of these transformants, genomic DNA was examined for the
containing wild-type and deletion alleles. Subsequently, Sanger    presence of the 231-bp deletion by PCR. These analyses revealed
sequencing demonstrated that the four homokaryotic mutants   a single colony that appeared to be a heterokaryon containing
contained the expected targeted 219-bp deletion in the lovB gene    wild-type and mutant lovR gene copies. To obtain a pure strain,
(Figure 2).                                          we therefore streak purified the colony and repeated the PCR test.
  We then attempted to generate a 231-bp deletion in the lovR    After a first round of re-streaking, the colony showing the most
gene. Two sgRNAs designed to target different sites of the lovR    intense mutant PCR fragment was selected for another round of
gene exon 1 were inserted into sgRNA/Cas9 expression vectors,    re-streaking. Finally, a clean lovR gene mutant strain was obtained
respectively, to produce plovR-sg1/Cas9 and plovR-sg2/Cas9 plas-    after several rounds of re-streaking (Figure 3), and the deletion wasmids. The lovR donor plasmid contained a fusion of sequences    confirmed by Sanger sequencing.                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded
upstream          (593               bp)               and downstream                                    (764 bp)                                               of exon1                                                   designed
to introduce            the                 desirable                        231-bp deletion.                                          Next,                                               A. terreus                                                           pro-                                                                                                                                              from
toplasts were co-transformed with the lovR donor plasmid and   3.3 DNA insertion in A. terreus
either the plovR-sg1/Cas9 plasmid or the plovR-sg2/Cas9 plas-    In order to access whether this approach can be used to insert
mid. Hygromycin B–resistant transformants were selected, and   a DNA fragment into a target gene, we constructed a donor
                                                            plasmid containing an insert DNA cassette containing the lovF
                                                                  gene. The DNA cassette was generated by fusing three fragments
                                                                  together in a single PCR reaction: a fragment containing 960 bp
                                                                       of sequence upstream of lovF, a 600-bp fragment containing the
                                                                  5′-untranslated regions of the glucoamylase gene and a fragment
                                                                 containing 900 bp of the lovF gene. The resulting PCR product
                                                     was inserted into the pJET1.2 vector to produce lovF donor plas-
                                                              mid. Aspergillus terreus protoplasts were co-transformed with the
                                                           donor plasmid and either the plovF-sg1/Cas9 plasmid or the plovF-
                                                               sg2/Cas9 plasmid. Eighteen transformants obtained from the
                                                                        selective medium were analyzed by colony PCR using primers tar-
                                                                    geting the donor plasmid, and 16 transformants showing positive
                                                         bands for the donor plasmid were identified. We then examined
                                                               the efficiency of DNA insertion into the lovF gene via genomic DNA
                                                             PCR. These analyses identified 12 transformants containing edited
Figure 2. Generation of lovB deletion mutant. (a) Diagram showing lovB     and unedited DNA, indicating that they were heterokaryons. Thesegene deletion. (b) The 281-bp band represents the colony PCR product      transformants were therefore purified by re-streaking on the                                                                                                                                                                                      https://academic.oup.com/synbio/article/7/1/ysac031/6874534
amplified from the donor plasmid of lovB gene. (c) Genome PCR analysis                                                                        selective medium. After three rounds of streak purification, pure      by
revealed that lovB gene was deleted, resulting in an expected band of 695
bp. Lane 1: wild-type (Wt) strain, lane 2: edited strain and lane M: 100-bp    lovF DNA insertion mutants were obtained (Figure 4). The mutantsDNA marker.                                                were also verified by Sanger sequencing.                                                                          Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     University
                                                                                                                                    of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          China
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        user
                                                                                                                                    on
                                                                                                                                    28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               January
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2026





Figure 3. Isolation of fully edited strains by streaking method. Before streaking, bands of both edited and unedited strains can be seen in
transformants. After applying for streaking, only the edited band was observed in the fully edited strain. (a) Diagram representing lovR gene deletion.
(b) Generation of homokaryotic mutants of the lovR gene. Wt: wild-type and M: 100-bp DNA marker.


[PDF physical page 5]
                                                                                                                                        S.-Y. Shih et al.    5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Downloaded

Figure 4. Isolation of fully edited strains by streaking method.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      from
(a) Diagram showing lovF gene insertion. (b) Generation of DNA-inserted
homokaryotic strain. Wt: wild-type and M: 100-bp DNA marker.



3.4 Iterative genome editing in A. terreus
                                                                       Figure 5. Iterative genome editing in A. terreus. After the plasmid
To perform iterative genome editing, we set out to generate a lovR                                                                  removal process, the plasmid-free lovF mutant was used to apply the
and lovF double mutant strain using the strain containing the    deletion of the lovR gene. The target mutations were detected by genome
lovF insertion mutation as a starting point. First, plovF-sg1/Cas9   PCR using the corresponding primers. From left to right: the 414-bp band
plasmid and the donor DNA used for obtaining the lovF mutant    represented the unedited genome, and the 1014-bp band represented the
                                                                            inserted lovF. For the second genome editing, the 937-bp band
were lost from the lovF strain by repeated culturing of the strain
                                                                       represented the unedited genome, and the 724-bp band represented lovR
in antibiotic-free PDA medium. To ensure complete plasmid loss,     deletion. Wt: wild-type, Mut: edited mutant and M: 100-bp DNA marker.
the potential plasmid-free strains were tested for sensitivity to
hygromycin B and finally checked by colony PCR. Next, plasmid-
free strains identified in this manner were then protoplasted and
used in a second round of genome editing. Specifically, to cre-
ate a double mutant strain, the lovF mutant protoplasts were
co-transformed with the plovR-sg2/Cas9 plasmid and the donor
plasmid containing the lovR mutation. Transformants were easily
obtained, and homokaryotic mutants were obtained after three
rounds of re-streaking on the selective medium. Genomic DNA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  https://academic.oup.com/synbio/article/7/1/ysac031/6874534
extracted from the mutants were checked by PCR using the vali-                                                                      by
dation primers detecting lovF and lovR (Figure 5) and confirmed by
Sanger sequencing. This analysis demonstrated that four double                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oceanmutants were successfully produced by this approach.


3.5 Construction of a ku70 and pyrG deletion           Figure 6. Generation of gene deletion with two sgRNAs. (a) Diagram                                                                          representing ku70 gene deletion. (b) An 833-bp band corresponding to                                      Universitystrain for improved gene editing
                                                                       the size of the deleted ku70 was observed on the agarose gel.               of
Encouraged by the successes of our initial CRISPR efforts, we    Wt: wild-type and M: 100-bp DNA marker.
next aimed to construct a strain, which is more amiable for                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       China
future genetic engineering of A. terreus. Specifically, we decided
to delete ku70, which generally increases template-directed gene-       After co-transforming protoplasts with the pku70-sg1/Cas9         user
editing efficiencies by eliminating repair by NHEJ, and pyrG,    plasmid, the pku70-sg2/Cas9 plasmid and the circular donor DNA,     on
which can then be used as a counter-selectable marker. Although    20 transformants were selected for a further analysis. Hence,     28
CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing can be achieved by using an sgRNA,   by colony PCR analyses, we identified eight transformants that
validating sgRNAs located in different regions can be a time-    contained the donor plasmid. Genomic DNA from the eight pos-and labor-consuming process as different sgRNAs may have vari-     itive transformants were extracted and subjected to diagnostic                 January
ous efficiencies. Many studies revealed that high genome-editing   PCR analysis. These PCR experiments indicated that all eight         2026frequencies were accomplished by applying two sgRNAs (29–31).    colonies contained the ku70 deletion but that only two were
Therefore, we performed double sgRNAs to delete ku70 and pyrG,   homokaryons containing only the ku70 deletion and no trace
respectively. Accordingly, we made two pairs of CRISPR plas-    of the wild-type allele. Lastly, Sanger sequencing demonstrated
mids, which encode sgRNAs targeting ku70 and pyrG, respectively.    that the homokaryotic strains contained the expected ku70 dele-
To direct gene deletion, two donor plasmids were constructed.    tion. To make a pyrG deletion mutant strain, protoplasts of a
For ku70 deletion, a donor plasmid containing a fusion of two    wild-type strain were transformed with the ppyrG-sg1/Cas9 plas-
∼800-bp regions up- and downstream of the ku70 gene was con-    mid, the ppyrG-sg2/Cas9 plasmid and the pyrG-donor plasmid.
structed with the aim of introducing a 943-bp deletion in the ku70   To detect the presence of a donor plasmid, 24 transformants
gene (Figure 6). Similarly, a donor plasmid containing 700–850 bp   were analyzed by colony PCR. Fifteen of the 24 transformants
of up- and downstream sequences of pyrG gene was constructed    contained the donor plasmid, and genomic DNA was purified
to facilitate an 834-bp deletion of pyrG deletion (Figure 7).          from these 15 transformants and checked by PCR. The result


[PDF physical page 6]
6     Synthetic Biology, 2022, Vol. 7, No. 1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        from



Figure 7. Generation of gene deletion with two sgRNAs. (a) Diagram showing pyrG gene deletion. (b) Genome PCR analysis showed that pyrG gene was
deleted, resulting in pyrG- (homokaryotic deletion) and pyrG± mutants (heterokaryotic deletion). (c) Wild-type and mutant strains were checked on
PDA medium, PDA medium with uracil and PDA medium containing uracil and 5-FOA. Wt: wild-type and M: 100-bp DNA marker.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            https://academic.oup.com/synbio/article/7/1/ysac031/6874534
                                                                                                                                    by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ocean



Figure 8. Targeted deletion of pyrG by NHEJ. (a) Diagram representing pyrG gene deletion via NHEJ. (b) pyrG mutations were determined by PCR.Sequence analysis of pyrG deletion, the sgRNA sequence was shown in green and the PAM region was highlighted in dark pink. Break sites were                                                             University
indicated by yellow arrowheads. M indicates100-bp DNA marker.                                                                              of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          China
showed        that all the 15                       colonies                             contained                                       the                                           pyrG deletion.                                                  Ten                                                    Genome                                                              PCR                                                                                     analysis                                                                                                 of 13 transformants                                                                                            showed                                                                                                                        that                                                                                                                      they
were homokaryons,                 and                       Sanger                              sequencing                                       demonstrated                                                           that                                                              contained                                                                 two                                                                                types                                                                                             of deletions,                                                                                                     representing                                                                                                                            loss of                                                                                                              575                                                                                                         bp            user
they all contained the expected pyrG deletion. Importantly, when   and 834 bp, respectively. Specifically, nine colonies contained      on
the pyrG mutants were tested on PDA medium, PDA medium   an 834-bp deletion, three colonies contained a 575-bp deletion      28
with uracil and PDA medium containing uracil and 5-FOA, the   and one colony contained both the 834-bp and 575-bp deletions.
pyrG mutants grew on PDA medium containing uracil and 5-FOA   The sequencing of PCR products covering the borders of thebut not on PDA medium as expected (Figure 7). This contrasts    deletions demonstrated that the 834-bp deletion was introduced                      January
with the phenotype of the wild-type strain, which grew on PDA   by HDR using the pyrG-based donor fragment as a repair tem-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2026
medium, but not on PDA medium supplemented with 5-FOA and    plate, and the 575-bp deletion was mediated by NHEJ. Notably,
uracil.                                                          the NHEJ-based deletion was achieved by sealing sgRNAs/Cas9
                                                               breaks induced 4 bp from the Protospacer adjacent motif (PAM)
                                                            sequences (Figure 8).
3.6 Gene editing with linear donor DNA             We next set out to determine whether using two sgRNAs pro-
To investigate the efficiency of using linear DNA in double sgRNA    vides a better gene-editing performance than an sgRNA in a wild-
CRISPR experiment, we attempted to introduce the pyrG gene dele-    type strain. We therefore edited pyrG gene by using an sgRNA
tion into a wild-type A. terreus strain by using the ppyrG-sg1/Cas9   and the linear pyrG-based dsDNA donor, and colony PCR was per-
plasmid, the ppyrG-sg2/Cas9 plasmid and a PCR-amplified dsDNA   formed to determine the presence and type of the deletion. By
donor generated from the pyrG donor plasmid.                     applying ppyrG-sg1/Cas9 plasmid with the dsDNA donor, five out


[PDF physical page 7]
                                                                                                                                        S.-Y. Shih et al.    7


of six transformants contained an 834-bp deletion, whereas when    obtained. However, all mutants were HDR-derived mutations by
the ppyrG-sg2/Cas9 plasmid was used along with the linear donor    using circular donor DNA as the repair template.
fragment, four out of seven transformants contained an 834-bp       Previous studies indicated that circular homologous donor
deletion. As confirmed by PCR product sequencing, the deletion   DNA performed better gene targeting than linearized donor DNA
was achieved by HDR.                                      due to the fact that NHEJ plays a dominant role in DSB repair
                                                                       in most filamentous fungi. Unlike circular donor DNA, linearized
                                                           donor DNA with free ends can attract NHEJ proteins and create
3.7 NHEJ-based deletion using dual sgRNAs
                                                     random integration into the genome (20). Additionally, circular
To determine the frequency of NHEJ-mediated gene deletion using                                                           donor DNA is highly resistant to exonucleases and stable in the
two sgRNAs, we performed pyrG gene deletions using ppyrG-                                                                                     cell, and it can bind HR proteins but not NHEJ proteins. Therefore,
sg1/Cas9 plasmid and ppyrG-sg2/Cas9 plasmid in the absence of a                                                                         for precise genome editing, circular donor DNA may be a better
repair template. The PCR results showed that 21 out of 24 colonies                                                                     option.
contained a 575-bp deletion, which was expected if the two Cas9-                                                                       In contrast to the co-delivery of two sgRNAs with a linear                        Downloaded
induced breaks were sealed by NHEJ. Three PCR fragments from                                                  dsDNA donor, applying a single gRNA with a linear dsDNA donor
three transformants were examined by DNA sequencing. The                                                               obtained fewer edited strains. The results suggested that apply-         from
sequencing results revealed that the transformants all carried                                                                   ing two sgRNAs in gene editing could increase the chance to edit
precise deletions mediated by NHEJ, cutting 4 bp upstream of the                                                               the target gene. Additionally, in the no-donor DNA assay, all muta-
PAM sequences.                                                                      tions were NHEJ-based deletions. Surprisingly, most mutants were
                                                                 created by removing the fragment between two gRNA target sites,
                                                                    cutting 4 bp upstream of the PAM sequences.
4. Discussion                                                    In conclusion, we presented CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing that can
By using endogenous gpdA promoter to drive gRNA expres-   be conducted in wild-type A. terreus in detail. In the present study,
sion and co-delivering the gRNA/Cas9 expression plasmids with    iterative genome editing was accomplished by using marker-
donor plasmids as repair templates, we successfully applied    free donor DNA, the efficiency of different types of donor DNAs
CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing to A. terreus. Our results revealed that   was examined and high gene-editing frequency was achieved by
various gRNAs have different efficiencies. Previous studies indi-    using two sgRNAs. The optimized CRISPR gene-editing workflow
cated that the sequence and secondary structure of sgRNA play   enhances the possibility of molecular breeding and provides a bet-
a key role in gene-editing efficiency and specificity (32–35). There-    ter understanding of biosynthetic mechanisms and gene function
fore, it is important to design multiple sgRNAs to target different    in A. terreus.
sites of candidate genes, and sgRNA design tools could help to
choose highly active sgRNAs.                       Supplementary data
   Additionally, repeated streaking is a time-consuming proce-                                                          Supplementary data are available at SYNBIO Online.
dure to obtain homokaryotic mutants. Several methods have been
developed for single spore isolation, such as isolating single spores                                         Data availability                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   https://academic.oup.com/synbio/article/7/1/ysac031/6874534under microscope, and using a capillary pipette or syringe to
pick up single spores (36), which could accelerate the process of    All the data described in this article are available within the article     by
obtaining pure CRISPR-edited strains.                         and in its online supplementary files.
   By removing the gRNA/Cas9 expression plasmids, we demon-                                                                                                                                                                              Ocean
strated that iterative genome editing in A. terreus is feasible. The   Material availability
protoplasts isolated from the plasmid-free mutant were applied
                                                                          All plasmids used in this study are publicly available from
to perform another gene editing. One of our CRISPR/Cas9 strate-                                                        Addgene (https://www.addgene.org/) with Plasmid #87845 and                        University
gies was to apply a donor DNA with homology to the targeted
                                                             Plasmid #87846.                                                   of
region. Our results showed that donor DNA containing homol-
ogous arm sequence was essential to achieving precise genome                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Chinaediting in A. terreus. Typically, a repair template containing a selec-  Funding
tion marker is employed in CRISPR-mediated homology-directed    Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan [MOST 108-2320-B-         user
repair to facilitate the screening process for many fungi. Instead,    110-007-MY3].                                                    on
we used a marker-free donor plasmid in this CRISPR/Cas9 sys-                                                                      28
tem, which provides a great potential for performing iterative gene     Conflict of interest statement. All the authors declare that they have
editing in filamentous fungi, with a limited number of selectable   no competing interests.markers such as A. terreus.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   January
   Moreover, ku70 and pyrG deletion strains have been generated
                                                                               Ethical statement. The experiments conducted on this study do                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2026by using two sgRNAs. Although CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing can
                                                              not contain any studies with human participants or animals
be achieved by using a single gRNA, validating gRNAs located
                                                           performed by any of the authors.
in different regions can be a time- and labor-consuming process
as different gRNAs may have various efficiencies. Many stud-
                                            Referencesies revealed that high genome-editing frequencies were accom-
plished by applying two sgRNAs (29–31). Therefore, we performed     1. Al-Fakih,A.A. and Almaqtri,W.Q.A. (2019) Overview on antibac-
double gRNAs to delete ku70 and pyrG, respectively. Employing        terial metabolites from terrestrial Aspergillus spp. Mycology, 10,
two sgRNAs with circular donor DNA, pure ku70 and pyrG dele-       191–209.
tions were generated without streaking process. Furthermore, we     2. Huang,X., Men,P., Tang,S. and Lu,X. (2021) Aspergillus terreus as an
tested linear donor DNA in pyrG deletion. While performing with        industrial filamentous fungus for pharmaceutical biotechnology.
a linear dsDNA donor, both HDR- and NHEJ-based deletions were        Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 69, 273–280.


[PDF physical page 8]
8     Synthetic Biology, 2022, Vol. 7, No. 1


3. Endo,A. (2004) The origin of the statins. 2004. Atheroscler. Suppl., 5,    20. Nødvig,C.S., Nielsen,J.B., Kogle,M.E., Mortensen,U.H. and Yu,J.-H.
   125–130.                                                                (2015) A CRISPR-Cas9 system for genetic engineering of filamen-
4. Ghanem,N.B., Yusef,H.H. and Mahrouse,H.K. (2000) Production of       tous fungi. PLoS One, 10, e0133085.
   Aspergillus terreus xylanase in solid-state cultures: application of    21. Pohl,C.,   Kiel,J.A.K.W.,  Driessen,A.J.M.,  Bovenberg,R.A.L. and
   the Plackett–Burman experimental design to evaluate nutritional       Nygård,Y. (2016) CRISPR/Cas9 based genome editing of Penicillium
   requirements. Bioresour. Technol., 73, 113–121.                           chrysogenum. ACS Synth. Biol., 5, 754–764.
5.  Guo,C.-J. and Wang,C.C.C. (2014) Recent advances in genome min-    22. Kowalczyk,J.E., Saha,S. and M ̈akel̈a,M.R. (2021) Application of
   ing of secondary metabolites in Aspergillus terreus. Front. Microbiol.,      CRISPR/Cas9 tools for genome editing in the white-rot fungus
    5, 717.                                                                Dichomitus squalens. Biomolecules, 11, 1526.
6.  Sohail,M., Ahmad,A. and Khan,S.A. (2016) Production of cellulase    23. Fan,C., Zhang,W., Su,X.,  Ji,W., Luo,H., Zhang,Y., Liu,B., Yao,B.,
   from Aspergillus terreus MS105 on crude and commercially purified      Huang,H. and Xu,X. (2021) CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing
   substrates. 3 Biotech., 6, 103.                                            directed by a 5S RRNA-TRNA(Gly) hybrid promoter in the ther-7. Subhan,M.,  Faryal,R. and Macreadie,I. (2016) Exploitation of       mophilic filamentous fungus Humicola insolens. Biotechnol. Biofuels,                               Downloaded
   Aspergillus                terreus for                       the production of natural statins.  J. Fungi                                                                          14,                                                                              206.
    (Basel, Switzerland),                         2, 13.                                                                           24.                                                                       Schuster,M.                                                                     and Kahmann,R. (2019) CRISPR-Cas9 genome edit-            from
8. Kaur,H., Kaur,A., Saini,H.S. and Chadha,B.S. (2009) Screening and       ing approaches in filamentous fungi and oomycetes. Fungal Genet.
   selection of lovastatin hyper-producing mutants of Aspergillus ter-          Biol., 130, 43–53.
   reus using cyclic mutagenesis. Acta. Microbiol. Immunol. Hung., 56,    25. AlAbdallah,Q., Ge,W. and Fortwendel,J.R. (2017) A simple and
   169–180.                                                              universal system for gene manipulation in Aspergillus fumigatus:
9. Kumar,A.K., Parikh,B.S., Singh,S.P. and Shah,D. (2015) Use of com-        in vitro-assembled Cas9-guide RNA ribonucleoproteins coupled
   bined UV and chemical mutagenesis treatment of Aspergillus       with microhomology repair templates. mSphere, 2, 6.
    terreus D34 for hyper-production of cellulose-degrading enzymes    26. Huang,X., Lu,X. and Li,-J.-J. (2014) Cloning, characterization and
   and enzymatic hydrolysis of mild-alkali pretreated rice straw.       application of a glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase pro-
    Bioresour. Bioprocess., 2, 35.                                      moter from Aspergillus terreus.  J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol.,  41,
10. Huang,X., Chen,M., Li,J. and Lu,X. (2016) Establishing an efficient       585–592.
   gene-targeting system in an itaconic-acid producing Aspergillus    27. Aamir,S. (2015) A rapid and efficient method of fungal genomic
    terreus strain. Biotechnol. Lett., 38, 1603–1610.                  DNA extraction, suitable for PCR based molecular methods. Plant
11. Shi,T.-Q., Gao,J., Wang,W.-J., Wang,K.-F., Xu,G.-Q., Huang,H. and        Pathol. Quar., 5, 74–81.
     Ji,X.-J. (2019) CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing in the  fila-    28. Yao,G., Chen,X., Han,Y., Zheng,H., Wang,Z. and Chen,J. (2022)
   mentous fungus Fusarium fujikuroi and its application in strain      Development of versatile and efficient genetic tools for the
   engineering for gibberellic acid production. ACS Synth Biol,  8,       marine-derived fungus Aspergillus terreus RA2905. Curr. Genet., 68,
   445–454.                                                           153–164.
12. Jiang,C.,  Lv,G.,  Tu,Y.,  Cheng,X.,  Duan,Y.,  Zeng,B. and  He,B.    29. Lin,S.,  Staahl,B.T.,  Alla,R.K. and Doudna,J.A. (2014) Enhanced
   (2021) Applications of CRISPR/Cas9 in the synthesis of sec-       homology-directed human genome engineering by controlled   ondary metabolites in filamentous fungi. Front. Microbiol., 12,       timing of CRISPR/Cas9 delivery. Elife, 3, e04766.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    https://academic.oup.com/synbio/article/7/1/ysac031/6874534
   638096.                                                                30. Acosta,S., Fiore,L., Carota,I.A. and Oliver,G. (2018) Use of two      by
13. Kück,U. and Hoff,B. (2010) New tools for the genetic manip-     GRNAs for CRISPR/Cas9 improves bi-allelic homologous recom-
   ulation  of filamentous  fungi. Appl.  Microbiol.  Biotechnol.,  86,       bination efficiency in mouse embryonic stem cells. Genesis, 56,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ocean
   51–62.                                                              e23212.
14. Horvath,P. and Barrangou,R. (2010) CRISPR/Cas, the immune sys-    31. DiStazio,M., Foschi,N., Athanasakis,E., Gasparini,P., d’Adamo,A.P.
  tem of bacteria and archaea. Science, 327, 167–170.                 and Galli,A. (2021) Systematic analysis of factors that improve15. Paul,N.C., Park,S.-W., Liu,H., Choi,S., Ma,J., MacCready,J.S., Chil-      homologous direct repair (HDR) efficiency in CRISPR/Cas9 tech-                               University
                                                                                                                                    of
   vers,M.I. and Sang,H. (2021) Plant and fungal genome editing to       nique. PLoS One, 16, e0247603.
   enhance plant disease resistance using the CRISPR/Cas9 system.    32. Corsi,G.I., Qu,K., Alkan,F., Pan,X., Luo,Y. and Gorodkin,J. (2022)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          China    Front. Plant Sci., 12, 700925.                                       CRISPR/Cas9 GRNA activity depends on free energy changes and
16. Wei,T.-Y., Wu,Y.-J., Xie,Q.-P., Tang,J.-W., Yu,Z.-T., Yang,S.-B. and      on the target PAM context. Nat. Commun., 13, 3006.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        user
   Chen,S.-X. (2020) CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing in the fila-    33. Bruegmann,T., Deecke,K. and Fladung,M. (2019) Evaluating the      on
   mentous fungus Glarea lozoyensis and its application in manipu-        efficiency of GRNAs in CRISPR/Cas9 mediated genome editing in      28
   lating gloF. ACS Synth. Biol., 9, 1968–1977.                                poplars. Int. J. Mol. Sci., 20, 15.
17. DiCarlo,J.E., Norville,J.E., Mali,P., Rios,X., Aach,J. and Church,G.M.    34. Doench,J.G., Hartenian,E., Graham,D.B., Tothova,Z., Hegde,M.,   (2013) Genome engineering  in Saccharomyces  cerevisiae using        Smith,I., Sullender,M., Ebert,B.L., Xavier,R.J. and Root,D.E. (2014)                      January
   CRISPR-Cas              systems.                          Nucleic                               Acids Res.,                                         41,                                          4336–4343.                                                                        Rational                                                                               design                                                                                               of  highly                                                                                                          active                                                                                         sgRNAs                                                                                                                                for
                                                                                                                CRISPR-Cas9-            202618.    Liu,R.,  Chen,L.,                        Jiang,Y.,                           Zhou,Z.                               and                                         Zou,G.                                                     (2015) Efficient                                                                mediated gene                                                                                              inactivation.                                                                                                       Nat.                                                                                                                              Biotechnol.,                                                                                                                     32,                                                                                                                 1262–1267.
  genome editing in filamentous fungus Trichoderma reesei using the    35. Wong,N., Liu,W. and Wang,X. (2015) WU-CRISPR: characteristics of
   CRISPR/Cas9 system. Cell Discov., 1, 15007.                             functional guide RNAs for the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Genome Biol.,
19. Matsu-Ura,T., Baek,M., Kwon,J. and Hong,C. (2015) Efficient gene       16, 218.
   editing in Neurospora crassa with CRISPR technology. Fungal Biol.    36. Zhang,K., Su,-Y.-Y. and Cai,L. (2013) An optimized protocol of
    Biotechnol., 2, 4.                                                           single spore isolation for fungi. Cryptogam. Mycol., 34, 349–356.