
[PDF physical page 1]
                                         Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation 35 (2004) 17–24

                                                                                                              www.elsevier.com/locate/yprep


         Expression cloned cDNA for 10-deacetylbaccatin
 III-10-O-acetyltransferase in Escherichia coli: a comparative study
                      of three fusion systems

                          Jianjun Fanga,* and Dietrich Ewaldb

                                                 a School of Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK
                b Institute for Forest Genetics and Forest Tree Breeding, Eberswalder Chaussee 3, Waldsieversdorf D-15377, Germany

                                      Received 24 July 2003, and in revised form 8 December 2003




Abstract

   10-Deacetylbaccatin III-10-O-acetyltransferase (10-DABT) catalyzes the formation of baccatin III, which is an immediate dit-
erpenoid precursor of Taxol. A cDNA encoding 10-DABT was cloned from Taxus baccata by using RT-PCR and screening a
cDNA library. A study of its heterologous overexpression in Escherichia coli was carried out. To get high-level expression of re-
combinant enzyme, three kinds of IPTG inducible fusion expression systems (with glutathione S-transferase (GST), hexahistidine
(6   His), and biotinylated tag) were used, and results of expression were compared. Fusion 10-DABT with diﬀerent tags was
expressed with diverse expression levels and solubility in the three systems. Optimum IPTG concentration, temperature, and in-
ducing time for producing recombinant enzymes were found. Under higher IPTG concentration (up to 1 mM), the highest level of
expression for fusion protein was obtained in the 6  His fusion system with phage T5 promoter, but expressed products were only
partially soluble. With lower IPTG concentration (less than 0.5 mM), the highest expression was detected in the GST fusion system
with tac promoter, and the lowest level of expression appeared in the biotinylated fusion system. The expression level in the latter
system did not diﬀer dramatically with a range of diﬀerent inducer concentrations. GST and 6  His fusion proteins were mainly
soluble in aqueous solutions and Triton X-100 improved the solubility of biotinylated fusion proteins (inferring this protein is
membrane-associated). Fusion proteins could only be partially puriﬁed by a single aﬃnity chromatography step for all three sys-
tems. Glutathione-coupled matrix and streptavidin-conjugated resin have higher speciﬁcity than Ni–NTA resin, and elution con-
ditions were shown to aﬀect enzyme activity. Three kinds of recombinant 10-DABT with diﬀerent tags showed enzyme activity, but
total enzyme activity was lost as a result of the aﬃnity chromatography step. Thrombin and Factor Xa could be used for site-speciﬁc
cleavage of fusion proteins, but the incubation temperature aﬀected enzyme activity of recombinant enzymes.
  2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.


Keywords: Fusion protein; Taxol biosynthesis; 10-Deacetylbaccatin III-10-O-acetyltransferase; Baccatin III; Taxus baccata



   10-Deacetylbaccatin  III-10-O-acetyltransferase  (10-      III (10-DAB) with acetyl-coenzyme A to form baccatin
DABT)1 catalyzes the acetylation of 10-deacetylbaccatin       III, which  is the immediate diterpenoid precursor of
                                                         Taxol. Taxol (paclitaxel), ﬁrst isolated from the bark of
                                                        Paciﬁc yew (Taxus brevifolia), is well established as a
    * Corresponding author. Fax: +44-113-343-2835.                                                         potent chemotherapeutic drug that  is eﬀective in the
   E-mail address: bgyjfang@leeds.ac.uk (J. Fang).
    1                                                      treatment of range of cancers, and has been approved to     Abbreviations used: 10-DABT, 10-deacetylbaccatin III-10-O-ace-
tyltransferase; 10-DAB, 10-deacetylbaccatin  III; GST, glutathione      treat breast, ovarian, and lung cancers, even AIDS-re-
S-transferase; 6   His, hexahistidine; SDS, sodium dodecyl sulfate;      lated Kaposi s sarcoma [1,2]. The reaction from 10-DAB
PAGE, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; IPTG, isopropyl-b-D-1-     to baccatin III is a key step, because the supply of Taxol
thiogalactopyranoside;   LB,    Luria–Bertani   medium;   DTT,       is currently largely sustained by semisynthetic means in
dithiothreitol; EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; PMSF, phenyl-
                                                    which 10-DAB isolated from yew needles  is used tomethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride; PBS, phosphate-buﬀered saline; IMAC, immo-
bilized metal ion aﬃnity chromatography; ORF, open-reading frame;     produce Taxol and the closely related analogue Taxo-
Ni–NTA, Ni2þ–nitrilotriacetic acid; TLC, thin layer chromatography.       tere. 10-DAB is available in suﬃcient quantities (0.1%)


1046-5928/$ - see front matter   2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pep.2003.12.005


[PDF physical page 2]
18                                       J. Fang, D. Ewald / Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation 35 (2004) 17–24

from  needles and bark, while the concentration of     Access RT-PCR introductory System (Promega) under
baccatin III and Taxol is very low (0.004%) [3]. Semi-     manufacturer s instructions. After analyzing a conserved
synthetic production of baccatin III involves protection     motif of plant origin acetyltransferase [10], degenerate
of the 7-hydroxyl of 10-DAB and chemical acetylation of     primers were designed. According to HXXXDG up-
the 10-hydroxyl to give 7-O-protected baccatin III. The     stream conserved sequence RFTCGGF, 18-fold degen-
method involves many steps and is expensive [4]. How-      erate forward primer: 50 C(G/A )(I/C/A)TTT ACA TGT
ever, a biosynthetic approach to yield Taxol by using   GGA GGT TT(I/C/A) 30; according to DFGWG and
enzyme catalysis could eliminate complicated steps and     nearby sequence, 6-fold degenerate reverse primer: 50
reduce production costs. Activity of 10-DABT was ﬁrst   TCC CCA CCC AAA GTC (I/C/A)(A/G)CT 30.
detected from crude cell free extracts of roots of Taxus       Through RT-PCR, an amplicon of about 680 bp was
baccata [5]. A partially puriﬁed enzyme had been isolated     obtained, which was separated by agarose gel electro-
from cultured Taxus chinensis and Taxus cuspidata cells      phoresis, and the product was extracted from the gel by
[6,7]. It has proved diﬃcult to prepare large amounts of     using QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen). The RT-
this enzyme from natural sources, for the puriﬁcation   PCR product was ligated into PCR 2.1-TOPO vector
was rather complex and only yielded a small amount of      (Invitrogen) and transformed into E. coli TOP 10 F0 cells
protein with low activity, so  it could not be used for    (TOPO TA Cloning Kit, Invitrogen). Plasmid DNA was
large-scale production. However, the gene encoding 10-     prepared from 8 positively transformed colonies and
DABT was cloned recently. If the gene can be strongly     plasmid DNA was extracted by using a QIAprep Spin
expressed in a soluble and active form, using a biosyn-     Miniprep Kit (Qiagen). Inserts were fully sequenced and
thetic approach to produce baccatin III is feasible.         one  colony  was  inserted  as  expected  (designated
  For scalable production of recombinant proteins,    pPDAB). After sequencing by blast analysis (by using
Escherichia coli is perhaps the most often-recommended     GenBank), it was found that the fragment had a high
expression  system.  Genetically  fused aﬃnity  fusion      identity with acetyltransferase of plant origin, so the
partners are widely used to express recombinant pro-     amplicon was used as a probe to screen the cDNA library.
teins in E. coli, because fusion partners with high aﬃnity
for a speciﬁc ligand make it much more easy to purify    cDNA cloning and sequencing
fusion protein from hundreds of proteins. Today a large
number of diﬀerent fusion systems are available. How-       For cDNA library construction, 20 g T. baccata roots
ever, dramatic diﬀerences in expression levels and solu-      treated with methyl jasmonate were used for total RNA
bility of fusion proteins are often realized in diﬀerent      isolation. About 4 lg of mRNA was puriﬁed from total
expression systems [8].                     RNA and this material was used to construct a cDNA
   Success in expressing certain genes depends mainly on      library using a ZAP-cDNA synthesis kit (Stratagene).
chance and the experience of the researchers. Here, we    The cDNA was extended with EcoRI adapters prior to
report results of experiments on how to express re-      ligation into the kZAP II vector (Stratagene) and the
combinant 10-DABT enzymes. To get high-level ex-     phagemids were packaged with ZAP-cDNA Gigapack
pression of the enzymes, three kinds of fusion systems      III Gold Cloning Kit (Stratagene). A cDNA library of
with isopropyl-b-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) in-     4  105 recombinants was screened by in situ plaque
ducible promoters were used. The fusion partners were     hybridization with 32P labelled probe (Random Primers
GST (glutathione S-transferase) tag, hexahistidine fu-   DNA Labeling System, Gibco-BRL). The hybridization
sion (6  His) tag, and a biotinylated peptide tag, and a    was performed at 68 C for 20 h in 6  SSC, 5  Den-
comparison of expression was made between the diﬀer-     hardt s solution, 0.5% SDS, and 100 lg/ml heat-dena-
ent expression systems.                                    tured salmon sperm DNA. The ﬁlters were washed three
                                                           times with 2  SSC and 0.1% SDS at 65 C for 30 min.
                                                         Hybridizing phages were plaque-puriﬁed through two
Materials and methods                                       further rounds of screening, yielding 8 clones that car-
                                                                ried inserts about 1.3 kb in length. The cDNA inserts
RT-PCR and cloning                                   were rescued in pBluescript SK following the in vivo
                                                              excision protocol for kZAP and subjected to sequencing
   Materials for experiment were the roots of T. baccata     by  the  dideoxy  chain  termination  procedure  using
saplings that had been induced to maximal Taxol pro-    modiﬁed T7 DNA polymerase.
duction with methyl jasmonate for 24 h (because the
production of Taxol is highly inducible in this system,     Construction of expressing plasmids
unpublished data). A protocol for isolation of total
RNA was as per Walker et al. [9]. Poly(A)þ mRNA was    GST system
puriﬁed from total RNA by using an Oligotex mRNA      Among  three  vectors  of pGEX-4T  (Pharmacia
Kit (Qiagen). RT-PCR was carried out by using an     Biotech, fusion tag: GST; promoter: tac; and cleavage


[PDF physical page 3]
                                         J. Fang, D. Ewald / Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation 35 (2004) 17–24                              19

agent: Xa) pGEX-4T-1 vector was chosen to express the      Biotinylated fusion system
10-DABT gene. Both pBluescript SK/10-DABT and      From three PinPoint Xa vectors (Promega, fusion
pGEX-4T-1 plasmid DNA were digested with EcoRI      tag: biotin; promoter: tac; cleavage agent: thrombin)
and XhoI restriction enzyme, and the linearized DNA     PinPoint Xa-2 was selected in the experiment. Using
was separated by electrophoresis in agrose. The linear-     methods similar to above, a BamHI and NotI fragment
ized pGEX DNA and insert DNA was at a vector to     containing the coding region of 10-DBAT (from pGEX/
insert molar ratio of 3:1, ligation was catalysed by T4    10-DABT) was subcloned into the vector PinPoint Xa-2
DNA Ligase (New England), and incubated for 15 min     (Promega) digested by same restriction enzyme. Liga-
at room temperature. The ligation reaction was used to      tion, transformation, and sequence analysis were carried
transform INVaF0 (Invitrogen) competent cells, positive     out as above, with preparation of competent cells based
colonies were selected and plasmid DNA was extracted.    on the procedure of Chung et al. [11].
Putative colonies were selected, the inserts were fully
sequenced, expected ligation referred to be pGEX/10-     Condition of cell cultures
DABT (Fig. 1), this plasmid DNA were used to trans-
form BL21 (DE3) (Novagen) and JM109 (Promega)       For all three systems, 1–5 ml of medium (GST fusion:
component cells, and the desired colonies were obtained.     2  YT; 6  His and biotinylated: LB, in order to in-
                                                             crease biotinylated fusion protein, with 2 lM biotin
6  His system                                       added for the biotinylated fusion system [12]) containing
  From three pQE vectors (Qiagen, fusion tag: 6  His;     appropriate antibiotic was inoculated with a freshly
promoter: Phage T5 promoter and two lac operator),      isolated bacterial colony of the host strain carrying re-
pQE-32 was selected to express the 10-DABT gene. Both     combinant vectors. The cultures were incubated over-
pQE-32 and pBluescript SK/10-DABT DNA were di-     night at 37 C with shaking, and were then diluted
gested with SalI  restriction enzymes. The  linearized     1:100 in 500 ml of fresh medium containing antibiotic in
DNA  was  dephosphorylated  by  bacterial  alkaline     a 1000 ml ﬂask before additional incubation at 30 C
phosphatase (MBI Fermentas), incubated at 60 C for     with shaking until an OD value of 0.7 was reached.
60 min, then Proteinase K was added to a ﬁnal con-    IPTG was added at a range of concentrations and cul-
centration of 1 mg/ml. Further incubation was carried      tures were grown for 7 h at a range of temperatures.
out for 30 min at 37 C, the DNA was extracted with
phenol/chloroform and precipitated in ethanol. Liga-     Protein extraction
tion, transformation, and sequence analysis were carried        Cell pellets of three fusion systems were suspended in
out as above.                                         10 volumes of cell lysis buﬀer: PBS, pH 7.4, 5 mM DTT,





Fig. 1. Vector maps and the promoter regions sequence of GST and biotinylated fusion system vectors. (A) The vector maps are shown as circular
drawings. The most important regulatory elements and encoded genes are indicated. Arrows indicate the direction of transcription. (B) The pro-
moters are marked as original numbers of vectors and underlined in the DNA sequence.


[PDF physical page 4]
20                                       J. Fang, D. Ewald / Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation 35 (2004) 17–24

1 mM benzamidine–HCl, 1 mM PMSF, and were lysed      (Schleicher &  Schuell,  Germany).  (Electrophoresis
in a French press at 1000 psi. Soluble and insoluble cell      transfer buﬀer: glycine19 1 mM; Tris base 24.8 mM; and
fractions were separated by centrifugation at 14,000g for     methanol 20%.) Western blots for the three systems were
15 min, the supernatant was treated with 0.2% polyeth-      carried out by a general method, following manufac-
yleneimine and stirred for 15 min to remove nucleic ac-      turer s instructions. Antibody for GST fusion protein:
ids, followed by centrifugation again. Supernatants were     anti-GST antibody (Pharmacia Biotech) and anti-goat
used as crude extracts.                             IgG alkaline phosphatase conjugate (Sigma); 6   His
                                                            fusion protein: Penta-His antibody (Qiagen) and anti-
Cell fractionation and SDS–PAGE                     mouse IgG (Sigma); biotinylated fusion protein: strep-
                                                               tavidin-alkaline phosphatase (Promega).
   Solubility of fusion protein was tested by the method
of Thomas and Vasina [13,14]. Samples used for elec-     Enzymatic activity assay
trophoresis were prepared from 150 ml cultures grown
and induced as described above. Following IPTG in-       Assays were performed as in the methods of refer-
duction, ﬂasks were transferred to 16, 20, 25, 30, or     ences [5–7]: crude or puriﬁed proteins were desalted by
37 C. After 7 h, 1 ml aliquots of whole cells were pel-     passage through a Sephadex G25 column (Pharmacia),
leted and resuspended in 1  SDS loading buﬀer. Other     puriﬁed fusion protein were desalted and concentrated
cells were collected, disrupted, and fractionated into     by ultraﬁltration through a centricon YM-100  ﬁlter
soluble and insoluble fractions as described above. The     (Amicon). One hundred microliters of crude extract or
soluble fractions were assayed for 10-DABT activity,     puriﬁed recombinant enzymes was mixed with 20 lM
and aliquots were precipitated with methanol/chloro-    10-DAB  and  20 lM  acetyl-coenzyme A  (including
form for SDS–PAGE analysis [15]. The insoluble frac-      0.5 lCi [1-14C]acetyl-CoA). After incubation for 1 h at
tions were  directly resuspended in 1  SDS loading     30 C, 1 ml of water was added and the mixture was
buﬀer and incubated at 95 C for 5 min. Samples of      extracted with 2 ml of chloroform. The organic layer
whole cells, soluble and insoluble fractions correspond-    was evaporated and the residue was dissolved in 50 ll
ing to identical amounts of culture, were fractionated on    EtOH and subjected to TLC (thin layer chromatogra-
10% SDS–PAGE gels and visualized by Coomassie blue     phy) on silica gel 60 F254 plates (Merck) to separate
or silver staining. Concentrations of total protein were     Baccatin  III. The  solvent system used was EtOAc/
determined by the Bradford method, and concentrations    MeOH/water   (100:5:1,v/v/v). A   single  radioactive
of fusion proteins were determined by comparing sam-     product, Rf  0.58–0.61, [14C]Baccatin  III, was identi-
ples with standard molecular markers.                   ﬁed by an automatic TLC-Linear analyzer (Berthold
                                                       Tracemaster 20, Berthold Systems, Pittsburgh, PA). In
Protein puriﬁcation                                       order to calculate activity, after incubation 2 ml water
  Aﬃnity chromatography was carried out on three    was added, then the mixture was extracted with 2 ml
systems, following manufacturer s instructions. Super-    EtOAc, 100 ll organic layer was transferred into a 20 ml
natants from  biotinylated  fusion were loaded onto      scintillation  vial containing 4 ml counting ﬂuor (Lu-
SoftLink resin columns (3 ml column volume), washed    masafeTM Advanced safety Lsc cocktail, Lumac, lsc,
with 20 ml lysis buﬀer, and eluted with 3 ml of the same     Netherlands), and radioactivity was measured in a liquid
buﬀer containing 5 mM biotin. Crude GST fusion pro-      scintillation counter (Wallac1409, Finland).
teins were loaded onto glutathione–Sepharose 4B col-
umns  (2 ml column  volume), washed  with 10 bed
volumes of lysis buﬀer, and eluted with 4 ml of the same      Results
buﬀer containing 10 mM reduced glutathione. Super-
natants of 6  His fusion protein were mixed with Ni–     Gene clone
NTA agarose (1 ml 50% Ni–NTA slurry to 4 ml lysate)
shaked (200 rpm on a rotary shaker) at 4 C for 60 min.     An amplicon about 680 bp was obtained by RT-PCR,
The lysate–Ni–NTA mixture was loaded onto a column,    and  after cloning and sequencing,  blast analysis by
washed with 10 bed volumes of  lysis buﬀer contain    Genebank showed  it to be a part of the putative 10-
12 mM imidazole (after test, His tagged 10-DABT was     deacetylbaccatin III-10-O-transacetylase. This amplicon
speciﬁcally bound with Ni–NTA resin in the buﬀer    was used to screen a cDNA library constructed from
containing 10–14 mM imidazole), then eluted with the   mRNA  isolated from methyl jasmonate-induced  T.
same buﬀer containing 250 mM imidazole (optimized).      baccata roots, from which the full-length cDNA of 10-
                                    DABT was obtained. After cloning and sequencing blast
Western blot techniques                                       analysis was carried out by Genebank, and the fragment
  Following electrophoresis the proteins were trans-    was shown to have 98% identity with 10-DABT from T.
ferred by electroblotting onto a nitrocellulose membrane      cuspidata  [16], which  bears an  open-reading frame


[PDF physical page 5]
                                         J. Fang, D. Ewald / Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation 35 (2004) 17–24                              21

(ORF) of 1320 nucleotides (GenBank Accession No.     (up to 1 mM) the expression rate was higher for the 6
AF456342) and encodes a deduced protein of 440 amino     His system than for the GST or biotinylated fusion
acids, with a calculated molecular weight of 49,085 Da.     systems. Concentration of IPTG was a critical factor for
When compared with the amino acid sequence infor-     the 6  His system; when the concentration was down to
mation from the peptide fragments of T. cuspidata, the      0.5 mM expression level of 6  His fusion protein was
deduced 10-DBAT sequence from T. baccata exhibits a     very low. For the GST fusion system, when IPTG was at
very close match (97% identity); the minor diﬀerences     a higher concentration (more then 5 mM) GST fusion
are likely attributable to the species diﬀerence or to al-     protein was expressed at a higher level, but cell growth
lelic variation. This sequence resembles those of other    was decreased and the fusion protein was unstable and
acetyltransferases or  benzoyltransferases  involved  in       its enzymic activity decreased very quickly. Often only
diﬀerent pathways of secondary metabolism in plants     separate GST was puriﬁed from the aﬃnity column,
(Arabidopsis thaliana, Nicotiana tabacum, Dianthus car-      instead of fusion protein. When the IPTG concentration
yophyllus, Clarkia breweri, and Catharanthus roseus).    was lowered to 0.2–0.3 mM the expression level did not
The  deduced ORF  contains  a  highly  conserved      signiﬁcantly decrease. No evident changes were detected
HXXXDG motif, which involved in binding or ca-      for biotinylated fusion protein when inducer concen-
talysis involved the common acyl-CoA corresponding      tration was varied.
substrates.
                                                        Inﬂuence of temperature on the solubility of fusion protein
10-DABT expressed in three fusion systems                     All kinds of E. coli cells transformed with the three
                                                         kinds of vectors were cultured under a range of tem-
  The open reading frame of 10-DABT was subcloned     peratures from 16 to 37 C, and expression level and
into three expression vectors and transformed E. coli      solubility of recombinant proteins were compared. Re-
bacteria.  All  kinds  of  crude  cell  extracts showed      sults indicated that temperature was a more important
10-DABT activities. Combining SDS–PAGE gel, assay      factor for the GST and biotinylated fusion systems.
and Western blot results fusion proteins were obtained    Most of the recombinant enzyme existed in the soluble
with GST, 6   His, and biotin tag.                           fraction when cells were cultured at lower than 30 C,
                                                       but the temperature should not be too low (lower than
Optimizing conditions for fusion protein expression          18 C) because at low temperature cells grew poorly.
                                                             After  inducing,  approximately 80%  recombinant
Eﬀect  of  diﬀerent IPTG concentration on expression     protein was synthesized within 4–8 h at 20–30 C. Pro-
levels                                                     longing culture time gave no evident increase in the
  In order to establish an optimum inducer concen-     amounts of fusion proteins.
tration, cells were cultured with a range of IPTG con-     No diﬀerence was found for expression level of fusion
centrations (Fig. 2). With higher inducer concentration     protein between the two component cells, except that
                                             BL21 (DE3) cells grew much faster than JM109 cells.
                                                              Several kinds of detergents were added to the ex-
                                                               traction buﬀer in order to improve the solubility of fu-
                                                            sion protein, 1% Triton-100, 1% Tween 20, and 0.1%
                                                  sodium deoxycholate. When Triton-100 was used in the
                                                                         lysis buﬀer the amount of soluble biotinylated fusion
                                                            protein doubled, but there was not a similar eﬀect for
                                       GST and 6  His fusion proteins.

                                                    Comparison of expression level
                                                       Fusion proteins with diﬀerent tags could be detected
                                                                in all three systems. However, their expression levels
                                                     were diverse. In order to compare the expression level
                                                 and solubility, the amounts of total or soluble expressed
                                                            fusion proteins were estimated by comparing SDS–
                                     PAGE results for whole cells and the soluble fraction.
                                                The results indicate that cells induced with 1 mM IPTG
Fig. 2. Eﬀect of the diﬀerent IPTG concentration on expression levels      for 7 h at 25 C, with PBS as the lysis buﬀer, and with the
of fusion proteins. Data are based on protein from a 500-ml culture,       cells disrupted by a French press, the highest expression
cells extracted with 100 ml buﬀer: ﬁlled bars denote expressed fusion
                                                                rate occurred in the 6  His fusion system (Fig. 3). Thisproteins  under IPTG  1.0 mM;  striped  bars  denote  expressed
fusion proteins under IPTG 0.5 mM; and open bars denote expressed    was 3.2% of the total overall expression, but fusion
fusion proteins under IPTG 0.1 mM.                               protein was mainly expressed in insoluble form (25%


[PDF physical page 6]
22                                       J. Fang, D. Ewald / Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation 35 (2004) 17–24





Fig. 3. Comparison on expression rates of the three fusion systems.
Data are based on protein from a 500-ml culture, cells extracted with
100 ml buﬀer: ﬁlled bars denote total expressed fusion proteins; open
bars denote soluble fusion proteins.
                                                                             Fig. 4. SDS–PAGE analysis of fusion proteins in bacterial extracts.
                                                             Lane M, molecular weight markers; lane 1, crude extracts of BL21
soluble). There was a comparatively higher expression      (DE3) transformed with pGEX/10-DABT; lane 2, partially puriﬁed
rate for GST fusion protein (1.8%), the fusion protein    GST fusion proteins after a single glutathione–Sepharose 4B column
occurring mainly in soluble form (about 80% of ex-       (position of GST fusion protein is indicated by the arrow, calculated
pressed fusion protein). Expression rate for biotinylated      molecular weight 77,170 Da); lane 3, crude extracts of JM109 trans-
                                                                formed with pQE/10-DABT; lane 4, partially puriﬁed 6  His fusion
fusion was the lowest value (0.53%) and here the fusion       proteins after a single Ni–NTA agarose column (position of 6  His
protein was mainly in an insoluble form (40% soluble).       fusion protein is indicated by the arrow, calculated molecular weight
                                                                       51,766 Da); lane 5, crude extracts of BL21 (DE3) transformed with
Comparison of the puriﬁcation eﬃciency of three aﬃnity      PinPoint Xa/10-DABT; and lane 6, partially puriﬁed biotinaylated
chromatography systems                                             fusion proteins after a single SoftLink Soft Release Avidin Resin
                                                              column (position of biotinylated fusion protein is indicated by the
   After a single aﬃnity chromatography step the fusion      arrow, calculated molecular weight 64,251 Da).
proteins were only partly puriﬁed for all three systems.
SDS–PAGE  gels showed contaminant bands for  all
puriﬁed  proteins, even though many attempts were     assay results (Table 1), all the fusion proteins showed
made to optimize binding and elution conditions ac-      activity. Though fusion proteins were puriﬁed many fold
cording to manufacturer s instructions (Fig.  4). The      after aﬃnity chromatography, this step largely failed to
presence of tagged 10-DABT was conﬁrmed by Western     improve speciﬁc activity. With GST fusion 10-DABT,
blotting. For GST fusion protein, 40% of the puriﬁed      for example, a several-fold increase in the scale of pu-
products were fusion protein, and separate GST protein      riﬁcation only marginally improved speciﬁc activity. We
often co-puriﬁed in this step;  it was 60 and 20% for      tried to cleave GST tag with thrombin, and cut the bi-
biotinylated and 6  His systems, respectively.               otin tag with Factor Xa, but the products showed no
                                                                     activity.
Activity                                            The recombinant enzymes exhibited a pH optimum at
                                                                     7.4, with half maximal activities at 6.0 and 8.0, respec-
   All recombinant 10-DABT catalysed the regio-spe-      tively. The optimal temperature for the reaction was at
ciﬁc acetylation at the 10-position of 10-DAB. From     30 C. For 6  His tagged 10-DABT, the Km values for



Table 1
Puriﬁcation and activity of fusion proteins

  Fusion systems  Sample                               Total activity    Total protein    Speciﬁc activity    Yield (%)    Puriﬁcation
                                                       (nmol/min)      (mg)            (nmol/min/mg)                   fold

  GST           Crude soluble extract                   2.308            187.00          0.0123             (100)         1.00
                  Puriﬁed by glutathione–Sepharose 4B   0.046               2.86          0.0161             1.99          1.31
                column

  6  His         Crude soluble extract                   2.567            220.00          0.0117             (100)         1.00
                  Puriﬁed by Ni–NTA agarose column    0.043               1.76          0.0244             1.68          2.09

  Biotinylated     Crude soluble extract                   0.215            234.00          0.0009             (100)         1.00
                  Puriﬁed by SoftLink Soft Release       0.003               0.49          0.0061             1.40          6.80
                  Avidin Resin


[PDF physical page 7]
                                         J. Fang, D. Ewald / Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation 35 (2004) 17–24                              23

acetyl CoA and 10-DAB were calculated from the Li-     E. coli [19]. Another important reason could lie in the
neweaver–Burk plot to be 8.5 and 11 lM, respectively.       speciﬁcity of certain resins. The puriﬁcation eﬃciency of
                                                            the three aﬃnity chromatography systems can be com-
                                                      pared roughly: the glutathione-coupled matrix and the
Discussion                                                  streptavidin-conjugated resin had higher speciﬁcity than
                                         Ni–NTA resin. In other words, GST or biotin fusion
  Diﬀerent expression results were obtained for the     protein are more speciﬁc to the resin type than the
same gene expressed in diﬀerent systems. Expression was      polyhistidine fusion protein; non-speciﬁc binding for
related  to promoters,  location  of expressed  foreign   IMAC (immobilized metal ion aﬃnity chromatography)
proteins within cells, and also the reaction between fu-     columns is one of the drawbacks of polyhistidine tags
sion tag and expressed protein.                                    [20]. Theoretically fusion protein can be puriﬁed to near
                                                     homogeneity from crude biological mixtures by a single
Comparison of the vectors of three fusion systems           aﬃnity chromatography step, but practically there are
                                                                                      still some problems yet to be solved. In order to get
  Comparing the three fusion systems, for 6  His fu-     highly puriﬁed fusion protein, some puriﬁcation steps
sion system the pQE vector consisted of phage T5 pro-    was needed, gel ﬁltration for example.
moter and was regulated by two lac operator elements,      The evident loss of total activity as a result of aﬃnity
while both GST and biotinylated fusion systems used     chromatography has been reported in similar studies
tac promoter. With higher inducer concentration (up to       [21]. A possible explanation is that denaturing condi-
IPTG 1 mM), 6  His fusion protein could be expressed      tions during aﬃnity chromatography could aﬀect enzy-
at a higher level, but with lower inducer concentration     mic activity. With the biotinylated fusion system, for
(less than 0.5 mM), the system worked poorly. It can be     example, elution from avidin-conjugated resins often
deduced that with enough inducer the tac promoter was      requires denaturing conditions because the interaction
more sensitive than phage T5 promoter, but phage T5     between biotin and streptavidin is so strong, and this
was stronger. Higher inducer concentration is a pitfall     could inﬂuence enzymic activity. From the study on the
for a system, which limits the usefulness, especially for     natural enzyme at room temperature, 10-DABT was not
production on a large scale [17]. With the same tac      stable and its activity dropped quickly. Generally, af-
promoter, a higher expression rate was seen in GST, but     ﬁnity tags could be separated by site-speciﬁc cleavage.
not  in the biotinylated fusion system. Aligning the   We tried to cleave GST tag using thrombin, and Factor
nucleotide sequence of pGEX-4T-1 and PinPoint Xa-2    Xa to cut the biotin tag, but the products showed no
vector showed that they shared an identical promoter      activity. Both thrombin and Factor Xa worked at room
region (pGEX-4T-1: 177–252, PinPoint Xa-2: 3203–     temperature, so perhaps this temperature is a key in-
3283, Fig. 1), and this includes tac promoter, lac oper-     ﬂuence on enzyme activity. The temperature  is often
ator, and ribosome binding site. However, comparing     ignored in manufacturer s instructions. In this study, the
the  distance between Shine–Dalgarno sequence and     aﬃnity tags could be left on the target protein for the
initiating ATG cordon this is much longer for PinPoint      biological activity of the target protein was unaﬀected
Xa-2 vector than pGEX-4T-1 vectors, and this is be-     by the aﬃnity fusion partners.
lieved to aﬀect the translation eﬃciency [8,18].             What we demonstrated  is that a large quantity of
  Fusion tags could aﬀect the location of expressed      soluble fusion proteins with activity could be expressed
foreign protein. In this study, Triton-100 seemed to af-      in certain systems which were selected; cost of produc-
fect the solubility of biotinylated fusion protein, while      tion can still be reduced, of course. From this research it
no eﬀects were seen on the other two fusion proteins.       is clear that every system has both advantages and dis-
Biotinylated protein was inferred to be membrane-as-     advantages. GST tag is one of the most common and
sociated. E.  coli gram negative bacteria contain two      oldest aﬃnity puriﬁcation methods. In recent years,
membranes (inner and outer membrane) and can be      polyhistidine fusion tags have grown  in popularity.
divided three compartments by these two membranes:     There are several reasons for this tag. Primarily, its small
cytoplasmic, periplasmic, and extracellular space. Fu-      size means the tag does not usually need to be cleaved
sion protein is normally expressed in the cytoplasm.       from the fusion protein. Also, researchers can purify 6
                                                      His fusions under denaturing conditions. Despite their
Comparison of three aﬃnity chromatography systems      many advantages, polyhistidine tags also show several
                                                           disadvantages. For example, formation of  inclusion
   Multiple bands were visible in the fusion proteins      bodies, diﬃculty in solubilization, lack of stability, and
puriﬁed by aﬃnity chromatography. This phenomenon     non-speciﬁc binding on the IMAC column. In this study
probably occurred because of partial degradation of     a high concentration of IPTG was needed for the 6  His
fusion proteins, or some bands were chaperonins in-     system, which is a disadvantage for large-scale produc-
volved in the proper folding of nascent proteins in      tion. In deciding which system should be used all factors


[PDF physical page 8]
24                                       J. Fang, D. Ewald / Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation 35 (2004) 17–24

must  be  balanced,  including  the  amounts  of  re-          [7] J.J. Pennington, A.G. Fett-neto, S.A. Nicholson, D.G.I. Kings-
combinant protein, activity, culture conditions, puriﬁ-            ton, F. Dicosmo, Acetyl CoA:  10-deacetylbaccatin  III-10-O-
                                                                                    acetyltransferase activity in leaves and cell suspension cultures
cation  and  cost,  especially  for  expression  on  an
                                                                               of Taxus cuspidata, Phytochemistry 49 (1998) 2261–2266.
industrial scale. This research may signiﬁcantly help in          [8] J. Sambrook, D.W. Russell, Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory
the selection of the system to be used.                            Manual, third ed., Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New
                                                                     York, 2001.
                                                                                                [9] K. Walker, A. Schoendorf, R. Croteau, Molecular cloning of a
                                                                                  taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-ol-O-acetyltransferase  cDNA   from
Acknowledgments
                                                                   Taxus and  functional  expression  in  Escherichia  coli,  Arch.
                                                                      Biochem. Biophys. 374 (2000) 371–380.
  This study was supported in part by a Biosciences        [10] B. St-Pierre, V. De Luca, Evolution of acyltransferase genes: origin
Special Programme of German Academic Exchange         and diversiﬁcation of the BAHD super family of acyltransferase
Service (Deutscher Akademischer Austausch  Dienst,           involved in secondary metabolism, in: J.T. Romeo, R. Ibrahim, L.
                                                                              Varin, V. De Luca (Eds.), Recent Advances in Phytochemistry,
DAAD). The basis for the investigations was provided
                                                                                        vol. 34, Elsevier Science, Oxford, 2000, pp. 285–315.
by a DAAD scholarship (to J. Fang). We thank Dr. Hao        [11] C.T. Chung, S.L. Niemela, R.H. Miller, One-step preparation pf
Chen (Department  of Biomedical  Engineering, The          competent Escherichia coli: transformation and storage of bacte-
Johns Hopkins University) for helpful discussions as              rial cells in the same solution, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86
well as Dr. David J. Pilbeam (School of Biology, Uni-           (1989) 2172–2175.
                                                                                      [12] J. Tucker,   Grisshammer, Puriﬁcation of a  rat neuro-tensin
versity of Leeds) for critical reading of the manuscript.
                                                                               receptor expressed in Escherichia coli, Biochem. J. 317 (1996) 891–
                                                                               899.
                                                                                      [13] J.G. Thomas, F. Baneyx, Protein misfolding and inclusion body
References                                                             formation in recombinant Escherichia coli  cells overproducing
                                                                           heat-shock proteins, J. Biol. Chem. 271 (1996) 11141–11147.
 [1] E.K. Rowinsky, M.J.  Citardi, D.A. Noe, R.C. Donehower,        [14] J.A. Vasina, F. Baneyx, Expression of aggregation-prone recom-
    Sequence-dependent cytotoxic eﬀects due to combinations of           binant proteins at low temperatures: a comparative study of the
     cisplatin and the antimicrotubule agents taxol and vincristine, J.           Escherichia coli cspA and tac promoter systems, Protein Express.
    Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 119 (1993) 727–733.                                 Purif. 9 (1997) 211–218.
 [2] C. Sgadari, E. Toschi, C. Palladino, G. Barillari, D. Carlei, A.        [15] D. Wessel, U.I. Fl€ugge, A method for the quantitative recovery of
    Cereseto, C. Ciccolella, R. Yarchoan, P. Monini, M. Sturzl, B.           protein in dilute solution in the presence of detergents and lipids,
     Ensoli, Mechanism of paclitaxel activity in Kaposi s sarcoma, J.          Anal. Biochem. 138 (1984) 141–143.
    Immunol. 165 (2000) 509–517.                                              [16] K. Walker, R. Croteau, Molecular cloning of a 10-deacetylbac-
 [3] G.M. Cragg, S.A. Schepartz, M. Suﬀness, M.G. Grever, The taxol            catin III-10-O-acetyltransferase cDNA from Taxus and functional
    supply  crisis. New NCI  policies for handling the  large-scale           expression in Escherichia, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97 (2000)
    production of novel natural product anticancer and anti-HIV          583–587.
     agents, J. Nat. Prod. 56 (1993) 1657–1668.                                 [17] F. Baneyx, Recombinant protein expression in Escherichia coli,
 [4] J.N. Denis, A.E. Greene, D. Guenard, F. Gueritte-Voegelein, L.           Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 10 (1999) 411–421.
    Mangatal, P. Potier, A highly eﬃcient, practical approach to        [18] J.D.  Gralla, Promoter  recognition and mRNA  initiation by
    natural Taxol, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 110 (1988) 5917–5919.                   Escherichia coli, Meth. Enzymol. 185 (1990) 37–53.
 [5] R. Zocher, W. Weckwerth, C. Hacker, B. Kammer, T. Horn-        [19] A. Buchberger, H. Schroder, T. Hesterkamp, H.J. Schonfeld, B.
    bogen, D. Ewald, Biosynthesis of taxol: enzymatic acetylation of          Bukau,  Substrate  shuttling between  the DnaK and GroEL
    10-deacetylbaccatin III to baccatin III in crude extracts from roots           systems indicates a chaperone network promoting protein folding,
    of Taxus baccata, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 229 (1996)              J. Mol. Biol. 261 (1996) 328–333.
    16–20.                                                                         [20] A. Constans, Protein puriﬁcation II: aﬃnity tags, The Scientist 16
 [6] B. Menhard, M.H. Zenk, Puriﬁcation and characterization of           (2002) 37.
     acetyl coenzyme A: 10-hydroxytaxane O-acetyltransferase from        [21] D. Peters, R. Frank, W. Hengstenberg, Lactose-speciﬁc enzyme II
     cell suspension culture of Taxus chinensis, Phytochemistry 50           of the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent phospho-transferase sys-
    (1999) 763–774.                                                 tem of Staphylococcus aureus, Eur. J. Biochem. 228 (1995) 798–804.