
[PDF physical page 1]
       HHS Public Access
                 Author manuscript
             ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.

                Published in final edited form as:Author        ACSChemBiol. 2018 November 16; 13(11): 3193–3205. doi:10.1021/acschembio.8b00679.

          Hybrid Transcription Factor Engineering Activates the SilentManuscript       Secondary Metabolite Gene Cluster for (+)-Asperlin in
          Aspergillus nidulans

              Michelle F. Grau†, Ruth Entwistle‡, Yi-Ming Chiang†,§, Manmeet Ahuja‡,∇, C. Elizabeth
              Oakley‡, Tomohiro Akashi∥, Clay C. C. Wang*,†,⊥, Richard B. Todd*,#, and Berl R. Oakley*,‡
              †Department of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
              Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, United StatesAuthor              ‡Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas 66045, United
               States

              §Department of Pharmacy, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and Science, Tainan City 71710,
              TaiwanManuscript
                 ∥Division of OMICS analysis, Center for Neurological Diseases and Cancer, Nagoya University
              Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan

             ⊥Department of Chemistry, University of Southern California, Dornsife College of Letters, Arts,
             and Sciences, Los Angeles, California 90089, United States

              #Department of Plant Pathology, Kansas State University, 4024 Throckmorton Plant Sciences
               Center, Manhattan, KS 66506, United StatesAuthor
            Abstract
                   Fungi are a major source of valuable bioactive secondary metabolites (SMs). These compounds
                      are synthesized by enzymes encoded by genes that are clustered in the genome. The vast majority
                     of SM biosynthetic gene clusters are not expressed under normal growth conditions, and theirManuscript
                     products are unknown. Developing methods for activation of these silent gene clusters offers the
                       potential for discovering many valuable new fungal SMs. While a number of useful approaches
                   have been developed, they each have limitations and additional tools are needed. One approach,
                     upregulation of SM gene cluster-specific transcription factors that are associated with many SM
                   gene clusters, has worked extremely well in some cases, but it has failed more often than it has
                    succeeded. Taking advantage of transcription factor domain modularity, we have developed a new
                    approach. We have fused the DNA-binding domain of a transcription factor associated with aAuthor                     silent SM gene cluster with the activation domain of a robust SM transcription factor, AfoA.



                   *Corresponding Author clayw@usc.edu, rbtodd@ksu.edu, boakley@ku.edu.
                  ∇Present Addresses Industrial Biotechnology Division, Reliance Technology Group, Reliance Industries Limited, Reliance Corporate
                     Park, Thane Belapur Road, Ghansoli, Navi, Mumbai 400701, India.Manuscript
                    Supporting Information
                 The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.8b00679
                     Detailed structural characterization including HIRESIMS and NMR spectroscopic data, hybrid transcription factor and reannotated
                   gene sequences, and CAGE RNA-seq analysis for AN9221.
                 The authors declare no competing financial interest.


[PDF physical page 2]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                     Page 2

                    Expression of this hybrid transcription factor activated transcription of the genes in the target
                       cluster and production of the antibiotic (+)-asperlin. Deletion of cluster genes confirmed that the
                       cluster is responsible for (+)-asperlin production, and we designate it the alncluster. Separately,Author                     co-induction of expression of two alncluster genes revealed the pathway intermediate (2Z,4Z,6E)-
                       octatrienoic acid, a compound with photoprotectant properties. Our findings demonstrate the
                       potential of our novel synthetic hybrid transcription factor strategy to discover the products of
                      other silent fungal SM gene clusters.Manuscript
            Graphical Abstract:


Author
Manuscript


                            Secondary metabolites (SMs) are a rich source of medically important compounds. These
                          compounds are not strictly required for viability, but they confer a selective advantage for
                                the producing organisms, often by inhibiting important biological processes in their
                               competitors in their native environments. These inhibitory activities are often medically
                                  useful. Some SMs have been used as medicines without modification (e.g. penicillin andAuthor                                lovastatin), other medically valuable compounds are derived from SMs, and yet additional
                          compounds are inspired by SMs (e.g. with pharmacophores based on SMs).

                            Fungi have been an excellent source of medically valuable SMs1 and, although many
                             thousands of fungal SMs have been isolated, genome sequencing has revealed that the vastManuscript                               majority of fungal SMs have yet to be identified. Fungal genome projects have confirmed
                               previous conclusions that the genes that encode the biosynthetic enzymes required for the
                              production of particular compounds are clustered together in the genome and coordinately
                                 regulated. They have also revealed that for nearly all fungi examined the number of SM
                                biosynthetic gene clusters greatly exceeds the number of compounds known to be produced
                          by the fungus2–5.

                         The reason is that most SM gene clusters are silent under normal lab growth conditions, andAuthor                              developing strategies for stimulating expression of these clusters, such that their products
                            can be isolated, has become an important research focus6. A number of strategies have been
                               developed7–11. These include alteration of the media on which the fungi are grown12,
                                 deletion or overexpression of genes involved in chromatin packing13,14, chemicalManuscript                             perturbation of proteins that modify chromatin15–18, isolation of mutations in, or over
                               expression of, genes such as mcrAand laeAthat affect the production of many secondary


                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 3]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                     Page 3

                                 metabolites19,20, co-incubation with other microorganisms21, and replacement of the
                             promoters of SM biosynthetic gene cluster genes with regulatable promoters22,23. All of
                                these strategies have had notable successes, but none of them have proved to be universallyAuthor                                    effective. All of these strategies have been applied to Aspergillusnidulans, the fungus in
                           which the secondary metabolome has been most extensively explored, resulting in the
                               discovery of scores of compounds new to A.nidulansor new to science11. Nevertheless,
                           many, probably more than half, of the compounds produced by this organism have yet to beManuscript                            discovered.

                        One approach, that has been successful in some instances, takes advantage of the fact that
                        many SM biosynthetic gene clusters contain a gene encoding a transcription factor that
                                 drives expression of all of the genes of the cluster. In some cases replacement of the
                             promoter of the transcription factor with a regulatable promoter, and subsequent
                               upregulation of expression of the transcription factor, results in strong expression of the
                             genes of the cluster and high levels of production of the compound produced by theAuthor                            pathway24,25. This approach can work spectacularly well, resulting in very high yields of
                             secondary metabolites [e.g. > 2 g/L of asperbenzaldehyde26], but the approach often fails.
                             This approach was tried with 18 SM biosynthetic gene clusters in A.nidulans22. In three of
                                these cases the approach was highly successful, but in the other cases no compounds, or
                             unanalyzably small amounts of compound were produced.Manuscript
                            There are several potential causes for failure of this approach. Some are intellectually trivial,
                               but practically consequential. For example, the induction conditions may have been
                              inadequate to stimulate the required level of production, or the transcription factor may have
                            been incorrectly annotated such that the promoter was not driving expression, or was driving
                               expression of only a portion of the transcription factor. These problems are compounded by
                                the fact that transcription factors may work as heterodimers and if either of the two required
                                  transcription factors is inadequately expressed or incorrectly annotated, SM production willAuthor
                                          fail. These problems will undoubtedly be addressed by better annotation algorithms and data
                           and by better expression systems. Other potential limitations of this approach are related to
                            normal SM regulation. One theoretical, but logical, possibility is that interaction of the
                                  transcription factor with an unknown natural inducer might be required for strong activation.Manuscript                           Another, well documented, factor is that the activity of transcription factors that drive
                               expression of SMs can be regulated post-translationally and, when this is the case, simple
                               upregulation is unlikely to result in high levels of expression of the genes of the regulated
                                     cluster. The best studied example of this is the AflR transcription factor that drives
                               expression of the sterigmatocystin gene cluster of A.nidulans.Regulation of AflR is
                           complex and occurs at multiple levels, but phosphorylation of AflR by protein kinase A
                                  inactivates AflR such that it no longer drives expression of the cluster27. If the activity of a
                                  transcription factor that drives expression of an SM cluster is regulated by post-translationalAuthor
                                modifications, overexpression of the transcription factor may never lead to expression of the
                             genes of the cluster or production of the corresponding SM product.

                        One theoretical approach to circumventing these problems is to create synthetic transcription
                                  factors that are not subject to inhibition by post-translational modification and do not requireManuscript
                            an unknown natural inducer. To evaluate the efficacy of this approach we have targeted a



                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 4]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                     Page 4

                                    silent A.nidulansSM biosynthetic gene cluster (Figure 1) containing the highly reducing
                               polyketide synthase gene AN11191 (using the gene designation shared by the Aspergillus
                       Genome Database [AspGD, http://www.aspergillusgenome.org/] and Fungal and OomyceteAuthor                          Genomics Resource [Fungidb, http://fungidb.org/fungidb/]). Previous efforts to activate this
                            gene cluster by upregulating the transcription factor in the cluster were not successful 22. We
                                      initially replaced the promoters of two of the genes in the cluster with an inducible promoter,
                           and upregulation of the two genes resulted in the production of (2Z,4Z6E)-octa-2,4,6-Manuscript                               trienoic acid. This compound is of interest as a possible feedstock compound for organic
                               syntheses and as a tanning agent in human skin because it promotes melanogenesis and
                                antioxidant defense in melanocytes28. This result suggested that the final product of the
                                  cluster might be of interest.

                    We now report that we have implemented the hybrid, or synthetic, transcription factor
                             approach successfully to activate this gene cluster. We have added an activation domain from
                          AfoA, the transcription factor that drives expression of the asperfuranone gene cluster, to theAuthor                              transcription factor from the cluster. Upregulation of the hybrid transcription factor results in
                               expression of genes in the silent cluster responsible for the biosynthesis of an anti-
                              inflammatory, antitumor antibiotic, (+)-asperlin29–33. The production of (+)-asperlin was
                               previously reported in A.nidulans,A.caespitosus, and A.versicolor29–31,34, but the specific
                            gene cluster for this polyketide has never been identified.Manuscript
         RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
              Induction of AN11199 and AN11191 results in the production of (2Z,4Z,6E)-octa-2,4,6-
                trienoic acid.

                        One strategy our labs have used to elicit SM production is to replace the promoters of
                                  transcription factor genes associated with SM gene clusters with the inducible alcA
                             promoter [alcA(p)] followed by induction of expression. We previously found, however, thatAuthor
                                the replacement of the promoter of AN9221, a transcription factor gene associated with the
                  SM gene cluster containing the highly reducing polyketide synthase gene AN11191, with
                             alcA(p) did not result in production of a detectable product22. Another strategy we have used
                                       is to simply replace the promoters of SM cluster genes individually with alcA(p) and induceManuscript                               expression 22,23. We consequently replaced the promoter of AN11191 with the alcA
                             promoter using an approach we have previously reported23. We also replaced the promoter
                               of AN11199, a gene that we hypothesized might be required for release of product from
                         AN11191. The resulting strain was LO4912 (genotypes of strains in Table 1). Induction of
                               expression of these genes resulted in production of compound 1 (2Z,4Z,6E)-octa-2,4,6-
                                  trienoic acid (Figure 2) (details of purification and structure elucidation are in the 1.2). (2Z,
                                4Z,6E)-octa-2,4,6-trienoic acid is a particularly interesting compound because of its
                                  potential as a natural tanning agent for human skin28. It is a promoter of melanogenesis andAuthor
                                antioxidant defense in melanocytes in vitro and in vivo, topically and systemically.
                             Pigmentation is a powerful protectant from UV damage and skin cancer, and octatrienoic
                               acid is an attractive natural photoprotectant. The alternating double bonds in this molecule
                                 also suggest that it has potential as a feedstock for organic syntheses. Since only two of theManuscript                          genes of the biosynthetic gene cluster were upregulated, we believed it was likely that this




                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 5]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                     Page 5

                         compound was an intermediate rather than the final product of the biosynthetic pathway, and
Author           Constructionweandwishedexpressionto developofaamethodsyntheticfor activatinghybrid transcriptionexpression of thefactorentiredrivespathway.expression
               of the AN11191 gene cluster.

                            Although individual replacement of promoters can be a very powerful tool for eliciting
                              production of SMs23, there are inherent limitations. The most obvious is that one must carryManuscript                           out several transformations to replace the promoters of all target genes. Our molecular
                                genetic methods are efficient, however, and these transformations can be carried out
                                   relatively quickly. Another, more serious, problem is that if any of the genes of the target
                                  cluster is incorrectly annotated, promoter replacement for that gene will be non-productive.
                         The gene will not be expressed or only a gene fragment will be expressed. In addition,
                              although progress has been made, defining the boundaries of gene clusters from genomic
                             sequence alone is still an inexact process4. We searched, therefore, for a new approach that
                          would allow expression of entire clusters.Author
                        One potential approach that might overcome post-translational inactivation of SM
                                  transcription factors, and/or Supporting Information sections 1.1 and requirement of an
                         unknown natural inducer for SM transcription factors, is to exploit the domain modularity of
                                  transcription factors35,36. Synthetic hybrid transcription activators may be constructed byManuscript
                               fusing an active transcription activation domain from a transcription factor known to
                               function in late stationary growth phase to a target SM transcription factor or its DNA
                              binding domain (DBD), which provides the DNA sequence specificity tethering the
                                  activation domain to SM gene cluster promoters. There are a number of factors to consider
                                  in designing such a synthetic transcription factor. Transcription initiation is complex and
                                  different transcription factors may be more or less potent in different contexts. In our
                                experience, SMs are not produced at high levels during log phase growth even if the SMAuthor                             biosynthetic genes are under control of promoters that drive high levels of expression in log
                               phase. The likely explanation is that the precursors required for SM biosynthesis are limiting
                                  in log growth. In late stationary phase, however, SM production, particularly polyketide
                               production, can be driven to very high levels, revealing that precursors are plentiful. A
                                  suitable transcription factor must be able to drive high levels of transcription at that time.Manuscript
                         The afoAgene drives expression of the asperfuranone biosynthetic cluster25, and
                               upregulation of afoAhas allowed us to obtain very high levels of production of
                              asperbenzaldehyde, an intermediate in asperfuranone biosynthesis26 (> 2 g/L of purified
                                product). AfoA (the protein encoded by the afoAgene), is, thus, capable of driving high
                                  levels of expression in late stationary phase cultures when SM precursors are abundant, and
                                               it is not negatively regulated post-translationally to any significant extent. We, therefore,
                             chose afoAas the source for our activation domain.Author
                    We note that in these experiments our replacement of the promoter of afoA(AN1029) with
                                the alcApromoter, was based on the AspGD version 3 gene annotation (AN1029.3)25. This
                               annotation of AN1029 was identical to the previous version 2 annotation. Upregulation of
                                the alcApromoter drove expression of a functional transcription factor that resulted in aManuscript                            successful upregulation of asperfuranone production25 and, with an appropriate pathway




                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 6]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                     Page 6

                                  deletion, asperbenzaldehyde production.26 These results indicate that the version 3
                               annotation was correct, at least with respect to the annotation of the start codon. The current
                            gene annotation for afoAin the AspGD and FungiDB databases (http://Author                             www.aspergillusgenome.org; http://fungidb.org) is version 5. In this version afoAis
                              shortened at the 5’ end relative to the version 3 annotation, omitting exon 1 and the DBD.
                    We do not believe that the version 5 annotation is correct because the DBD would be
                               required for function and because promoter replacements based on the longer, version 3Manuscript                            annotation drive expression of a functional transcription factor. We have consequently based
                             our analyses on the version 3 annotation. We have included the version 3 nucleotide and
                          amino acid sequences for afoAand AfoA in the supplemental materials (Supporting
                              Information Figure S1). The identical version 2 annotation (AN1029.2) is still available at
                                the National Center for Biotechnology Information (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/).

                         The AfoA transcription factor harbors a Zn(II)2Cys6 DNA binding motif. The DNA-binding
                                   specificity of Zn(II)2Cys6 transcription factors is typically provided by the specificity regionAuthor                        and heptad repeat coiled-coil forming dimerization motif immediately following the
                             Zn(II)2Cys6 motif, whereas the activation domain is C-terminal to the heptad repeats36,40.
                         The predicted Zn(II)2Cys6 DNA-binding motif is at residues 16-43, and a potential coiled-
                                   coil dimerization motif is at residues 55-80. A second predicted coiled coil at 98-129 could
                                contribute to dimerization. A putative nuclear localization signal (NLS) of the SV40 LargeManuscript
                               T-antigen-type is found at residues 236-242.

                         To verify that AfoA residues C-terminal to the DBD contained the activation domain and
                             could activate gene expression in a hybrid transcription factor context we replaced amino
                                acids 143-867 of the transcription factor FacB with amino acids 130-666 of AfoA (Figure
                                    3). N-terminal residues 1-142 of FacB are sufficient for DNA binding and are known to
                              provide DNA binding specificity for acetate utilization gene promoters when fused to the
                                  activation domain of other Zn(II)2Cys6 transcription factors41–44. Fusion of putative ADs toAuthor
                                the FacB DBD in strains lacking native facBprovides a simple assay for activation function
                               assessed by growth on acetate as a sole carbon source. The hybrid FacB(1-142)-
                           AfoA(130-666) transcription factor activated transcription of acetate utilization genes as
                            growth on acetate was supported albeit below wild-type growth rates (Figure 3).Manuscript
                           Having established that the afoAactivation domain can activate expression in the context of
                             a hybrid transcription factor, we attempted to create a hybrid transcription factor that would
                                drive expression of the SM gene cluster containing AN11191 and AN11199. We fused the
                                  transcription activation domain (residues 130-666) of AfoA to amino acids 250 through 652
                               of AN9221, as annotated in the AspGD and FungiDB databases. (We have subsequently
                            found that AN9221 was mis-annotated, as we will discuss.) This region included the
                       AN9221 Zn(II)2Cys6 motif, specificity region, and heptad repeats (residues 269-352)Author                            predicted to provide DNA-binding specificity for promoters in the cluster regulated by
                       AN9221 (Figure 4). We omitted AN9221 N-terminal residues 2-249 to avoid predicted
                            transmembrane domains, but retained the AN9221 sequences C-terminal to the DNA-
                              binding domain in the fusion protein as they may contribute to activation, particularly if an
                               intermediate in the regulated pathway acts as an inducer, as is known for some otherManuscript
                                  transcription factors of this class (e.g. LeuB45, AmyR46). The resultant hybrid transcription



                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 7]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                     Page 7

                                    factor, consisting of AN9221 residues 250-652, and AfoA residues 130-666, was put under
                                control of the alcApromoter (with a start codon created during the fusion PCR process) and
                                 inserted at the yAlocus using the AspergillusterreuspyrGpyrimidine prototrophicAuthor                                 selectable marker (Figure 4). The recipient strain LO9577 is derived from LO8030, which
                                  carries deletions of eight of the most highly expressed gene clusters in A.nidulansincluding
                                the asperfuranone biosynthetic gene cluster39. Removal of these gene clusters lowers the SM
                            background and facilitates detection of newly induced metabolites. LO9577 also carries aManuscript                          replacement of the yAgene with a fragment containing the AspergillusfumigatuspyroA
                            gene (AfpyroA) as well as the aldApromoter driving expression of afoA. This facilitated
                                construction and identification of correct transformants as shown (Figure 4). In particular,
                                 correct transformants with the alcA(p)-driven hybrid transcription factor gene targeted in
                                 single copy at yAand replacing AfpyroA-aldA(p)afoAwill be pyrimidine prototrophs and
                              pyridoxine auxotrophs. Transformants were analyzed by diagnostic PCR, and we
Author                           subsequentlyWe next wishedhaveto workeddeterminewithif thea correcthybridtransformanttranscriptiondesignatedfactor droveLO9721.expression of the target
                            gene cluster and, if so, whether this led to the production of the SM product of the cluster.
                    We examined expression of cluster genes using RNA-seq. Our samples were grown in liquid
                                 culture with lactose minimal medium. Lactose is a non-repressing carbon source that allows
                               expression from the alcApromoter. The alcApromoter is induced by a number ofManuscript
                           compounds. For induction of expression of the hybrid transcription factor from the alcA
                             promoter in these experiments, we used 50 mM methyl-ethyl ketone (MEK). We carried out
                        RNA-seq (in triplicate) for LO1362, a control strain wild-type for SM gene clusters,
                        LO9721 under non-repressing conditions, which is predicted to give some expression of the
                              hybrid transcription factor, and LO9721 under inducing conditions, which is predicted to
                               give strong expression of the hybrid transcription factor.

                    We first verified that the hybrid transcription factor was expressed by looking for afoAAuthor
                             sequence reads. As the wild-type afoAgene in the asperfuranone gene cluster has been
                                deleted in LO9721, any afoAreads will be from the hybrid transcription factor. afoAreads
                                are quantified in Table 2. There are almost no afoAreads in the control strain, in which the
                              asperfuranone gene cluster is intact. This reflects the fact that the native afoApromoter isManuscript                              essentially completely off in control strains with wild-type regulation of the asperfuranone
                            gene cluster. In LO9721 under non-repressing conditions for the alcApromoter, there were
                            moderate numbers of afoAreads as expected and induction with MEK substantially boosted
                                the afoAreads. We also noted a very large increase in AN9221 reads, consistent with the
                                   fact that the hybrid transcription factor includes a portion of AN9221. These data reveal that
                                the hybrid transcription factor is expressed and responds to induction of the alcApromoter
Author                            asNext,expected.we asked if expression of the hybrid transcription factor resulted in expression of the
                                   target gene cluster. Results are shown in Figure 5 and quantified in Table 2. The genes in the
                               region extending from AN11200 through AN11191 are strongly upregulated by expression
                               of the hybrid transcription factor. Adjacent genes are not upregulated. These data reveal that
                                the hybrid transcription factor does, as anticipated, drive expression of the SM cluster genes.Manuscript
                          They also define the boundaries of the cluster since the genes that are not upregulated are



                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 8]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                     Page 8

                                unlikely to be components of the cluster. We designate this cluster the (+)-asperlin cluster
                                    after the product of the cluster (see below) and the genes of this cluster alnA-alnIplus alnR
                               (Figures 1 and 6 and Table 2). Interestingly, differences in the levels of induction of theAuthor                             genes within the cluster is observed. This likely reflects different DNA-binding affinities of
                                the hybrid transcription factor for different alngene promoters due to either sequence
                                 differences in the different AlnR DNA-binding sites or different numbers of AlnR DNA-
                              binding sites in the promoters. It is tempting to speculate that these expression differencesManuscript                    may represent the optimal relative levels, arising from DNA-binding site evolution, for
                               operation of the pathway and biosynthesis of the final product.

                         Our analyses of RNA-seq data also reveal that AN11200 is slightly longer than indicated by
                                the AspGD and FungiDB annotations. AN11200 contains an intron and additional sequence
                             upstream of the current annotation. The corrected coding sequence is in the Supporting
                              Information Figure S2. It is also worth noting that induction of the hybrid transcription
                                  factor upregulates the antisense strand of AN11200 as well as the sense strand. Finally,Author                           although AN11200 and AN11192 are very close, with the termination codon of AN11200
                             being less than 250 bp from the start codon of AN11192, our RNA-seq data indicate that
                               they are indeed, separate genes

             Reannotation of AN9221.Manuscript
                        One unexpected outcome of our RNA sequencing was a realization that AN9221 is mis-
                              annotated in the databases. We noted in a number of RNA-seq experiments that AN9221 is
                              expressed at very low levels in strains that do not carry the hybrid transcription factor.
                           However, it is expressed enough that a clear pattern in the RNA-seq reads emerged. The
                               reads were confined to what was annotated as exon 3. Reads from exons 1 and 2 were
                             almost completely absent. The fact that transcription of exon 3 was apparently regulated
                              independently of exons 1 and 2 suggested that it is a separate gene. We consequently carriedAuthor                           out CAGE RNA-seq, which reveals transcription start sites. The results (Supporting
                              Information Figure S3) revealed that there is a distinct transcription start site at the
                              beginning of exon 3. These data, in combination, reveal exon 3 is a separate transcription
                                  unit (i.e. gene) from exons 1 and 2. The coding sequences of these genes along with the
                          amino acid sequences of the predicted products are listed in the Supporting InformationManuscript
                               Figures S4 and S5. The region containing the sequences previously annotated as exons 1 and
                          2 appears to be a separate gene encoding transmembrane domains that is upregulated by the
                              hybrid transcription factor. These results indicate that the genes formerly called AN9221
                            need to be given new designations. We designate the exon 3 gene alnR(R denoting that as a
                                  transcription factor it is a regulatory gene). Its nucleotide and predicted amino acid
                             sequences are shown in Supporting Information Figure S4. The predicted AlnR protein
                               contains a Zn(II)2Cys6 zinc binuclear cluster at residues 24-51 and putative heptad repeatsAuthor                                at residues 81-108. We designate the former exons 1 and 2 alnG. Our RNA-seq data further
                                 indicate that the intron in alnGis misannotated in the current AspGD and FungiDB
                                databases. The actual intron is shorter, and the correct alnGsequence is given in Supporting
                              Information Figure S5.Manuscript




                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 9]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                     Page 9

                             Reannotation of AN9221 has important consequences for this study. One is that, in all
                                  likelihood, the previously published replacement of the promoter of AN9221 with the alcA
                             promoter22 was doomed to failure because the transcription factor was not actually beingAuthor                                upregulated. Instead, the adjacent transmembrane domain encoding-gene, alnG,was likely
                                upregulated. The second is that in our hybrid transcription factor construction, we actually
                              included most of AlnR (residues 5-407), lacking only the four N-terminal amino acids. This
                                 raised the possibility that the activation of the cluster was simply due to upregulation of alnRManuscript                        and that the AfoA activation domain was not needed. To test this possibility we placed alnR
                             under control of the alcApromoter and upregulated it. The resulting HPLC profile (Figure
                               2) showed that, in inducing conditions, overexpression of alnRalone was not sufficient to
                                stimulate SM production by the alngene cluster. The hybrid transcription factor, including
                                the AfoA activation domain, therefore, was required for activation of the cluster.

             Expression of the hybrid transcription factor drives production of (+)-asperlin (2).

                             Strong expression of the hybrid transcription factor resulted in the production of compoundAuthor                                   2, (+)-asperlin, which we believe to be the final product of the target gene cluster (Figures 2
                           and 6). (+)-Asperlin was purified from large-scale cultures using preparative Thin Layer
                            Chromatography, and the structure was confirmed by NMR (details of purification and
                                  structure elucidation are in the Supporting Information section 1.1 and 1.2).Manuscript
                         Our RNA-seq analysis provided a clear prediction as to the genes involved in (+)-asperlin
                                 biosynthesis, but to test the prediction we individually deleted twelve genes (AN11200-
                        AN9213) and examined the effects of the deletions on the biosynthesis of (+)-asperlin
                               (Figure 5). The deletant strains were cultivated under inducing conditions and their
                               metabolite profiles examined by LC/MS. Analysis of the deletants shows that deletions of
                         alnA,alnB,alnC,alnD,alnF,alnHand alnIfully eliminated production while deletion of
                        alnEand AN9221 (=alnR+alnG) diminished production. AN9216Δ, AN9215Δ,Author                      AN12145Δ, AN9214Δ, AN9213Δ strains all produced (+)-asperlin in substantial amounts,
                                revealing that they are not functional components of the (+)-asperlin gene cluster. The
                                 deletion and RNA-seq data are consistent with each other and, together, reveal that the genes
                               involved in the biosynthesis of (+)-asperlin (2) include; alnA(AN11191), alnB(AN11199),
                       alnC(AN11198), alnD(AN9218), alnE(AN9219), alnF(AN9220), alnG(AN9221 exonsManuscript
                                  1-2), alnR(AN9221 exon3), alnH(AN11192), and alnI(AN11200) (Table 2 and Figure 5).

                                  Earlier attempts to upregulate entire silent gene clusters in A.nidulansby expressing
                               pathway-specific transcription factors with an inducible promoter have proven to be largely
                                unsuccessful, resulting in the upregulation of less than 20% of gene clusters tested22. To
                            improve upon this approach, we designed a synthetic hybrid transcription factor to drive
                               expression of the AN11191 cluster. By exploiting the domain modularity of transcription
                                   factors, we fused the potent transcription AD of AfoA, the asperfuranone clusterAuthor
                                  transcription factor, with the DBD of AN9221 (AlnR), the transcription factor of the
                       AN11191 cluster, and placed the synthetic construct under the control of the alcApromoter.
                               Induction of expression of this hybrid transcription factor activated expression of AN11191-
                       AN11200 and production of the polyketide, (+)-asperlin (2). We confirmed that these genes,Manuscript                               but not other genes nearby in the genome, are required for (+)-asperlin (2) biosynthesis



                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 10]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 10

                             through a series of gene deletions. Our results also revealed that the putative native
                                  transcription factor for this cluster, AN9221 was misannotated previously and is actually two
                                separate genes. However, induction of expression of the reannotated transcription factor,Author                             alnR, did not result in significant (+)-asperlin (2) production. This result demonstrates the
                               value of the hybrid transcription factor approach for activation of expression of the (+)-
                                 asperlin (2) gene cluster. These results, taken together, show the potential of the synthetic
                              hybrid transcription factor strategy we have developed to upregulate the genes and identifyManuscript                             the products of other cryptic clusters.

                                 Cluster-specific transcription factors are often associated with SM gene clusters in
                            Ascomycetes. In A.nidulansalone, 48 of 71 putative SM clusters contain identifiable
                                  transcription factors3. One-half to two-thirds of putative SM clusters in related Aspergillus
                                species contain identifiable transcription factor genes; Aspergillusoryzae: 40 of 75,
                             Aspergillusfumigatus: 27 of 39, Aspergillusniger: 54 of 81, Aspergillusflavus: 35 of
                                   553,48. Moreover, most of these transcription factors belong to the Zn(II)2Cys6 DBD class,Author                        and the majority of SM products from these clusters are unknown. This indicates the
                                  potential scope of application of hybrid transcription factor technology for SM discovery.
                         The success of our hybrid transcription factor strategy relied on the Zn(II)2Cys6 DBD of
                           AlnR. This class of transcription factors usually binds DNA as homodimers36,40. The hybrid
                                  transcription factor approach should be applicable to other DBD classes. HybridManuscript
                                  transcription factors that tether an active activation domain to the DBD of a SM cluster
                                  transcription factor have the advantage of providing cluster activation specificity without
                             needing to know whether a natural inducer or post-translational modification of the
                                  activation domain of the native transcription factor is necessary for activation. In some cases,
                             however, the success of this approach may be hampered by the requirement of an unknown
                               heterodimerization partner or other DNA-binding partner for promoter binding, by post-
                                  translational regulation of the DBD of the cluster-specific transcription factor, or by theAuthor                                availability of the necessary metabolic precursors. Future efforts with respect to the (+)-
                                 asperlin (2) cluster will focus on identifying intermediates of and fully elucidating the
                              stepwise biosynthetic pathway for (+)-asperlin (2).

        METHODSManuscript
              Bioinformatic analysis of transcription factors.

                         The location of predicted structural features of the transcription factors was determined
                              following analysis using ScanProsite (https://prosite.expasy.org/)49 for the Zn(II)2Cys6
                            domain, Lupas coiled-coil prediction (http://toolkit.tuebingen.mpg.de/pcoils)50 for the
                               dimerization motif, and PSORTII (https://psort.hgc.jp/)51 for the Nuclear Localization
                               Signals (NLSs). The transmembrane domains in the mis-annotated AN9221 sequences were
                             analyzed using the TMHMM Server v. 2.0 for prediction of transmembrane helices inAuthor
                                 proteins (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/)52.

             Fermentation and LC/MS Analysis.
                             For all strains, 3 × 107 spores were grown in 30 mL lactose minimum media (LMM) (15 g LManuscript                            −1                                   D-lactose, 6 g L−1 NaNO3, 0.52 g L−1 KCl, 0.52 g L−1 MgSO47H2O, 1.52 g L−1



                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 11]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 11

                        KH2PO4, and 1 mL L−1 Hutner’s trace element solution53) or glucose minimum media
                     (GMM) (10 g L−1 D-glucose, 6 g L−1 NaNO3, 0.52 g L−1 KCl, 0.52 g L−1 MgSO47H2O,
                              1.52 g L−1 KH2PO4, and 1 mL L−1 Hutner’s trace element solution), and, where appropriate,Author                            supplemented with 0.5 mg L−1 pyridoxine, and 2.5 mg L−1 riboflavin, in 125 mL flasks at
                          37 °C with shaking at 180 rpm. For alcA(p) induction, 50 mM of MEK was added to the
                                 culture 42 h after inoculation2. Culture medium and hyphae were collected 72 h after
                               induction by filtration and extracted twice with a volume of EtOAc equal to the cultureManuscript                         volume. The combined EtOAc layers were evaporated invacuo, redissolved in 1 mL of
                   MeOH and 10 μL was injected for HPLC-DAD-MS analysis. LC/MS spectra were obtained
                              using a ThermoFinnigan LCQ Advantage ion trap mass spectrometer with a reverse phase
                           C18 column (Alltech Prevail C18; particle size, 3 μm; column, 2.1 by 100 mm) at a flow rate
                               of 125 μL min−1. The solvent gradient for LC/MS was 95% MeCN–H 2O (solvent B) in 5%
                    MeCN–H 2O (solvent A), both of which contained 0.05% formic acid, as follows: 0%
                                solvent B from 0 to 5 min, 0 to 100% solvent B from 5 min to 35 min, 100% solvent B from
                          35 to 40 min, 100 to 0% solvent B from 40 to 45 min, and reequilibration with 0% solvent BAuthor                        from 45 to 50 min. Conditions for MS included a capillary voltage of 5.0 kV, a sheath gas
                             flow rate at 60 arbitrary units, an auxiliary gas flow rate at 10 arbitrary units, and the ion
                                  transfer capillary temperature at 350 °C.

           Compound Spectral Data.Manuscript
                 NMR spectral data were collected on a Varian Mercury Plus 400 spectrometer. High
                                 resolution electrospray ionization mass spectrum (HRESIMS) was obtained on
                              ThermoScientific Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer with an Eclipse
                       XDB-C18 column (Agilent 5 μm 4.6 × 150 mm) at a flow rate of 125 μL min−1. Conditions
                                  for MS included a spray voltage of 3.5 kV, sheath gas flow rate 20 au, auxiliary gas flow rate
                                    at 5 au, sweep gas flow rate at 1 au, capillary temperature at 275 °C, s-lens RF level 55,
                                 auxiliary gas heat temperature at 325 °C, scan range of 100-600 m/z, resolution 140,000,Author                   AGC target 3 × 106, and maximum injection time of 200 ms.

                             (2Z,4Z,6E)-octa-2,4,6-trienoic acid (1): White amorphous powder; for UV-Vis and
                     HRESIMS spectra see Supporting Information Figure S6; for 1H and 13C NMR data
                                        see Supporting Information Figure S7-S9; HRESIMS, [M – H]+ m/zfoundManuscript                          (CDCl3),
                             139.0753.

                            (+)-Asperlin (2): Colorless oil; for UV-Vis and HRESIMS spectra see Supporting
                              Information Figure S6; for 1H and 13C NMR data (CDCl3), see Supporting Information
                              Figure S7, S10-S11; HRESIMS, [M – H]+ m/zfound 213.0754.

              Transformation procedures and construction of transforming molecules.Author                          Transforming molecules were constructed by fusion PCR as previously described37,54,55.
                         The selectable markers used were the AspergillusfumigatuspyrGgene (AfpyrG)56, the
                             AspergillusterreuspyrGgene (AtpyrG)57, the A.fumigatusriboBgene AfriboB51 and the
                    A.fumigatuspyroAgene51. The markers used for each construct are specified in the strain
                                            list. All constructs were verified by diagnostic PCR. Transformation procedures were asManuscript
                               previously described54,55.



                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 12]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 12

             RNA-seq.

                             Conidia of a control strain (LO1362 = TNO2A7) and of LO9721, which carries the hybrid
                                  transcription factor under control of the alcApromoter, were inoculated into 50 mL ofAuthor
                                 lactose minimal medium in 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks at a density of 2 × 104 conidia mL−1.
                         The medium was supplemented with riboflavin, pyridoxine, uridine and uracil to supplement
                                the nutritional markers carried by the control strain. The flasks were incubated at 37 °C in a
                                 rotary shaker at 100 RPM. After 36 h incubation, MEK was added to a final concentration ofManuscript                       50 mM to flasks containing the control strain and to half the flasks containing LO9721. The
                             remaining LO9721 flasks were incubated without MEK. After four hours of further
                                incubation, hyphae were harvested by filtration through miracloth. They were then frozen
                             with liquid nitrogen and reduced to a frozen powder with a Multi-beads Shocker (Yasui
                             Kikai Co., Ltd., Japan). Library preparation, sequencing and data analysis procedures were
                               as previously described20 with minor modifications (for example, HISAT2 was used instead
Author                            of HISAT for read mapping).
           Supplementary Material

                                 Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Manuscript       ACKNOWLEDGMENT

                                    Supported by the National Institutes of Health (grant number P01GM084077), by US Department of Energy funds
                                  awarded through Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, by the Irving S. Johnson Fund of the Kansas University
                               Endowment Association, and by the Kansas City Area Life Sciences Institute and Hall Family Foundation (grant
                                number KCALSI 17-12). Contribution no. 19-004-J from the Kansas Agricultural Experiment Station. The authors
                                 would like to thank O. Yoon and C.B. Jenkinson (University of Kansas) for technical assistance. We thank N.A.
                              Graham and A. Delfarah (USC Viterbi School of Engineering) for their help collecting HRESIMS data.

         REFERENCESAuthor                                     (1). Keller NP, Turner G, and Bennett JW (2005) Fungal secondary metabolism-from biochemistry to
                                     genomics. Nat. Rev. Microbiol 3, 937–947. [PubMed: 16322742]
                                         (2). Galagan JE, Calvo SE, Cuomo C, Ma L-J, Wortman JR, Batzoglou S, Lee S-I, Baştürkmen M,
                                   Spevak CC, Clutterbuck J, Kapitonov V, Jurka J, Scazzocchio C, Farman M, Butler J, Purcell S,
                                        Harris S, Braus GH, Draht O, Busch S, D’Enfert C, Bouchier C, Goldman GH, Bell-Pedersen D,Manuscript                                      Griffiths-Jones S, Doonan JH, Yu J, Vienken K, Pain A, Freitag M, Selker EU, Archer DB,
                                     Peñalva MÁ, Oakley BR, Momany M, Tanaka T, Kumagai T, Asai K, Machida M, Nierman WC,
                                  Denning DW, Caddick M, Hynes M, Paoletti M, Fischer R, Miller B, Dyer P, Sachs MS, Osmani
                                 SA, and Birren BW (2005) Sequencing of Aspergillusnidulansand comparative analysis with A.
                                  fumigatusand A.oryzae. Nature 438, 1105–1115. [PubMed: 16372000]
                                         (3). Inglis DO, Binkley J, Skrzypek MS, Arnaud MB, Cerqueira GC, Shah P, Wymore F, Wortman JR,
                                   and Sherlock G (2013) Comprehensive annotation of secondary metabolite biosynthetic genes
                                   and gene clusters of Aspergillusnidulans, A.fumigatus, A.nigerand A.oryzae. BMC Microbiol.
                                        13, 91. [PubMed: 23617571]
                                         (4). de Vries RP, Riley R, Wiebenga A, Aguilar-Osorio G, Amillis S, Uchima CA, Anderluh G,Author                                       Asadollahi M, Askin M, Barry K, Battaglia E, Bayram Ö, Benocci T, Braus-Stromeyer SA,
                                    Caldana C, Cánovas D, Cerqueira GC, Chen F, Chen W, Choi C, Clum A, dos Santos RAC,
                                 Damásio AR, de L, Diallinas G, Emri T, Fekete E, Flipphi M, Freyberg S, Gallo A, Gournas C,
                                Habgood R, Hainaut M, Harispe ML, Henrissat B, Hildén KS, Hope R, Hossain A, Karabika E,
                                       Karaffa L, Karányi Z, Kraševec N, Kuo A, Kusch H, LaButti K, Lagendijk EL, Lapidus A,Manuscript                                  Levasseur A, Lindquist E, Lipzen A, Logrieco AF, MacCabe A, Mäkelä MR, Malavazi I, Melin
                                                P, Meyer V, Mielnichuk N, Miskei M, Molnár ÁP, Mulé G, Ngan CY, Orejas M, Orosz E,



                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 13]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 13

                                  Ouedraogo JP, Overkamp KM, Park H-S, Perrone G, Piumi F, Punt PJ, Ram AFJ, Ramón A,
                                    Rauscher S, Record E, Riaño-Pachón DM, Robert V, Röhrig J, Ruller R, Salamov A, Salih NS,
                                Samson RA, Sándor E, Sanguinetti M, Schütze T, Sepčić K, Shelest E, Sherlock G,
                                    Sophianopoulou V, Squina FM, Sun H, Susca A, Todd RB, Tsang A, Unkles SE, van de Wiele N,Author                                   van Rossen-Uffink D, Oliveira JV de C, Vesth TC, Visser J, Yu J-H, Zhou M, Andersen MR,
                                    Archer DB, Baker SE, Benoit I, Brakhage AA, Braus GH, Fischer R, Frisvad JC, Goldman GH,
                                  Houbraken J, Oakley B, Pócsi I, Scazzocchio C, Seiboth B, vanKuyk PA, Wortman J, Dyer PS,
                                   and Grigoriev IV (2017) Comparative genomics reveals high biological diversity and specific
                                         adaptations in the industrially and medically important fungal genus Aspergillus. Genome Biol.
                                        18.Manuscript
                                         (5). Nielsen JC, Grijseels S, Prigent S, Ji B, Dainat J, Nielsen KF, Frisvad JC, Workman M, and
                                      Nielsen J (2017) Global analysis of biosynthetic gene clusters reveals vast potential of secondary
                                        metabolite production in Penicilliumspecies. Nat. Microbiol 2, 17044. [PubMed: 28368369]
                                         (6). Brakhage AA, Schuemann J, Bergmann S, Scherlach K, Schroeckh V, and Hertweck C (2008)
                                        Activation of fungal silent gene clusters: A new avenue to drug discovery, in Natural Compounds
                                        as Drugs, pp 1–12. Birkhäuser Basel.
                                         (7). Brakhage AA, and Schroeckh V (2011) Fungal secondary metabolites – Strategies to activate
                                              silent gene clusters. Fungal Genet. Biol. 48, 15–22. [PubMed: 20433937]
                                         (8). Chiang Y-M, Chang S-L, Oakley BR, and Wang CC (2011) Recent advances in awakening silentAuthor
                                         biosynthetic gene clusters and linking orphan clusters to natural products in microorganisms.
                                         Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol 15, 137–143. [PubMed: 21111669]
                                         (9). Lim FY, Sanchez JF, Wang CCC, and Keller NP (2012) Toward awakening cryptic secondary
                                        metabolite gene clusters in filamentous fungi, in Methods in Enzymology, pp 303–324. Elsevier.
                                      (10). Brakhage AA (2013) Regulation of fungal secondary metabolism. Nat. Rev. Microbiol 11, 21–32.Manuscript                                  [PubMed: 23178386]
                                      (11). Yaegashi J, Oakley BR, and Wang CCC (2014) Recent advances in genome mining of secondary
                                        metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters and the development of heterologous expression systems in
                                     Aspergillusnidulans. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 41, 433–442. [PubMed: 24342965]
                                      (12). Andersen MR, Nielsen JB, Klitgaard A, Petersen LM, Zachariasen M, Hansen TJ, Blicher LH,
                                      Gotfredsen CH, Larsen TO, Nielsen KF, and Mortensen UH (2013) Accurate prediction of
                                     secondary metabolite gene clusters in filamentous fungi. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 110, E99–E107.
                                  [PubMed: 23248299]
                                      (13). Bok JW, Chiang Y-M, Szewczyk E, Reyes-Dominguez Y, Davidson AD, Sanchez JF, Lo H-C,Author                               Watanabe K, Strauss J, Oakley BR, Wang CCC, and Keller NP (2009) Chromatin-level regulation
                                        of biosynthetic gene clusters. Nat. Chem. Biol 5, 462–464. [PubMed: 19448638]
                                      (14). Soukup AA, Chiang Y-M, Bok JW, Reyes‐Dominguez Y, Oakley BR, Wang CCC, Strauss J, and
                                         Keller NP (2012) Overexpression of the Aspergillusnidulanshistone 4 acetyltransferase EsaA
                                         increases activation of secondary metabolite production. Mol. Microbiol 86, 314–330. [PubMed:Manuscript                                22882998]
                                      (15). Shwab EK, Bok JW, Tribus M, Galehr J, Graessle S, and Keller NP (2007) Histone deacetylase
                                             activity regulates chemical diversity in Aspergillus. Eukaryot. Cell 6, 1656–1664. [PubMed:
                                   17616629]
                                      (16). Cichewicz RH (2010) Epigenome manipulation as a pathway to new natural product scaffolds
                                   and their congeners. Nat Prod Rep 27, 11–22. [PubMed: 20024091]
                                      (17). Vervoort HC, Drašković M, and Crews P (2011) Histone deacetylase inhibitors as a tool to up-
                                          regulate new fungal biosynthetic products: isolation of EGM-556, a cyclodepsipeptide, from
                                  Microascussp. Org. Lett 13, 410–413. [PubMed: 21174394]Author                                  (18). Albright JC, Henke MT, Soukup AA, McClure RA, Thomson RJ, Keller NP, and Kelleher NL
                                      (2015) Large-scale metabolomics reveals a complex response of Aspergillusnidulansto
                                         epigenetic perturbation. ACS Chem. Biol 10, 1535–1541. [PubMed: 25815712]
                                      (19). Keller N, Bok J, Chung D, Perrin RM, and Keats Shwab E (2006) LaeA, a global regulator of
                                     Aspergillustoxins. Med. Mycol 44, 83–85.
                                      (20). Oakley CE, Ahuja M, Sun W-W, Entwistle R, Akashi T, Yaegashi J, Guo C-J, Cerqueira GC,Manuscript
                                Wortman JR, Wang CCC, Chiang Y-M, and Oakley BR (2017) Discovery of McrA, a master



                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 14]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 14

                                          regulator of Aspergillussecondary metabolism. Mol. Microbiol 103, 347–365. [PubMed:
                                   27775185]
                                      (21). Schroeckh V, Scherlach K, Nutzmann H-W, Shelest E, Schmidt-Heck W, Schuemann J, Martin
                                   K, Hertweck C, and Brakhage AA (2009) Intimate bacterial-fungal interaction triggersAuthor
                                         biosynthesis of archetypal polyketides in Aspergillusnidulans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 106, 14558–
                                     14563. [PubMed: 19666480]
                                      (22). Ahuja M, Chiang Y-M, Chang S-L, Praseuth MB, Entwistle R, Sanchez JF, Lo H-C, Yeh H-H,
                                   Oakley BR, and Wang CCC (2012) Illuminating the diversity of aromatic polyketide synthases in
                                     Aspergillusnidulans. J. Am. Chem. Soc 134, 8212–8221. [PubMed: 22510154]Manuscript                                  (23). Yeh H-H, Ahuja M, Chiang Y-M, Oakley CE, Moore S, Yoon O, Hajovsky H, Bok J-W, Keller
                                    NP, Wang CCC, and Oakley BR (2016) Resistance gene-guided genome mining: serial promoter
                                    exchanges in Aspergillusnidulansreveal the biosynthetic pathway for fellutamide B, a
                                    proteasome inhibitor. ACS Chem. Biol 11, 2275–2284. [PubMed: 27294372]
                                      (24). Bergmann S, Schümann J, Scherlach K, Lange C, Brakhage AA, and Hertweck C (2007)
                                    Genomics-driven discovery of PKS-NRPS hybrid metabolites from Aspergillusnidulans. Nat.
                                Chem. Biol 3, 213–217. [PubMed: 17369821]
                                      (25). Chiang Y-M, Szewczyk E, Davidson AD, Keller N, Oakley BR, and Wang CCC (2009) A gene
                                            cluster containing two fungal polyketide synthases encodes the biosynthetic pathway for aAuthor                                      polyketide, asperfuranone, in Aspergillusnidulans. J. Am. Chem. Soc 131, 2965–2970.
                                  [PubMed: 19199437]
                                      (26). Paranjape SR, Riley AP, Somoza AD, Oakley CE, Wang CCC, Prisinzano TE, Oakley BR, and
                                  Gamblin TC (2015) Azaphilones inhibit Tau aggregation and dissolve Tau aggregates inVitro.
                          ACS Chem. Neurosci 6, 751–760. [PubMed: 25822288]
                                      (27). Shimizu K, Hicks JK, Huang T-P, and Keller NP (2003) Pka, Ras and RGS protein interactionsManuscript
                                          regulate activity of AflR, a Zn(II)2Cys6 transcription factor in Aspergillusnidulans. Genetics
                                      165, 1095–1104. [PubMed: 14668367]
                                      (28). Flori E, Mastrofrancesco A, Kovacs D, Ramot Y, Briganti S, Bellei B, Paus R, and Picardo M
                                      (2011) 2,4,6-Octatrienoic acid is a novel promoter of melanogenesis and antioxidant defense in
                                    normal human melanocytes via PPAR-γ activation. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 24, 618–630.
                                  [PubMed: 21762468]
                                      (29). Argoudelis AD, Coats JH, and Herr RR (1965) Isolation and characterization of a new antibiotic,
                                     U-13,933. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 5, 801–803. [PubMed: 5883500]
                                      (30). Argoudelis AD, and Zieserl JF (1966) The structure of U-13,933, a new antibiotic. TetrahedronAuthor                                             Lett. 7, 1969–1973.
                                      (31). Mizuba S, Lee K, and Jiu J (1975) Three antimicrobial metabolites from Aspergilluscaespitosus.
                                    Can. J. Microbiol. 21, 1781–1787. [PubMed: 1104120]
                                      (32). Lee D-S, Jeong G-S, Li B, Lee SU, Oh H, and Kim Y-C (2011) Asperlin from the marine-derived
                                     fungus Aspergillussp. SF-5044 exerts anti-inflammatory effects through Heme Oxygenase-1Manuscript                                    expression in murine macrophages. J. Pharmacol. Sci 116, 283–295. [PubMed: 21705844]
                                      (33). He L, Nan M-H, Oh HC, Kim YH, Jang JH, Erikson RL, Ahn JS, and Kim BY (2011) Asperlin
                                      induces G2/M arrest through ROS generation and ATM pathway in human cervical carcinoma
                                                cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 409, 489–493. [PubMed: 21600879]
                                      (34). Zhou Y, Chen R, Liu D, Wu C, Guo P, and Lin W (2017) Asperlin inhibits LPS-evoked foam cell
                                      formation and prevents atherosclerosis in ApoE−/− mice. Mar. Drugs 15, 358.
                                      (35). Keegan L, Gill G, and Ptashne M (1986) Separation of DNA binding from the transcription-
                                           activating function of a eukaryotic regulatory protein. Science 231, 699–704. [PubMed: 3080805]
                                      (36). Reece RJ, and Ptashne M (1993) Determinants of binding-site specificity among yeast C6 zincAuthor                                        cluster proteins. Science 261, 909–911. [PubMed: 8346441]
                                      (37). Nayak T, Szewczyk E, Oakley CE, Osmani A, Ukil L, Murray SL, Hynes MJ, Osmani SA, and
                                   Oakley BR (2006) A versatile and efficient gene-targeting system for Aspergillusnidulans.
                                      Genetics 172, 1557–1566. [PubMed: 16387870]
                                      (38). Chiang Y-M, Szewczyk E, Davidson AD, Entwistle R, Keller NP, Wang CCC, and Oakley BRManuscript                                  (2010) Characterization of the Aspergillusnidulansmonodictyphenone gene cluster. Appl.
                                       Environ. Microbiol. 76, 2067–2074. [PubMed: 20139316]



                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 15]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 15

                                      (39). Chiang Y-M, Ahuja M, Oakley CE, Entwistle R, Zutz C, Wang CCC, and Oakley BR (2016)
                                  Development of genetic dereplication strains in Aspergillusnidulansresults in the discovery of
                                          aspercryptin. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed Engl 55, 1662–1665. [PubMed: 26563584]
                                      (40). Todd RB, and Andrianopoulos A (1997) Evolution of a fungal regulatory gene family: theAuthor
                                     Zn(II)2Cys6 binuclear cluster DNA binding motif. Fungal Genet. Biol 21, 388–405. [PubMed:
                                   9290251]
                                      (41). Todd RB, Murphy RL, Martin HM, Sharp JA, Davis MA, Katz ME, and Hynes MJ (1997) The
                                          acetate regulatory gene facBof Aspergillusnidulansencodes a Zn(II)2Cys6 transcriptional
                                              activator. Mol. Gen. Genet 254, 495–504. [PubMed: 9197408]Manuscript                                  (42). Parsons LM, Davis MA, and Hynes MJ (1992) Identification of functional regions of the
                                           positively acting regulatory gene amdRfrom Aspergillusnidulans. Mol. Microbiol 6, 2999–3007.
                                  [PubMed: 1479891]
                                      (43). Todd RB, Andrianopoulos A, Davis MA, and Hynes MJ (1998) FacB, the Aspergillusnidulans
                                            activator of acetate utilization genes, binds dissimilar DNA sequences. EMBO J. 17, 2042–2054.
                                  [PubMed: 9524126]
                                      (44). Small AJ, Hynes MJ, and Davis MA (1999) The TamA protein fused to a DNA-binding domain
                                    can recruit AreA, the major nitrogen regulatory protein, to activate gene expression in
                                     Aspergillusnidulans. Genetics 153, 95–105. [PubMed: 10471703]Author                                  (45). Downes DJ, Davis MA, Kreutzberger SD, Taig BL, and Todd RB (2013) Regulation of the
                                  NADP-glutamate dehydrogenase gene gdhAin Aspergillusnidulansby the Zn(II)2Cys6
                                           transcription factor LeuB. Microbiology 159, 2467–2480. [PubMed: 24025604]
                                      (46). Makita T, Katsuyama Y, Tani S, Suzuki H, Kato N, Todd RB, Hynes MJ, Tsukagoshi N, Kato M,
                                   and Kobayashi T (2009) Inducer-dependent nuclear localization of a Zn(II)2Cys6 transcriptional
                                              activator, AmyR, in Aspergillusnidulans. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem 73, 391–399. [PubMed:Manuscript
                                   19202286]
                                      (47). Todd RB, Kelly JM, Davis MA, and Hynes MJ (1997) Molecular characterization of mutants of
                                         the acetate regulatory gene facBof Aspergillusnidulans. Fungal Genet. Biol 22, 92–102.
                                  [PubMed: 9367656]
                                      (48). Chang P-K, and Ehrlich KC (2013) Genome-wide analysis of the Zn(II)2Cys6 zinc cluster-
                                     encoding gene family in Aspergillusflavus. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol 97, 4289–4300.
                                  [PubMed: 23563886]
                                      (49). de Castro E, Sigrist CJA, Gattiker A, Bulliard V, Langendijk-Genevaux PS, Gasteiger E, Bairoch
                                   A, and Hulo N (2006) ScanProsite: detection of PROSITE signature matches and ProRule-Author                                         associated functional and structural residues in proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 34, W362–W365.
                                  [PubMed: 16845026]
                                      (50). Biegert A, Mayer C, Remmert M, Soding J, and Lupas AN (2006) The MPI Bioinformatics
                                         Toolkit for protein sequence analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 34, W335–W339. [PubMed:
                                   16845021]Manuscript                                  (51). Nakai K, and Horton P (1999) PSORT: a program for detecting sorting signals in proteins and
                                         predicting their subcellular localization. Trends Biochem. Sci. 24, 34–35. [PubMed: 10087920]
                                      (52). Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G, and Sonnhammer EL. (2001) Predicting transmembrane
                                         protein topology with a hidden markov model: application to complete genomes J. Mol. Biol
                                      305, 567–580. [PubMed: 11152613]
                                      (53). Vishniac W, and Santer M (1957) The Thiobacilli,. Bacteriol. Rev 21, 195–213. [PubMed:
                                   13471458]
                                      (54). Szewczyk E, Nayak T, Oakley CE, Edgerton H, Xiong Y, Taheri-Talesh N, Osmani SA, and
                                   Oakley BR (2007) Fusion PCR and gene targeting in Aspergillusnidulans. Nat. Protoc 1, 3111–Author                                  3120.
                                      (55). Oakley CE, Edgerton-Morgan H, and Oakley BR (2012) Tools for manipulation of secondary
                                    metabolism pathways: rapid promoter replacements and gene deletions in Aspergillusnidulans,
                                           in Fungal Secondary Metabolism (Keller NP, and Turner G, Eds.), pp 143–161. Humana Press,
                                     Totowa, NJ.
                                      (56). Weidner G, d’Enfert C, Koch A, Mol PC, and Brakhage AA (1998) Development of aManuscript
                                  homologous transformation system for the human pathogenic fungus Aspergillusfumigatus



                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 16]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 16

                                     based on the pyrGgene encoding orotidine 5′-monophosphate decarboxylase. Curr. Genet. 33,
                                    378–385. [PubMed: 9618589]
                                      (57). Dohn JW, Grubbs AW, Oakley CE, and Oakley BR (2018) New multi-marker strains and
                                   complementing genes for Aspergillusnidulansmolecular biology. Fungal Genet. Biol 111, 1–6.Author
                                  [PubMed: 29309843]
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript




                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 17]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 17

Author
Manuscript


                               Figure 1.
                              Organization of the (+)-asperlin biosynthetic gene cluster in A.nidulans.The original
                               annotation of the genes in this pathway is included as the top cluster. RNA-seq and CAGE
                        RNA-seq data revealed that AN9221 was incorrectly annotated. We designate the AN9221-
                            exons 1-2 gene as alnG(see Supporting Information Figure S5 for the correctly annotated
                       alnGsequence), and designate the AN9221-exon 3 gene, encoding a Zn(II)2Cys6 binuclearAuthor
                                    cluster, as the transcription factor gene alnR(see Supporting Information Figure S4 for the
                                 correctly annotated alnGsequence). The cluster below represents the re-annotated (+)-
                                 asperlin biosynthetic gene cluster with the alngene designations included. Predicted gene
                                functions are color-coded.Manuscript


Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript




                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 18]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 18

Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript                            Figure 2.
                            (A) Diode array detector (DAD) total scan HPLC profiles and (B) extracted ion
                           chromatograms (EIC) for compound 2 (EIC = m/z213) of culture media extracts of A.
                            nidulansstrains in which we induced the alcApromoter driving expression of the native
                                   cluster-specific transcription factor gene (alnR) (top), the HR-PKS (AN11191 = alnA) and
                                 esterase (AN11199 = alnB) genes (middle), and the hybrid alnR-afoAtranscription factor
                            gene (HyTF) (bottom) under the control of the alcApromoter. 1 is (2Z,4Z,6E)-octa-2,4,6-
                                  trienoic acid, and 2 is (+)-asperlin. (C) Chemical structures of 1 and 2 as determined byAuthor
                     NMR. *From RNA-seq experiments, we have corrected the originally annotated sequence of
                                the AN9221 transcription factor gene and put the reannotated sequence (alnR) under the
                                control of the alcApromoter. †At the same retention time as 1, trace amounts of unknown
                               metabolites could also be detected in the hybrid transcription factor-expressing strain.Manuscript




                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 19]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 19

Author
Manuscript





                               Figure 3. Activation capacity of AfoA residues 130-666 in a hybrid transcription factor context.Author
                            (A) The primary structure of the transcription factors AfoA and FacB, and the hybrid
                            FacB(1-142)-AfoA(130-666) transcription factor are shown with the relevant functional
                             domains. The DNA Binding Domain (DBD) consists of the Zn(II)2Cys6 zinc binuclear
                                  cluster (wide diagonal stripe) and the heptad repeats coiled-coil dimerization region (narrowManuscript                           diagonal stripe). The putative nuclear localization signal (NLS) in AfoA is indicated. The
                                  activation domain, which is located in the C-terminal portion for this class of transcription
                                    factor, is not precisely defined but is located within AfoA residues 130-666. The FacB
                                  activation domain is C-terminal to residue 62541. AfoA sequences are shown in green,
                            whereas FacB sequences are shown in purple. The DNA binding specificity and function of
                             each transcription factor is indicated. The fusion point in the hybrid transcription factor is
                                indicated by an arrow head with the amino acid coordinates separated by two colons. (B)
                         The ability of the FacB(1-142)-AfoA(130-666) hybrid transcription factor to activate FacB-Author
                             dependent acetate utilization genes was assessed qualitatively by gene replacement of wild
                              type facBwith the hybrid transcription factor gene containing sequences encoding the FacB
                  DNA binding domain (codons 1-142) and the AfoA activation domain (codons 130 – 666),
                              followed by growth on acetate as a sole carbon source. Growth (37°C, 2 d) of transformantsManuscript                           expressing FacB(1-142)-AfoA(130-666) (LO9886, LO9887, and LO9888) are shown
                                   relative to the wild type (LO4389) and the facB101complete loss-of-function mutant (FGSC
                               442), which truncates FacB at residue 619 deleting the activation domain47. Growth on
                              glucose is independent of facBactivity. Note that the color difference observed for FGSC
                          442 is due to the chaA1conidial color mutation in the background genotype and is unrelated
                                  to facB.
Author
Manuscript




                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 20]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 20

Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript


                               Figure 4. The hybrid AlnR(5-407)-AfoA(130-666) transcription factor leads to (+)-asperlin
                                production.
                            (A) The induction system used, transcription factor domain structure, DNA binding
                                    specificity, and product observed in inducing conditions are summarized from previous
                              experiments and this work. Expression of the AfoA transcription factor from the alcA(p)
                             promoter conferred asperfuranone production25, whereas expression of AN9221 from theAuthor                             alcA(p) promoter failed to yield a SM product22. The protein expressed from the AN9221
                             sequence was, due to misannotation, not the predicted transcription factor but instead was
                                the transmembrane (TM) protein AlnG, which lacks a DBD. Expression of the reannotated
                                  transcription factor AlnR, which contains the AN9221 DBD, from alcA(p) also failed toManuscript                         produce a SM product. Expression of the hybrid AN9221(250-652)-AfoA(130-166)
                                  transcription factor, which was reannotated as AlnR(5-407)-AfoA(130-666), conferred
                              production of (+)-asperlin (2). The transcription factors/proteins products are shown with the
                                 relevant functional domains: the DBD consists of the Zn(II)2Cys6 zinc binuclear cluster
                             (wide diagonal stripe) and the heptad repeats coiled-coil dimerization region (narrow
                              diagonal stripe), the putative NLS in AfoA, and transmembrane region (TM). The activation
                          domain is not precisely defined but is located within AfoA residues 130-666. No obvious
                     NLS is found in AlnR. AfoA sequences are shown in green, whereas AN9221-derivedAuthor                             sequences including AlnG and AlnR are shown in yellow. The fusion point in the hybrid
                                  transcription factor is indicated by an arrow head with the amino acid coordinates separated
                          by two colons. (B) i. A transforming fragment was created by fusing three DNA fragments
                              using fusion PCR. The first fragment consists of 5’ flanking DNA from the yAlocus, theManuscript                          AspergillusterreuspyrGgene (AtpyrG) and the promoter from the alcohol dehydrogenase
                            gene [alcA(p)]. This fragment was a cassette previously made by fusion PCR. The second


                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 21]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 21

                             fragment consists of the DNA binding domain from AN9221 (AN9221 DBD) and the third
                             fragment consists of the activation domain of afoA(AN1029) (afoAAD). ii. The three
                             fragments were fused by fusion PCR creating the transforming fragment shown. TheAuthor                                  recipient strain (LO9577) carried a replacement of the yAlocus by the Aspergillus
                           fumigatuspyroAgene (AfpyroA), the aldehyde dehydrogenase promoter [aldA(p)] and the
                              asperfuranone gene cluster transcription factor, afoA(AN1029). iii. Homologous
                             recombination during transformation results in a hybrid transcription factor driven by theManuscript                     alcApromoter. Note that AfpyroAis replaced by AtpyrGresulting in a strain that does not
                                require added pyrimidines for growth but does require added pyridoxine.


Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript




                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 22]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 22

Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript


                               Figure 5.
                            (A) RNA-seq transcript read alignments to genes surrounding the HR-PKS, AN11191, for
                                the hybrid AlnR-AfoA transcription factor (HyTF) expressing A.nidulansstrain compared
                                  to a strain lacking a hybrid transcription factor. Gene color indicates direction of
                                  transcription; genes transcribed from right to left (blue), and genes transcribed from left to
                                   right (orange). (B) Extracted ion chromatograms for compound 2 (EIC = m/z213) of cultureAuthor
                           media extracted from A.nidulanshybrid transcription factor expressing strains carrying a
                                 single gene deletion of genes surrounding AN11191. *Original annotation of AN9221
                              suggested 3 exons, however, RNA-seq data indicates that AN9221 is actually two separate
                                  transcription units; one gene contains exons 1 and 2 and the other gene contains exon 3.Manuscript


Author
Manuscript




                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 23]
               Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 23

Author
Manuscript
                               Figure 6.
                            (A) The deduced functions of each ORF based on the AspGD gene designations. (B)
                            Proposed biosynthesis of (2Z,4Z,6E)-octa-2,4,6-trienoic acid (1) by AlnA with cleavage of
                                the PKS product by AlnB, and downstream production of the pathway product, (+)-asperlin
                                     (2). *Original annotation of AN9221 suggested 3 exons, however, RNA-seq data indicates
                                   that AN9221 is actually two separate transcription units; alnGcontains exon 1-2 and the
                                other gene, alnR, contains exon 3. KS, β-ketoacyl synthase; MAT, malonyl-CoA:acyl carrierAuthor                                protein transacylase; DH, dehydratase; ER, enoylreductase; KR, ketoreductase; ACP, acyl
                                   carrier protein
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript




                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 24]
              Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 24

                                                                    Center
                                                        Stock
                                                                                          Genetics                                                          [38]         work   work         work             work   work   work   work   work   work   work   work   work   work   work   work   work   work   work   work   work   work   workAuthor                                                                                  Reference     Fungal   [37]   [13],   [22]   This   This   [22]   This     [39]     This   This   This   This   This   This   This   This   This   This   This   This   This   This   This   This   This   This   This
Manuscript
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mdp(AN10023-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       apt(AN6000-AN6002)Δ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             afo(AN1039-AN1029)Δ,Author                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ors(AN7906-AN7915)Δ,



      1.Manuscript              Table                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             eas(AN2545-AN2549)Δ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AN9246-AN9259)Δ,
                                                                                                                                                                                LO8030
                                                           in                                                                                                  LO2026
                                 in                                                                                                                                                                                          LO4389
                                                              in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             stc(AN7804-AN7825)Δ,aus(AN8379-AN8384,


                                                                                                                in                                                                                                                                                                                                    LO9577Author                                                          nirA14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LO9721                                                                                                                                          LO4054                                                                                                            LO2026                                                                                                                                                                    LO8030                                                                 in                                              in                                                                                                                                                                                                              LO8030                                                       in                                    in              LO4387
                                                                     in                                                        sE15,       nukA::argB               in                          nukA::argB,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LO9721                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LO9721                        LO9721                                  LO9721    LO9721
                                                                                     in
                                                                        in        in           in in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LO9721                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LO9721                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LO9721                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LO9721                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LO9721                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LO9721                                                                                                                      LO2026                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LO9721                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LO9721                                                                    chaA1,     pyrG89,    LO1362                                                                           in                                                                                         in                                                                                                             in                                                                                            in                                                                                                         in                                                                               in                                       in                            pyrG89,                                                                                                      in                                                                                                                   in                             in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                tdi(AN8512-AN8520)Δ,Manuscript                                                                               riboB2,     riboB2,                                                                           riboB2,                                                                         Genotype      facB101,     pyroA4,          stcJΔ::AfriboB                           AN9221(alnG-alnR)::AfpyrG-alcA(p)-AN9221                alnA::AfpyrG-alcA(p)alnA         stcWΔ::AfpyrG             stc(AN7804-AN7825)Δ                 alnB::AfpyroA-alcA(p)alnB     pyroA4,AN10021)Δ,               yA::AfpyroA-aldA(p)afoA                        yA::AtpyrG-alcA(p)alnR(250-652)-afoA(130-666)*                          facB::facB(1-142)-afoA(130-666)-AtpyrG                yA::AtpyrG-alcA(p)AN9221               yA::AfpyrG-alcA(p)alnR           AN9216Δ::AfriboB         alnDΔ::AfriboB         alnEΔ::AfriboB           AN9214Δ::AfriboB           AN12145Δ::AfriboB         alnAΔ::AfriboB         alnBΔ::AfriboB           AN9213Δ::AfriboB           AN9215Δ::AfriboB         alnFΔ::AfriboB         alnCΔ::AfriboB         alnHΔ::AfriboB                  AN9221(alnG-alnR)Δ::AfriboB         alnIΔ::AfriboB
                        study
                   this                                                                                                                                       LO9888
          in
Author              used                                          (LO1362)                                                                                                                   LO9887,
                                                                Strains     FGSC442    TN02A7    LO2026    LO3632    LO4054    LO4387    LO4389    LO4912      LO8030      LO9577     LO9721     LO9886,    LO11147    LO11280    LO11153    LO11156    LO11160    LO11164    LO11168    LO11178    LO11181    LO11184    LO11190    LO11192    LO11261    LO11289    LO11293    LO11302                                 Strains
Manuscript
                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 25]
              Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 25
                             AlnR(5-407)
     as
Author          reannotated
Manuscript   was                                       AN9221(250-652)
                       inserted;
        was
             codon
             start
        ATGAuthor
    *An
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript
                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 26]
              Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 26


                                                                                                                                                   The       be  For
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                minimal factor. not(but               cannot   reads.
                                                      0  raw
                                                                                                                                                                 and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                lactose             no
                                                                                                in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               transcription                     wereAuthor                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                grown                                                 logarithms   there                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       hybrid   AN11200-AN11191                                                                                                                                                                                                were     2                                                                                                                                                   the of          base   which
                                                                                                  of       as in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                factor,Manuscript                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       expression                 million                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           expression           per     instances
                                                                                                               in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               transcription        drives                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       induce                  reads  read
                                                       a                                                                                                  to factor                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                hybrid             of
                                                                                                                                                the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LO9721                                     normalizes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  fractions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              transcription                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                carrying                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         package   small                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                strain  containing hybrid                                                                                                                                                                 The inAuthor
                                                                                                                                                the flasks The                            results
                                                                                                                                                   the                             package.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LO9721, half LO1362.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   numbers
                                                                                                               to      2.                                                                                                                               and to                             analysis                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                strain,Manuscript                                                                          control)                                                                                                                                                                                        added                      vs        -- --       0                                  -- --          LO1362              Table                valuec                                                                                                                                                                                back                                                                                                                                                   was control          P                     2.17E-25                                        5.19E-10             2.33E-36                                      1.17E-40             2.86E-39             2.60E-28             1.69E-22             4.75E-35             1.13E-33                                                                                SeqMonk   values                                                       2 0.29.                                                                                                                                                                 the                                                                                                                                                   MEK theto                                                                                       (induced                                                                                                                                                                                                                      strain                                                                                                            of
                                                                                                  mM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                control                          base of                                                                                                                                                                      log reads                                      cluster.                                                                                   50  parallel            quirk
                                                                                                                                                The   in                from                                                                      67.24     0.04   0.04     1.74          526.75         83.50           303.36          655.08        99.45        28.41          106.70          342.46     1.61   0.04
              ± ± ± ±  ±  ±  ±  ±  ±  ±  ±  ± ± ±                   gene                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        growth,                  minora                                                                               induced                                                                                                  of added                                                                                                            of                 normalized
                                                                                                                 in                                                                                                                                                       was                                                                                    891.77     0.22   0.22      18.95           2845.53           576.91             4989.54           4247.82          768.20          271.65           2181.88           1885.98     3.10   0.22                   replicates.Author                                            (LO9721)a                                                                                                                                                                                               hours                                                    Conversion                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         because                   TF                                                                                                                                                                                         three 36 MEK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    resulted                                                         (+)-asperlin                                                                                                                         for                     2−∞).                                                                      32.93                                                                                4.29                                                                                                                               11.77                                                                                                                                                                          194.59                                                                                                                                                                                          150.41                                                                                                                                                 8.74                                                                                                                                                                                                  37.65                                                                0.06                                                                       0.06                                                                                                                                       118.12                                                                                                                                                                        12.70                                                                                                                                                                                                               15.45                                                                                                                                                                              2.11                                                                                                                                                                                     0.06                                                       =
              ±                    ±                         ±                            ±                               ±                                    ±                                       ±                ±                  ±                       ±                                  ±                                         ±                                            ±                                             ±                                                       0 reads              the             Hybrid                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      After  control.               strain                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                million                                                                                                                                                                          raw                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         medium.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (i.e.          of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         control                                                                                                                                                per                                                                                                                 no                                                                                                                                                              non-repressing        125.66                                                                0.26   0.25      46.59          743.55           130.20             1384.18           1589.13        47.56        38.71          166.57        49.09     5.07   0.25                                                                                                                                                                      log                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          promoter.                                                                                                                                                                 theManuscript
                                                       2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                reads          in       were                                                                                                                                                                                                     alcA                                                                                                of                          base                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 non-repressing                                                       a                                           induction                                                                                                                            the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           there                                                  a            value                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  non-repressing      as                                                        0.02     0.03   0.03     0.51       0.03        5.69        0.03       0.03       0.03       0.03       0.03       0.03     3.42   0.03         for as
                                                                                                       in              ± ± ± ±  ±  ±  ±  ±  ±  ±  ±  ± ± ±                                                                       (LO1362)a,b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                deviation                             factor                                                                                                                                                                                        same         which                                                                                                                                                                 the                                                        0.30     0.29   0.29     2.30       0.29         14.72        0.29       0.29       0.29       0.29       0.29       0.29     3.57   0.29                        served even                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           accuracy
                                                                         Control                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 standard               in                                                ±   non-repressing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              flasks region)     have                instances                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             genes    complete                                                                                                  is      this                                                                                                                                   alnR)                                                                                   mean     in    the         lane,                                                              transcription                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LO9721                with                                                                                                            ofAuthor                                                                              and                                                              are which                                         Gene                                                                                                                          (alnI)                                                                                                                                                                             (alnF)                                                                                                                                                                                            (alnE)                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (alnC)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (alnB)                                                                                                                                          (alnH)                                                                                                                                                                                                            (alnD)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (alnA)                                                                                                                                                                                       AN9219                                                                                                                                                                                                      AN9218                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AN9216    AN9215                          genes                                                                                 AN1029(afoA)    AN9223     AN12146     AN11200                                                                                                                                                          AN11192                                                                                                                  AN9221d          AN9220                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AN11198                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AN11199                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AN11191                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Control                                                                                                                                   (alnG                             Hybrid                                                                                                                                                                              aValues medium  remaining other   bSeveral     expressed the
Manuscript
                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.


[PDF physical page 27]
              Grau et al.                                                                                                    Page 27
                                                                   expression.
            in                             statistical
   R        the                    increaseAuthor    with
             reads                         additional
             total
             using                           substantial

      aManuscript         in
                     obtained                                          results
          were
                  MEK
                values   P          with
                               significant.                      InductionAuthor                      alnR.
                highly       and
     is          alnG                strain
                  controlManuscript                                            designated
        the
     vs          have
                strain     we                        that
                  induced            genes
        the       two
     in                    actually
            isAuthor                          expression                  and
     in
                     increase                      databases
        theManuscript    that                                                       available
                  the                reveal
            in
             right
        the     at                      annotated
                column        the                           incorrectly
     in     isAuthor


   cP                values  package.   dAN9221
Manuscript
                       ACSChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 November 16.