THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY                                                                                         Vol. 270, No. 15, Issue of April 14, pp. 8686-S690, 1995
© 1995 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.                                                                               Printed in U.S.A.

Cyclization of Geranylgeranyl Diphosphate to Taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene
Is the Committed Step of Taxol Biosynthesis in Pacific Yew*

                                                (Received for publication, February 6, 1995, and in revised form, February 22, 1995)


          Alfred E. Koepp:j:, Mehri Hezari:j:, Jaroslav Zajicek§, Brigitte Stofer VogeU, Roy E. LaFever:j:,
        Norman G. Lewis:j:, and Rodney Croteau:j:'IJ

          From the +Institute of Biological Chemistry and the §University NMR Spectroscopy Center, Washington State University,
            Pullman, Washington 99164-6340


  The biosynthesis of taxol (paclitaxel) and related tax-   Total synthesis of taxol, at present, is not commercially viable
oids in Pacific yew (Taxus brevifolia) is thought to in-    (17), and efficient and economical supply of the drug must rely
volve the cyclization of geranylgeranyl diphosphate to a   on biological production systems for the foreseeable future (18).
taxadiene followed by extensive oxygenation of this   Therefore, it is essential to understand the origin of taxol and
diterpene olefin intermediate. A cell-free preparation   related taxoids in yew species from the universal precursor of
from sapling yew stems catalyzed the conversion of   plant diterpenoids, geranylgeranyl diphosphate 3 (19). To this
[1-3H]geranylgeranyl diphosphate to a cyclic diterpene   end, we have undertaken a systematic study of taxol biosyn-
olefin that, when incubated with stem sections, was con-   thesis at the enzyme level, with the goal of targeting the slow
verted in good radiochemical yield to several highly                                                                 steps of the pathway for ultimate manipulation.
functionalized taxanes, including 10-deacetyl baccatin                                                      The biosynthesis oftaxol1 (Scheme 1) is presumed to involve
III and taxol itself. Addition of the labeled olefin to a yew
                                                                     cyclization of geranylgeranyl diphosphate 3, via (1S)-verticil-
bark extract, followed by radiochemically guided frac-
                                                               lene 4, to taxa-4(20),11(12)-diene 5 (20-22) since taxoids bear-
tionation, provided sufficient product to establish the
                                                             ing the 4(20)- and 11(12)-pair of double bonds are very commonstructure as taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene by two-dimensional
                                                                             (23). Such a cyclization to establish the taxane skeleton couldNMR spectroscopic methods. Therefore, the first dedi-
cated step in taxol biosynthesis is the conversion of the   then be followed by oxidative elaboration of this diterpene
universal diterpenoid precursor geranylgeranyl diphos-   olefin intermediate (22, 24). Previous investigations on taxol
phate  to  taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene,  rather than  to  the   biosynthesis have involved feeding early precursors, such as
4(20),11(12)-diene isomer previously suggested on the   labeled acetate, to various yew tissue preparations (25, 26), or
basis of the abundance of taxoids with double bonds in   have focused on late stage modifications to the taxane nucleus,
these positions. The very common occurrence of taxane   such as the origin of appended acyl moieties (27, 28). No ex-
derivatives  bearing  the  4(20)-ene-5-oxy  functional   perimental work on the enzymology of taxol biosynthesis has
grouping, and the lack of oxygenated derivatives bear-   been reported, and the first dedicated step of the pathway and
ing a 4(5)-double bond, suggest that hydroxylation at C-5   the identity of the presumed olefinic precursor of taxol have
of taxadiene with allylic rearrangement of the double   remained uncertain. In this communication, we describe the
bond is an early step in the conversion of this olefin   enzymatic cyclization of geranylgeranyl diphosphate to taxa-
intermediate to taxol.                                          4(5),11(12)-diene as the first committed reaction, and a very
                                                            slow step, of taxol biosynthesis.

  The highly functionalized diterpenoid taxol (paclitaxel)1 1 (1)                  MATERIALS AND METHODS
is of interest because of its efficacy in the treatment of a range      Plants, Substrates, and Standards-Two-year-old T. brevifolia sap-
of cancers (2). A principal limitation to the wider therapeutic    lings in active growth were obtained from the Weyerhaeuser Research
                                                                        Center, Centralia, WA. [1-3H]Geranylgeranyl diphosphate (118 Ci!mol)use oftaxol was the limited supply of the drug isolated from the
                                                           was prepared as described previously (29). Bark extracts and taxoid
bark of Pacific yew (Taxus  brevifolia Nutt.:Taxaceae); the                                                                    standards  (taxol, cephalomannine, and baccatin  III, and their 10-
yields are low (0.01-0.1% dry weight), the species is very slow    deacetyl derivatives) were obtained from Hauser Chemical Research
growing and sparsely distributed, and the harvest is destruc-    Inc., Boulder, CO. (+)-Taxusin was isolated from the wood ofT. brevi-
tive (3,  4). Alternate approaches for obtaining taxol include    folia (30). Other diterpenoid standards were from our own collection.
isolation from the renewable foliage and other tissues of plan-       Cell-free Extracts-Methods previously developed for the isolation
                                                             and assay ofterpenoid cyclases from conifer stem tissue were employedtation-grown Taxus species (5-10), production in tissue culture
                                                                                   (29, 31). Yew sapling stem sections were frozen in liquid N2 and pul-
systems (11, 12), and semisynthesis of the drug and its analogs   verized in a hammer mill to separate the bark and adhering tissue from
from baccatin III 2 and related late stage taxane diterpenoid   the woody core. The resulting "bark" powder was extracted with a buffer
(taxoid) metabolites that are more readily available (13-16).   containing vinylpyrrolidone polymers and polystyrene resin to adsorb
                                                                            phenolics, and the 27,000 X g supernatant was partially purified by
                                                                     ion-exchange chromatography on DEAE-cellulose (31). The preparation
  *This work was supported in part by National Institutes of Health
                                                           was then dialyzed to assay conditions (30 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 5 mMGrant CA-55254 and by Mcintire-Stennis Project 0967 from the Wash-
                                                                                 dithiothreitol, 10% glycerol) and adjusted to -50 p,g ofprotein/ml beforeington State University Agricultural Research Center. The costs of
                                                                      incubation in the presence of 10 p,M geranylgeranyl diphosphate and 1publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked "advertisement"  mM MgC12 (29). Following incubation (1-3 h), the pentane-soluble prod-
in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.    ucts of the reaction mixture were extracted and the extract passed
   ~ To whom correspondence should be addressed: Institute of Biolog-   through a short column of silica gel to provide the hydrocarbon fraction.
ical Chemistry, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-   Quantification was by aliquot counting, and the products were analyzed
6340. Tel.: 509-335-1790; Fax: 509-335-7643.                         by radio-GLC? To obtain sufficient amounts of the biosynthetic olefin
    1 Paclitaxel is the generic name for taxol, which is now a registered
trademark of Bristol-Myers Squibb. Because of the far greater famili-
arity with the word taxol, we use it here in lieu of "paclitaxel."                   2 The abbreviations used are: GLC, gas-liquid chromatography; CC,

                                            8686




   This is an Open Access article under the CC BY license.