
[PDF physical page 1]
Metabolic Engineering of Isoprenoid
Biosynthesis in Arabidopsis for the
Production of Taxadiene, the First
Committed Precursor of Taxol


O´scar Besumbes, Susanna Sauret-Gu¨eto, Michael A. Phillips, Santiago Imperial,
Manuel Rodrı´guez-Concepcio´n, Albert Boronat

Departament de Bioquı´mica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Quı´mica,
Universitat de Barcelona, Martı´i Franque`s 1-7, 08028 Barcelona, Spain;
telephone: 34-93-402-1195; fax: 34-93-402-1219;
e-mail: mrodrigu@sun.bq.ub.es

Received 27 November 2003; accepted 10 June 2004

Published online 15 September 2004 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/bit.20237


Abstract: Paclitaxel (Taxol) is a widely used anticancer iso-   INTRODUCTION
prenoid produced by the secondary metabolism of yew
(Taxus sp.) trees. However, only limited amounts of Taxol    Isoprenoids (also called terpenoids) are the most function-
or related metabolites (taxoids) can be obtained from the     ally and structurally diverse group of plant metabolites.
currently available sources. In this work we have taken the    They are present in all organisms but are especially abun-
first step toward genetically engineering the biosynthe-                                                            dant in plants, with more than 30,000 compounds reported
sis of taxoids in angiosperms. The first committed step
                                                                  to date (Chappell, 1995; McGarvey and Croteau, 1995;in Taxol biosynthesis is the production of taxadiene from
geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP), catalyzed by the    Croteau et al., 2000). Many isoprenoids have primary roles
plastid-localized enzyme taxadiene synthase (TXS). A re-     in membrane architecture (phytosterols), protein modifica-
combinant T. baccata TXS lacking the putative plastid tar-     tion (dolichol, prenyl groups), respiration (ubiquinones),
geting peptide and fused to a C-terminal histidine (His) tag                                                             photosynthesis (carotenoids, chlorophylls, plastoquinones),
was shown to be enzymatically active in Escherichia coli.
                                                     and regulation of growth and development (gibberellins,Constitutive production of the full-length His-tagged en-
zyme in Arabidopsis thaliana plants led to the accumu-     abscisic  acid,  cytokinins,  brassinosteroids). The  largest
lation of taxadiene and concomitant growth retardation     variety of isoprenoids, however, are secondary metabolites
and decreased levels of photosynthetic pigment in trans-     that function in protecting plants against herbivores and
genic plants. Although these phenotypes may derive from                                                            pathogens,  in  attracting  pollinators and  seed-dispersing
a toxic effect of taxadiene, the lower accumulation of en-
                                                             animals, and as allelochemicals that influence competitiondogenous plastid isoprenoid products such as carotenoids
and chlorophylls in transgenic plants also suggests that the   among plant species (Croteau et  al., 2000). Each plant
constitutive production of an active TXS enzyme might    species synthesizes a specific array of isoprenoid secondary
alter the balance of the GGPP pool. Induction of transgene    metabolites, mostly produced only in wild or semi-wild
expression using a glucocorticoid-mediated system con-                                                                plant species. The diterpenoid paclitaxel is one of these.
sistently resulted in a more efficient recruitment of GGPP
                                                                  (Paclitaxel  is the generic name  for Taxol, which  is afor the production of taxadiene, which reached levels
30-fold higher than those in plants constitutively express-     registered trademark of Bristol-Myers Squibb. Because of
ing the transgene. This accomplishment illustrates the pos-    the far greater familiarity with the word Taxol, we will use
sibility of engineering the production of taxoids and other      it here instead of paclitaxel.)
GGPP-derived isoprenoids in crop plants despite the con-                                                         Taxol is synthesized in the bark of yew trees such as
straints associated with limited knowledge with regard to
                                                      Taxus brevifolia, which are very slow growing and sparselyregulation of GGPP availability. B 2004 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Keywords: Arabidopsis; glucocorticoid; isoprenoids; pacli-     distributed. In addition, the amount of Taxol produced in the
taxel; taxadiene; geranylgeranyl diphosphate             yew bark is low and its harvest is destructive. Because Taxol
                                                                             is one of the most potent chemotherapeutic agents known
                                                                against a range of cancers (Arbuck and Blaylock, 1995;
                                                       Jennewein and Croteau, 2001), its demand greatly exceeds
                                                          supply from its natural source. Alternative approaches for
                                                             obtaining Taxol include total synthesis of the drug, which is
  Correspondence to: M. Rodrı´guez-Concepcio´n                        costly and low yielding (Kingston, 1994), and semisynthesis
  Contract grant sponsors: Generalitat de Catalunya; Spanish Ministerio
                                                     from abundant, more readily available biosynthetic pre-de Educacio´n y Cultura; Generalitat de Catalunya (DURSI)
  Contract  grant numbers: BIO99-0503-C02-01; FEDER-BIO2002-    cursors such as 10-deacetylbaccatin  III and baccatin  III
04419-C02-02; FEDER-BIO2002-1653; 2001SGR00109               (Ketchum and Croteau, 1998). Although semisynthesis is



B 2004 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.


[PDF physical page 2]
the main procedure for commercial production of Taxol,
purification of the precursors from renewable foliage and
other tissues of plantation-grown Taxus species requires
substantial  effort. The production of Taxol and related
taxane diterpenoids (taxoids) in Taxus cell culture systems
appeared to be a promising strategy, but the yields have been
unstable and high production levels  difficult to sustain
(Jennewein and Croteau, 2001; Ketchum and Croteau,
1998). Intensive efforts have been directed toward finding
other means of producing and synthesizing Taxol analogs
with increased activity and solubility. For the foreseeable
future, however, an efficient and affordable supply of Taxol
and taxoids should rely on alternative biological production
systems (Jennewein and Croteau, 2001; Walker and Croteau,
2001). Because no routine transformation systems are cur-
rently available for Taxus species, we have explored the
possibility of transferring the pathway to fast-growing plant
species  that are easier to genetically manipulate as an
alternative to currently available methods for the production
of taxoids.
  The first step in the biosynthesis of Taxol (Fig. 1A) is the
production of the committed intermediate taxadiene [taxa-
4(5),11(12)-diene] by cyclization of the universal diterpe-
noid precursor geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP). This
reaction is catalyzed by taxadiene synthase (TXS), a plastid-
localized enzyme (Koepp et  al., 1995). After taxadiene
synthesis, it takes about 12 enzymatic steps (including hy-
droxylations and  acylations of the taxane skeleton)  to
synthesize Taxol, but fewer are required to produce the
advanced  taxoid  intermediate  10-deacetylbaccatin  III
(Fig. 1A), the major current source for semisynthesis of
Taxol (Jennewein and Croteau, 2001; Walker and Croteau,
2001). Although the microsomal cytochrome P450 mono-
oxygenase that hydroxylates taxadiene to produce the next
intermediate of the pathway has not yet been cloned, sev-
eral of the genes encoding the remaining biosynthetic
enzymes have been identified (Walker and Croteau, 2001).
The GGPP substrate used by TXS appears to be derived
mostly from the methylerytritol 4-phosphate (MEP) pathway
(Eisenreich et al., 1996; Palazon et al., 2003), which syn-
thesizes the prenyl diphosphate precursors for the pro-
duction of isoprenoids in plastids (Rodriguez-Concepcion     Figure 1.  Taxol biosynthetic pathway. (A) TXS, taxadiene synthase; Ac,
and Boronat, 2002). Plastidial GGPP is also a precursor for      acetyl group; Bz, benzoyl group; BzPIS, N-benzoyl-3-phenylisoserine side
the biosynthesis of phytohormones and photosynthesis-      chain. (B) Outline of GGPP-derived isoprenoid biosynthesis in plant cells.
                                                                G3P, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; DXP, deoxyxylulose 5-phosphate; MEP,
related isoprenoids in plants (Fig. 1B). In this study we show
                                                                               methylerythritol  4-phosphate;  IPP,  isopentenyl  diphosphate; DMAPP,
that the production of taxadiene and potentially downstream      dimethylallyl diphosphate; GGPP, geranylgeranyl diphosphate; PPP, phy-
taxoids can be implemented in transgenic plants despite the      tyl diphosphate; ABA, abscisic acid; GGDS, GGPP synthase.
problems derived from the interaction between endogenous
and transferred GGPP-consuming pathways.
                                                               sized with a cDNA synthesis system (Gibco-BRL). Primers
                                              TXS-1F (5V-ATGGCTCAGCTCTCATTTAATG-3V;  the
MATERIALS AND METHODS                                translation  start codon  is underlined) and TXS-7R  (5V-
                                         TGCCAATACAATAATAAGTC-3V, annealing on the 3V-
                                            UTR) were designed after very highly conserved sequences
cDNA Cloning and Sequence Analysis
                                                                  in the TXS cDNAs from T.  brevifolia (Accession No.
Total RNA was isolated from T. baccata cultured cells as    U48796) and T. chinensis (AY007207) and used to amplify
described by Wang et al. (2000), and cDNA was synthe-    a T. baccata cDNA encoding a full-length protein with



                                       BESUMBES ET AL.: TAXADIENE PRODUCTION IN ARABIDOPSIS       169


[PDF physical page 3]
homology to TXS (AY424738). The blunt-ended polymer-    1999) to generate plasmid pGFP-TXS-His. Digestion of
ase chain reaction (PCR) product obtained with Pfu DNA     this plasmid with PstI and XbaI (the XbaI site was blunt-
polymerase (Promega) was cloned  into  SmaI-digested    ended with Klenow before digestion with PstI) released the
pBluescript SK+ (Stratagene) to generate plasmid pBS-   TXS cDNA fused to the CaMV 35S promoter and a TEV
TXS. Sequencing of the cloned cDNA was carried out with    enhancer. The resulting fragment was subcloned into the
an ABI-Prism BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing kit,    PstI and PmlI  sites  of  the pCAMBIA 1303  vector
v2.0 (PE Biosystems). Sequence analyses were performed    (AF234299) to generate plasmid pCA-TXS-His. A frag-
using GCG 9.0 software (Genetics Computer Group, Inc.)    ment without the CaMV 35S promoter was obtained after
and  the  available web  resources (www.expasy.ch and    digestion of pGFP-TXS-His with EcoRI and XbaI (the
www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/ChloroP/).                      EcoRI site was blunt-ended with Klenow before digestion
                                                          with XbaI) and cloned into pTA7002 (Aoyama and Chua,
                                                       1997) digested with XhoI, blunt-ended with Klenow, and
Expression in E. coli
                                                              digested with SpeI to generate plasmid pTA-TXS-His. Con-
The RGS(6xH) epitope was cloned in-frame with the C-     structs pCA-TXS-His and pTA-TXS-His were delivered to
terminus of the predicted protein after amplifying the entire    the Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain C58C1 (pGV2260)
coding region of the TXS cDNA by PCR with Pfu DNA    and used to transform Arabidopsis plants (ecotype Colum-
polymerase (Promega) and primers TXS-1F and TXS-6R-     bia-3) by floral dipping (Clough and Bent, 1998). Transgenic
His (5V-TCACGTGTCAGTGATGGTGATGGTGATGC-     plants were selected on Petri dishes with solid Murashige–
GATCCTCTTACTTGAATTGGGTCAATATAAAC-3V;    Skoog (MS) medium supplemented with 50 Ag/mL hygro-
the sequence annealing with the TXS cDNA is underlined).    mycin (Carretero-Paulet et al., 2002). Homozygous T3 plants
Primer TXS-6R-His was designed to only eliminate the stop    were selected and used for the experiments reported in
codon and incorporate in its place a sequence encoding the     this work. Induction with dexamethasone (DEX; Sigma)
epitope residues (in italics), a new stop codon (in bold), and   was carried out either by supplementing MS plates with
a PmlI restriction site. The PCR product was cloned into    30 AM DEX (prepared from a 30 mM stock solution in
SmaI-digested pBluescript SK+ to generate plasmid pBS-    ethanol) or by spraying plants with a solution containing
TXS-His. A NcoI site was subsequently incorporated into    30 AM DEX and 0.1% Tween-20 (Sigma).
the TXS cDNA cloned into pBS-TXS-His by PCR using
primer TXS-NcoI-180F (5V-GTCGTAACCATGGGCAG-
                                                Immunoblot Analyses
TAGCAC-3V; the NcoI site is underlined) to generate a new
ATG codon 60 triplets downstream of the original trans-    Plant protein extracts were then prepared as described by
lation start site. A NcoI–EcoRI cDNA fragment encoding    Carretero-Paulet et al. (2002). Aliquots of 50 Ag of protein
the predicted mature TXS protein (without the predicted    were separated on 8% acrylamide gels and either stained
plastid targeting sequence) was cloned into the same sites    with Coomassie blue to monitor loading or electrotrans-
of the expression vector pET23 (Novagen) for expression     ferred to Hybond-P PVDF membranes (Amersham), as
in E. coli. The resulting pET-  TXS-His plasmid was used    described by Rodriguez-Concepcion  et  al. (2001). The
together with pUBS520-argU, which encodes the bacterial    recombinant His-tagged TXS protein was detected with a
minor tRNA(Arg) species to decode the plant-abundant    1:2000 dilution of an anti-RGS(6xH) polyclonal antibody
codons AGA and AGG (Brinkmann et al., 1989) to cotrans-    (Qiagen), as described by Carretero-Paulet et al. (2002).
form BL21(DE3) cells. Protein expression was induced with
0.2 mM isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopy ranoside (IPTG) at
                                                 Pigment Measurement28jC and monitored by sodium dodecylsulfate–polyacry-
lamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and Coomassie     Plastidial isoprenoid pigments were extracted and separated
staining. The recombinant His-tagged TXS protein was puri-    by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) on a
fied on a Hi-Trap chelating column (Amersham Pharmacia)    Waters Alliance 2690 system using a reverse-phase YMC
and eluted with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl,   5-Am (250   4.6 mm) C30 column, as described by Fraser
and 150 mM imidazol, following  the manufacturer’s     et al. (2000b). Eluting compounds were monitored using a
recommendations. Analysis of this fraction by SDS-PAGE    photodiode array detector (Model 2996, Waters). Canthax-
and Coomassie staining showed that >90% of the eluted    anthin was used as an internal standard for quantification.
protein corresponded to His-tagged TXS.                   Peak areas of total chlorophylls and carotenoids at 450 nm
                                                     were determined using MILLENIUM v3.2 software (Waters).

Expression in Plants
                                                    Determination of Taxadiene
A 2.6-kb cDNA fragment encoding the full-length TXS pro-
tein fused to the RGS(6xH) epitope was isolated from pBS-    In  vitro TXS  activity was determined as described by
TXS-His after digestion with NcoI and PmlI. The resulting    Hezari et al. (1995) with the following modifications. Ten
fragment was gel-purified and subcloned into the NcoI and    micrograms of His-tagged TXS protein purified by immo-
SmaI sites of pGFP-MRC (Rodriguez-Concepcion et  al.,     bilized metal-ion affinity chromatography (IMAC), as de-



170       BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOENGINEERING, VOL. 88, NO. 2, OCTOBER 20, 2004


[PDF physical page 4]
scribed  earlier, was incubated at 30jC for 12 h in the
presence of 25 mM HEPES (pH 8), 50 AM GGPP (Sigma),
and 1 mM MgCl2 in a final volume of 500 AL. After incu-
bation, 1 mL of hexane was added and the reaction mixture
vigorously  vortexed.  After  centrifugation  to  separate
phases, the hexane layer was collected and passed through
a glasswool-plugged Pasteur pipette filled with silica gel
with an average pore diameter of 25 A˚ (Sigma), overlaid
with anhydrous MgSO4. This step was repeated twice. The
hexane extracts were collected and concentrated before gas
chromatography–mass  spectrometry (GC-MS)  analysis,
which was performed on a Trace-DSQ system (Thermo
Finnigan) using a 25-m fused silica capillary HP-5 column
with a 200-Am diameter and 0.5-Am film thickness. Sam-
ples were separated using splitless injection (250jC) with
temperature programming to 320jC at 8jC/min and helium
as a carrier gas. Electron impact spectra were recorded at
70 eV. For taxadiene quantification in plants, tissues were
frozen in liquid nitrogen, ground to a fine powder, and
mixed with 0.5 ng/mL nonadecane (Sigma)  in hexane
(3 mL/g of fresh tissue). The mixture was shaken overnight
at 4jC and the hexane fraction was then passed through a     Figure 2.  TXS derivatives and taxadiene mass spectrum. (A) Schematic
column similar to that described earlier but surmounted by    map of the TXS proteins used in this study. The signal peptide predicted to
                                                                                     target the protein to plastids by the ChloroP algorithm (Emanuelsson et al.,
a top layer of activated charcoal. The eluted hydrocarbon
                                                                     1999) is represented in gray, the typical terpene synthase divalent metal
fraction free of oxygenated metabolites was used for GC-     ion–substrate complex binding motifs (Wildung and Croteau, 1996) are
MS analysis, as described previously.                                indicated with black bars, and the C-terminal RGS(6xH) tag is shown as a
                                                                        hatched box. (B) Mass spectra of the product of the truncated recombinant
                                                   TXS enzyme produced in E. coli using GGPP as a substrate. Identification
                                                                             of the mass fragmentation pattern as that of taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene is based
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION                               on comparison to published data (Wildung and Croteau, 1996; Williams
                                                                                         et al., 2000).

Cloning of a T. baccata cDNA Encoding
Taxadiene Synthase
                                                           involved in plastid targeting were removed to optimize
An in vitro culture of Taxol-producing T. baccata cells was    expression of high levels of active protein (Williams et al.,
used as a source for the isolation of a cDNA encoding TXS.    2000), whereas the RGS(6xH) epitope was added to moni-
Reverse transcript (RT)-PCR with primers designed from     tor production of the protein with a specific antibody and to
highly conserved regions of cloned TXS sequences from     facilitate the purification of the recombinant enzyme by
T. chinensis and T. brevifolia successfully amplified a   IMAC (Huang et al., 1998). In vitro activity assays with
T. baccata cDNA sequence with a 2589-bp open reading    the purified protein showed that  it was able to convert
frame encoding a predicted protein of 862 residues and   GGPP into a compound identified as taxadiene by GC-MS
98 kDa. The deduced full-length protein showed homology     (Fig. 2B), thus confirming that the identified T. baccata
to the previously cloned TXS enzymes (98.8% and 97.7%   cDNA encodes a functional TXS. Furthermore, we found
similarity to T. chinensis and T. brevifolia TXS proteins,     that neither the truncation of the predicted plastid targeting
respectively). The putative T. baccata enzyme also dis-    sequence nor the addition of the C-terminal RGS(6xH) tag
played two conserved motifs, likely involved in metal ion–    prevents enzymatic activity.
substrate complex binding (Wildung and Croteau, 1996),
and a putative plastidial transit peptide predicted to be
                                                        Constitutive Production of Taxadiene Correlatescleaved at position 59 by the ChloroP algorithm (Ema-
                                                With Deleterious Effects in Arabidopsis
nuelsson et al., 1999) (Fig. 2A). Indeed, earlier studies have
reported that the mature TXS enzyme is a plastid-localized    Taxadiene has been synthesized in E. coli cells cotrans-
monomeric protein of about 79 kDa (Hezari et al., 1995),    formed with constructs to express TXS and GGPP synthase
which suggests that the cleavage of the plastid signal pep-    (an activity absent in the bacterium) (Huang et al., 2001).
tide likely occurs downstream of the predicted position. To    However, implementation of further enzymatic steps for
ascertain  the proposed function of  the cloned  protein,    the production of downstream taxanes in bacterial cells
Escherichia coli cells were transformed with a construct   may be prevented by the need to express the required plant
expressing the predicted mature TXS enzyme fused to a    microsomal cytochrome P450 monooxygenases in an en-
RGS(6xH) tag (Fig. 2A). The 60 N-terminal residues likely    zymatically active form. In addition, there are metabolic



                                       BESUMBES ET AL.: TAXADIENE PRODUCTION IN ARABIDOPSIS       171


[PDF physical page 5]
constraints mostly derived from the need to channel a    by C2 was  active  in producing a new compound  in
limited pool of bacterial precursors to GGPP biosynthesis,    Arabidopsis, which was identified as taxadiene by GC-MS.
which may compromise the production of Taxol precur-    Quantification of taxadiene  in C2 and C3  plants was
sors (Huang et  al., 2001). A similar scenario has been    accomplished using nonadecane as an internal standard
described for the production of carotenoids, another group     (Fig. 3B). Similar levels of taxadiene (around 20 ng/g dry
of GGPP-derived isoprenoids (Fig. 1B) in E. coli (a non-    weight) were produced in seedlings and leaves from both
carotenogenic bacteria) (Farmer and Liao, 2000; Sandmann,    35S:TXS transgenic lines (Table I). We observed, however,
2001). We therefore reasoned that plants might be a better     that taxadiene accumulation in 35S:TXS plants was cor-
system to engineer the production of taxoids. To overex-     related with a reduced hypocotyl length in dark-grown
press TXS in Arabidopsis a chimeric cDNA encoding the    seedlings (Table I), retarded growth and flowering, and a
full-length enzyme from T. baccata fused to a C-terminal     pale, bleached phenotype (data not shown) due to reduced
RGS(6xH) tag (Fig. 2A) was cloned into the pCAMBIA     levels of chlorophylls and carotenoids compared with un-
1303 vector under the transcriptional control of the cauli-    transformed plants (Table  I). One explanation for these
flower mosaic virus 35S promoter (35S:TXS construct).    phenotypes might be a toxic effect of taxadiene accumu-
Homozygous T3 plants from seven independent 35S:TXS     lation in plant cells. An alternative possibility is that the
lines were selected and used for immunoblot analysis with     constitutive production of an active TXS enzyme might
an anti-RGS(6xH) antibody, revealing the presence of a ca.     interfere with endogenous balance in the production of plas-
80-kDa protein in six of them, which was absent from wild-     tidial isoprenoids, such as the diterpenoid hormones gib-
type plants and homozygous control plants (CC) trans-     berellins and carotenoids and the side chain of chlorophylls
formed  with  the unmodified pCAMBIA 1303  vector    (see Fig. 1B). Similarly, dwarf tomato and tobacco plants
(Fig. 3A). The size of the recognized protein was consist-    were generated by constitutive overexpression of phytoene
ent with previous reports (Hezari et al., 1995) suggesting a    synthase, the enzyme catalyzing the conversion of GGPP
plastidial localization of the enzyme. In agreement, the     into phytoene, which is the first committed step in the bio-
recombinant protein was found in the organellar fraction in    synthesis of carotenoids (Busch et al., 2002; Fray et al.,
subcellular  fractionation experiments  (data not shown).    1995). In these plants, the synthesis of gibberellins was
Lines C2 and C3, which showed the highest levels of    compromised because the GGPP precursor required for
recombinant protein (Fig. 3A), as well as the CC control     their synthesis was channeled to the carotenoid pathway
line, were selected for further analyses. Figure 3B shows    by phytoene synthase (Fray et al., 1995) (see Fig. 1B). The
that the recombinant RGS(6xH)-tagged protein produced     affinity of T. brevifolia TXS for GGPP (Km [GGPP] = 3 AM)
                                                            (Hezari et al., 1995) is similar to that reported for other
                                                                plant enzymes that utilize GGPP as substrate to catalyze the
                                                           formation of the first committed steps of pathways leading
                                                                  to the production of carotenoids (phytoene synthase; 5 AM)
                                                                (Fraser et al., 2000a) and the side chain of plastoquinone
                                                               (solanesyl diphosphate synthase; 1.6 AM) (Hirooka et al.,
                                                            2003). However, the relatively small amounts of taxadiene
                                                     formed suggests that the recombinant TXS might not be
                                                          channeling significant amounts of GGPP away from the
                                                               biosynthesis of other plastidial isoprenoids. We propose
                                                                    that the presence of a non-native, GGPP-consuming en-
                                               zyme such as TXS in Arabidopsis might interfere with the


                                                                 Table  I.  Characterization  of  transgenic  plants  constitutively  over-
                                                                           expressing TXS.a

                                                                                                                  Line

                                                                      CC        C2         C3

                                                                           Seedlings
                                                                       Taxadiene (ng/g DW)    —      23.45 F 2.76  19.21 F 1.31
                                                                       Hypocotyl length (mm)   10.89 F 2.18   8.02 F 1.64   7.77 F 1.48
                                                                            Carotenoids (mg/g FW)    0.81 F 0.02   0.62 F 0.04   0.64 F 0.01
Figure  3.  Constitutive expression of TXS in transgenic Arabidopsis       Chlorophylls (mg/g FW)   1.20 F 0.03   0.75 F 0.04   0.87 F 0.04
thaliana. (A) Immunoblot analysis of extracts from 2-week-old seedlings of     Leaves
seven independent 35S:TXS lines. A vector control line (CC) and the       Taxadiene (ng/g DW)    —      24.64 F 4.10  17.52 F 0.56
Columbia-3 wild-type (WT) were also analyzed with a commercial anti-       Carotenoids (mg/g FW)    1.47 F 0.16   1.03 F 0.15   1.03 F 0.10
RGS(6xH) antibody. (B) GC-MS analysis (total ion count) of the hexane       Chlorophylls (mg/g FW)   2.10 F 0.15   1.50 F 0.03   1.58 F 0.07
extracts from CC (upper panel) and C2 (lower panel) leaves. Retention times
of the nonadecane standard (24.47) and taxadiene (26.54) are indicated.        aDW, dry weight; FW, fresh weight.



172       BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOENGINEERING, VOL. 88, NO. 2, OCTOBER 20, 2004


[PDF physical page 6]
regulation of the availability of intermediates for produc-
tion of endogenous plastidial isoprenoids, many of which
are key for plant growth and development.


Induction of TXS Expression in Mature Leaves
Results in a Dramatic Increase in Recombinant
Protein Levels and Taxadiene Production

An alternative strategy for the production of taxadiene in
transgenic Arabidopsis plants consisted in the utilization of
an inducible system to control expression of the transgene.
We reasoned that this approach could result in higher yields
of taxadiene by expressing the recombinant TXS when
GGPP levels are less critical for plant growth and devel-
opment. The cDNA encoding the full-length enzyme from
T. baccata fused to a C-terminal RGS(6xH) tag (Fig. 2A)
was cloned into the pTA7002 vector, which contains a two-
component glucocorticoid system that utilizes the regu-
latory mechanism  of  steroid hormone  receptors from     Figure 4.  Inducible expression of TXS in transgenic Arabidopsis tha-
mammals, allowing tight regulation of transgene expression      liana. (A) Immunoblot analysis with the anti-RGS(6xH) antibody of
in plants (Aoyama and Chua, 1997). Arabidopsis plants      protein extracts from 2-week-old seedlings of five independent TA:TXS
transformed with this construct (TA:TXS) were expected to      lines germinated and grown on MS plates either supplemented (+) or not
                                                                                                 (  ) with DEX. A vector control line (CI) and the Columbia-3 wild-type
express only recombinant TXS after glucocorticoid treat-                                                          (WT) grown on DEX-containing plates were also analyzed. (B) Mature
ment.  Indeed, immunoblot  analysis  using  the  anti-     leaves of the TA:TXS line I2 were sprayed either with DEX (+) or with a
RGS(6xH) antibody of seedlings from five independent    mock solution (   ), and samples were collected after the indicated times (in
TA:TXS lines revealed the presence of a cross-reacting band     hours) for immunoblot analysis with the anti-RGS(6xH) antibody. Protein
in all of them only when the synthetic glucocorticoid dexa-      extracts from leaves of the vector control line (CI) collected 48 h after
                                               DEX treatment and from untreated leaves of C2 and C3 plants (harboring
methasone (DEX) was added to the medium in which they                                                                               the 35S:TXS transgene) were also analyzed. (C) GC-MS analysis (total ion
were germinated and grown (Fig. 4A). The protein was     count) of the hexane extracts from I2 mature leaves collected 48 h after
absent from wild-type plants and control plants transformed     spraying with DEX. Retention times of the nonadecane standard (24.43)
with the unmodified vector (CI), as well as from non-     and taxadiene (26.54) are indicated.
induced TA:TXS transgenic  plants, confirming  that ex-
pression of the transgene could be regulated efficiently.
Homozygous T3 plants of the line I2, which showed high      still higher than those found in leaves from the 35S:TXS
levels of the recombinant protein only in the presence of     lines C2 and C3 (Fig. 4B). Leaves from I2 plants were col-
DEX (Fig. 4A), were selected for further analyses. As    lected 2 days after spraying with DEX and used to monitor
expected, in I2 seedlings germinated and grown on medium    the production of taxadiene, which was much higher than
supplemented with DEX, the accumulation of recombinant     that observed in plants constitutively expressing TXS (com-
enzyme, the production of taxadiene, and the depletion of    pare Fig. 4C with Fig. 3B). Quantification of taxadiene in
isoprenoid pigments were very similar to those described    these samples showed levels of up to 600 ng of taxadiene
for 35S:TXS seedlings (data not shown), because in both    per gram of dry weight, a ca. 30-fold increase compared
cases the plants continuously express the TXS transgene. To    with that measured in seedlings and young leaves con-
optimize  the  conditions  for  taxadiene  production, we     stitutively expressing the transgene (Table I). We believe
studied the time-course of TXS accumulation after DEX-     that this occurs because the production and accumulation
mediated  induction  of  transgene  expression  in mature    of very high levels of active TXS enzyme in a relatively
leaves, which show an active MEP pathway (Carretero-    short period can more  efficiently  recruit the  available
Paulet et al., 2002; Estevez et al., 2000), and yet the pro-   GGPP substrate for taxadiene biosynthesis.
duction of plastidial GGPP-derived end-products  is less     Our results demonstrate for the first time that functional
critical than that in developing seedlings and young leaves.     steps of the Taxol biosynthesis pathway can be reproduced
Samples of mature leaves from I2 plants at the vegetative     in plants other than Taxus. We have also shown that sig-
stage were collected at 24-h intervals after DEX spraying     nificant increases in the production of taxadiene can be
and used for immunoblot analysis with the anti-RGS(6xH)    accomplished by selecting the temporal and spatial coor-
antibody. As shown in Figure 4B, a very strong DEX-    dinates of TXS expression, establishing a platform tech-
dependent induction of TXS production was observed,    nology  for  future  metabolic  engineering  approaches
reaching the highest levels 2 days after spraying and then    aimed at production of taxoids (and likely other GGPP-
progressively declining. At 4 days after induction, the levels    derived isoprenoids) in crop plants. Alternatives to the
of recombinant enzyme in the induced TA:TXS plants were     strategy described herein to increase the availability of the



                                       BESUMBES ET AL.: TAXADIENE PRODUCTION IN ARABIDOPSIS       173


[PDF physical page 7]
GGPP substrate include metabolic engineering of the MEP     Eisenreich W, Menhard B, Hylands PJ, Zenk MH, Bacher A. 1996. Studies
pathway for production of higher levels of this isoprenoid        on the biosynthesis of taxol: the taxane carbon skeleton is not of
                                                                        mevalonoid origin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:6431–6436.
precursor. For instance, overexpression of deoxyxylulose 5-                                                                  Emanuelsson O, Nielsen H, von Heijne G. 1999. ChloroP, a neural network-
phosphate synthase (the first enzyme of the MEP pathway)         based method for predicting chloroplast transit peptides and their
results in enhanced accumulation of plastidial isoprenoid         cleavage sites. Protein Sci 8:978–984.
end-products, suggesting that this activity is limiting for     Estevez JM, Cantero A, Reindl A, Reichler S, Leon P. 2001. 1-Deoxy-D-
production of their precursors in Arabidopsis (Estevez et al.,         xylulose-5-phosphate synthase, a limiting enzyme for plastidic iso-
                                                                              prenoid biosynthesis in plants. J Biol Chem 276:22901–22909.
2001). In addition, the transformation of other plants with                                                                        Estevez JM, Cantero A, Romero C, Kawaide H, Jimenez LF, Kuzuyama T,
constructs to target the expression of the TXS gene to         Seto H, Kamiya Y, Leon P. 2000. Analysis of the expression of CLA1,
tissues or organs with a more active secondary metabolism         a gene that encodes the 1-deoxyxylulose 5-phosphate synthase of the
and higher production of GGPP-derived isoprenoids (such         2-C-methyl-D-erythritol-4-phosphate pathway in Arabidopsis. Plant
as tomato  fruit during ripening) might permit a further         Physiol 124:95–104.
                                                                   Farmer WR, Liao JC. 2000. Improving lycopene production in Escherichia
increase in taxadiene production and may facilitate har-                                                                                          coli by engineering metabolic control. Nat Biotechnol 18:533–537.
vesting  without  disturbing  the endogenous  metabolic     Fraser PD, Schuch W, Bramley PM. 2000a. Phytoene synthase from
balance. Future efforts should also be directed at imple-         tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) chloroplasts—partial purification
mentation of other biosynthetic steps for transgenic plants        and biochemical properties. Planta 211:361–369.
in the production of taxoids that could be then purified and     Fraser PD, Pinto ME, Holloway DE, Bramley PM. 2000b. Technical ad-
                                                                              vance: application of high-performance liquid chromatography with
used  in semisynthesis approaches. In addition, the ex-                                                                            photodiode array detection to the metabolic profiling of plant iso-
pression in such transgenic plants of chimeric genes gen-          prenoids. Plant J 24:551–558.
erated by in vitro evolution or shuffling strategies might     Fray RG, Wallace A, Fraser PD, Valero D, Hedden P, Bramley PM,
contribute to generation of structurally novel taxoids with a         Grierson D. 1995. Constitutive expression of a fruit phytoene synthase
greater range and potency of anticancer activity, increased        gene in transgenic tomatoes causes dwarfism by redirecting metabo-
                                                                                                     lites from the gibberellin pathway. Plant J 8:693–701.
bioavailability, and decreased side effects.                                                                        Hezari M, Lewis NG, Croteau R. 1995. Purification and characterization of
                                                                                  taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene synthase from Pacific yew (Taxus brevifolia)
  The authors are very grateful for the excellent technical support              that catalyzes the first committed step of taxol biosynthesis. Arch
   provided by Joan Montero and the staff of the Serveis Cientifico-          Biochem Biophys 322:437–444.
    te`cnics and the Serveis de Camps Experimentals of the Universitat       Hirooka K, Bamba T, Fukusaki E, Kobayashi A. 2003. Cloning and kinetic
   de Barcelona. The help of Dr. Teresa Pin˜ol’s lab members (Facultat             characterization of Arabidopsis thaliana solanesyl diphosphate syn-
   de Farma`cia, Universitat de Barcelona) with Taxus cell cultures and              thase. Biochem J 370:679–686.
   Dr. Irene Ferna´ndez (Servei d’Espectrometria de Masses, Universi-       Huang KX, Huang QL, Wildung MR, Croteau R, Scott AI. 1998. Over-
    tat de Barcelona) with GC-MS is greatly appreciated. Canthaxanthin             production, in Escherichia coli, of soluble taxadiene synthase, a key
  was a gift from Merck.                                             enzyme in the Taxol biosynthetic pathway. Prot Expr Purif 13:90–96.
                                                             Huang Q, Roessner CA, Croteau R, Scott AI. 2001. Engineering Esche-
                                                                                     richia coli for the synthesis of taxadiene, a key intermediate in the
                                                                                   biosynthesis of taxol. Bioorg Med Chem 9:2237–2242.
References                                                       Jennewein S, Croteau R. 2001. Taxol: Biosynthesis, molecular genetics,
                                                                      and biotechnological applications. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 57:
Aoyama T, Chua NH. 1997. A glucocorticoid-mediated transcriptional        13–19.
    induction system in transgenic plants. Plant J 11:605–612.              Kingston DG. 1994. Taxol: The chemistry and structure–activity relation-
Arbuck SG, Blaylock BA. 1995. Taxol: clinical results and current issues          ships of a novel anticancer agent. Trends Biotechnol 12:222–227.
    in development. In: Suffness M, ed. Taxol: Science and applications.    Koepp AE, Hezari M, Zajicek  J, Vogel BS, LaFever RE, Lewis NG,
   Boca Raton: CRC Press. p 379–415.                                      Croteau R. 1995. Cyclization of geranylgeranyl diphosphate to taxa-
Brinkmann U, Mattes RE, Buckel P. 1989. High-level expression of          4(5),11(12)-diene  is the committed step of  taxol biosynthesis  in
    recombinant genes in Escherichia coli is dependent on the availability          Pacific yew. J Biol Chem 270:8686–8690.
    of the dnaY gene product. Gene 85:109–114.                       Ketchum RE, Croteau R. 1998. Recent progress toward an understanding
Busch M, Seuter A, Hain R. 2002. Functional analysis of the early steps of          of Taxol biosynthesis in plant cell cultures. In: Ageta H, Aimi N,
    carotenoid biosynthesis in tobacco. Plant Physiol 128:439–453.             Ebizuka Y,  Fujita T, Honda G,  eds. Towards  natural medicine
Carretero-Paulet L, Ahumada I, Cunillera N, Rodriguez-Concepcion M,          research in the 21st century. Amsterdam Elsevier Science. p 339–348.
    Ferrer A, Boronat A, Campos N. 2002. Expression and molecular    McGarvey DJ, Croteau R. 1995. Terpenoid metabolism. Plant Cell 7:
    analysis of the Arabidopsis DXR gene encoding 1-deoxy-D-xylulose        1015–1026.
    5-phosphate reductoisomerase, the  first committed enzyme of the     Palazon J, Cusido RM, Bonfill M, Morales C, Pinol MT. 2003. Inhibition of
    2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate pathway. Plant Physiol 129:          paclitaxel and baccatin III accumulation by mevinolin and fosmidomy-
   1581–1591.                                                                   cin in suspension cultures of Taxus baccata. J Biotechnol 101:157–163.
Chappell J. 1995. Biochemistry and molecular biology of the isoprenoid     Rodriguez-Concepcion M, Ahumada  I, Diez-Juez E, Sauret-Gueto S,
    biosynthetic pathway in plants. Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol         Lois LM, Gallego F, Carretero-Paulet L, Campos N, Boronat A. 2001.
    Biol 46:521–547.                                                        1-Deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase and plastid isopre-
Clough  SJ, Bent AF.  1998.  Floral  dip: A  simplified method  for         noid biosynthesis during tomato fruit ripening. Plant J 27:213–222.
    Agrobacterium-mediated  transformation  of  Arabidopsis  thaliana.     Rodriguez-Concepcion M, Boronat A. 2002. Elucidation of the methyl-
    Plant J 16:735–743.                                                                erythritol phosphate pathway for isoprenoid biosynthesis in bacteria
Croteau R, Kutchan TM, Lewis NG. 2000. Natural products (secondary        and plastids. A metabolic milestone achieved through genomics. Plant
    metabolites). In: Buchanan B, Gruissem W, Jones R, eds. Biochem-         Physiol 130:1079–1089.
     istry and  molecular  biology  of  plants.  Rockville, MD: ASPB.     Rodriguez-Concepcion M, Yalovsky S, Zik M, Fromm H, Gruissem W.
   p 1250–1268.                                                           1999. The prenylation status of a novel plant calmodulin directs




174       BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOENGINEERING, VOL. 88, NO. 2, OCTOBER 20, 2004


[PDF physical page 8]
    plasma membrane or nuclear localization of the protein. EMBO J    Wildung MR, Croteau R. 1996. A cDNA clone for taxadiene synthase, the
    18:1996–2007.                                                               diterpene cyclase that catalyzes the committed step of taxol biosyn-
Sandmann G. 2001. Genetic manipulation of carotenoid biosynthesis:           thesis. J Biol Chem 271:9201–9204.
     Strategies, problems and achievements. Trends Plant Sci 6:14–17.       Williams DC, Wildung MR, Jin AQ, Dalal D, Oliver JS, Coates RM,
Walker K, Croteau R. 2001. Taxol biosynthetic genes. Phytochemistry         Croteau R. 2000. Heterologous expression and characterization of a
    58:1–7.                                                                     ‘‘pseudomature’’ form of taxadiene synthase involved in paclitaxel
Wang SX, Hunter W, Plant A. 2000. Isolation and purification of func-         (Taxol) biosynthesis and evaluation of a potential intermediate and
     tional total RNA from woody branches and needles of Sitka and white          inhibitors of the multistep diterpene cyclization reaction. Arch Bio-
    spruce. Biotechniques 28:292–296.                                 chem Biophys 379:137–146.





                                       BESUMBES ET AL.: TAXADIENE PRODUCTION IN ARABIDOPSIS       175