
[PDF physical page 1]
     Critical Reviews in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology





        ISSN: 1040-9238 (Print) 1549-7798 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ibmg20

Structural analysis of protein–protein interactions
in type I polyketide synthases


Wei Xu, Kangjian Qiao & Yi Tang


To cite this article: Wei Xu, Kangjian Qiao & Yi Tang (2013) Structural analysis of
protein–protein interactions in type I polyketide synthases, Critical Reviews in Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, 48:2, 98-122, DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2012.745476

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.3109/10409238.2012.745476




        Published online: 19 Dec 2012.



       Submit your article to this journal


         Article views: 1298



       View related articles



         Citing articles: 6 View citing articles





                           Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
             https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ibmg20


[PDF physical page 2]
                                                      http://informahealthcare.com/bmg
                                                   ISSN: 1040-9238 (print), 1549-7798 (electronic)
                                                                     Editor: Michael M. Cox
                                                                           Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol, 2013; 48(2): 98–122
                        ! 2013 Informa Healthcare USA, Inc. DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2012.745476


REVIEW ARTICLE

Structural analysis of protein–protein interactions in type I polyketide
synthases

Wei Xu1*, Kangjian Qiao1*y, and Yi Tang1,2

1Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, and 2Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA



Abstract                                                                    Keywords
Polyketide synthases (PKSs) are responsible for synthesizing a myriad of natural products with    Antibiotics, biosynthesis, fatty acid synthase,
agricultural, medicinal relevance. The PKSs consist of multiple functional domains of which     macromolecular docking, mutagenesis,
each can catalyze a specified chemical reaction leading to the synthesis of polyketides.      natural products, protein NMR, X-ray
Biochemical studies showed that protein–substrate and protein–protein interactions play      crystallography
crucial roles in these complex regio-/stereo-selective biochemical processes. Recent develop-
ments on X-ray crystallography and protein NMR techniques have allowed us to understand the                                                                                          History
biosynthetic mechanism of these enzymes from their structures. These structural studies have
                                                                                        Received 19 October 2012facilitated the elucidation of the sequence–function relationship of PKSs and will ultimately
                                                                                   Accepted 29 October 2012contribute to the prediction of product structure. This review  will focus on the current
                                                                                          Published online 19 December 2012knowledge of type I PKS structures and the protein–protein interactions in this system.


Introduction                                                phosphopantetheinylated at the active site serine within the
                                                           conserved DSL motif by a phosphopantetheinyl transferase
Polyketides constitute a major family of secondary metabo-
                                                              (PPTase). The PPTase is either encoded in the PKS gene
lites  that  have  diverse  structures  and  broad  biological
                                                                      cluster as a dedicated enzyme, or is shared with FASs or other
activities (Staunton & Weissman, 2001; Walsh, 2008). As
                                                PKSs in the same host (Lambalot et al., 1996). The acyl-
a  result, polyketides are ample sources  for  the develop-
                                              CoA:ACP transacylase (AT) is responsible for transferring the
ment  of  frontline  therapeutics towards  different  diseases
                                                    monomeric acyl groups, such as malonyl or methylmalonyl,
(Newman & Cragg, 2012). Many polyketide natural products
                                                       from  the coenzyme A  carrier  to  the  free  thiol  of  the
have become important drug molecules, including human
                                                            phosphopantetheine (pPant) arm on  the modified  (holo-)
antibiotics erythromycin A and tetracycline; veterinary anti-
                                                   ACP.  The  ketosynthase  (KS)  catalyzes  the  successive
biotic tylosin; anti-cancer agent doxorubicin; immunosup-
                                                               decarboxylative Claisen condensations between the growing
pressant rapamycin and cholesterol-lowering drug lovastatin
                                                               polyketide chain and the monomeric/extender unit supplied
(Figure 1).
                                                     by ACP to elongate the nascent polyketide backbone. AT, KS
   Notwithstanding the diversity displayed by the structures,
                                                       and ACP are the minimal domains required for the PKS
all polyketides are assembled from simple cellular building
                                                                    synthesis, hence are called minimal PKSs. Following eachblocks, such  as  acetate, by a group  of enzymes  called                   2013                                                             chain extension step in which the polyketide backbone  is
polyketide synthases (PKSs) (Khosla, 2009). Resembling the
                                                               increased in size by one ketide, tailoring domains such as
biosynthetic mechanism  of  fatty  acid  synthases  (FASs),
                                                               b-ketoreductase (KR), dehydratase (DH) and enoylreductase
polyketide biosynthesis by PKSs can be divided into three
                                                       (ER) can selectively reduce the newly formed polyketide.
steps: initiation, elongation and termination. Both FASs and
                                                     Whereas in FASs, the b-keto positions are completely reduced
PKSs  are composed  of  catalytic domains  that work  in
                                                                    to methylenes and yield a saturated fatty acyl product, the
coordination  to  polymerize  the  simple  building  blocks
                                                                      tailoring domains in PKS can be used in different combina-
(mostly in the form of acyl-CoAs). In the initiation step, the
                                                                     tions  at  each  b-position  to  yield  products  of  different
acyl carrier protein (ACP) must first be posttranslationally
                                                                oxidation states. Also unique to PKSs, a methyl group may
                                                        be introduced at the a position of the growing chain by
*These authors contributed equally to this work.                       C-methyltransferase (MT) domain (Hertweck, 2009). Finally,
yCurrent address: Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts   when  the polyketide chain reaches  the  desired  size,  the
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139-4307, USA.     product can be offloaded from the PKSs via different release
Address for correspondence: Yi Tang, Department of Chemistry and
                                                        mechanisms, such as hydrolysis or macrocyclization cata-Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
Tel: (310) 825-0375. E-mail: yitang@ucla.edu                        lyzed by a thioesterase (TE) (Du & Lou, 2010) (Figure 2).


[PDF physical page 3]
DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2012.745476                                    PKS structure and protein–protein interactions   99





Figure 1.  Examples of polyketides synthesized by different types of polyketide synthases: type I modular PKS (erythromycin A and tylosin), type I
iterative PKS (lovastatin, aflatoxin B1) and type II PKS (tetracycline and doxorubicin).





                                          Figure 2.  General chemical reactions catalyzed by PKSs.




   Based on the enzyme primary sequence, catalytic domain    with aromatic polyketides from bacteria; type III PKSs contain
organization and product structure, PKSs can be classified into     single KS domains  that  catalyze  condensations between
three distinct types (Hertweck, 2009; Weissman, 2009): type I    various acyl-CoAs directly without the use of ACP domains.
PKSs are large multidomain enzymes that can function either    This  classification  is also supported by the phylogenetic
modularly or iteratively; type II PKSs consist of dissociated     analysis  based  on  the  amino  acid  sequence  of KS
enzymes that function iteratively, and are typically associated    domains (Kroken et al., 2003; Jenke-Kodama et al., 2005).


[PDF physical page 4]
100  W. Xu et al.                                                                                                             Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol, 2013; 48(2): 98–122





Figure 3.  Biosynthesis of 6-deoxyerythronolide B on type I modular PKS DEBSs. The domain with a ‘‘0’’ notation indicate nonreactive domain
which misses important catalytic/binding site. (see colour figure online at www.informahealthcare.com/bmg).



Among the three classes of PKSs, type I PKSs have the highest    (Figure 3). The colinear feature of type I PKSs has greatly
complexity in their protein structures and product diversities.    enabled the rational manipulation of the domains and modules
These megasynthases are featured by having multiple catalytic    towards the generation of structurally altered products. In the
domains juxtaposed on a single polypeptide chain. These    case  of DEBS,  over 50  different macrolides have been
covalently joined domains result in increased reaction rates    synthesized through the engineering of AT and b-processing
and protection of labile intermediates. Depending on whether    domains (McDaniel et al., 1999).
the polyketide backbone extension is performed using distinct        Iterative type I PKSs, such as the lovastatin nonaketide
sets of domains (each set contains minimal PKS domains and    synthase LNKS  (or LovB) from  Aspergillus  terreus,  are
is referred as a module), or repeatedly on a single set of    mostly  found  in  filamentous  fungi,  with  some  recent
domains, type I PKSs can be divided into two subcategories:    discoveries of bacterial examples, including the PKSs that
modular  (noniterative)  and  iterative PKSs  (Cox,  2007;    synthesize the polyketide core of enediynes (Shen, 2003).
Hertweck, 2009; Weissman, 2009).                         Each iterative type I PKS consists of a single set of catalytic
  Modular type I PKSs, which are usually found in bacteria,    domains, which can vary and define  different extents of
synthesize  polyketides  in an assembly  line  fashion:  the    reductive modification in the product (Figure 4A). While the
growing polyketide chain is delivered from one module to     linear organization and the  iterative use of the domains
the next and each catalytic domain in a module is typically    resemble those of mammalian fatty acid synthase (mFAS), the
used only once (Meier & Burkart, 2009). The number of the    programming rules dictating the permutative use of catalytic
modules present  in a PKS defines the number of chain    domains  in  iterative type  I PKSs are  significantly more
extension  steps, while the presence of KR, DH and ER    complicated and mysterious. In the LovB case,  different
domains in each module determine the degree of b-keto    combinations of MT-KR-DH-ER usage are involved in the
reduction  after  each  elongation (Cane &  Walsh,  1999;    eight cycles of chain elongation, resulting in the generation of
Fischbach & Walsh, 2006). Therefore, the modular nature     different b-oxidation states of different chain length inter-
of the PKSs and the associated structures of the polyketide    mediates, by the same set of domains. The necessity of such
products are colinear, which can be used to predict product    complex programming rule is evident in the product of LovB,
from PKS sequence and vice versa (Fischbach & Walsh,    dihydromonacolin L, in which the decalin core  is formed
2006). The best-studied modular PKS is the 6-deoxyerythro-    through  the  intramolecular  Diels–Alder  cyclization  of a
nide B synthase (DEBS) involved in the synthesis of 6-    precisely prepared triene at the hexaketide stage (Kennedy
deoxyerythronide B (6-dEB), which  is the aglycon of the     et al., 1999; Auclair et al., 2000; Ma et al., 2009) (Figure 4B).
antibiotic erythromycin A. In DEBS, one loading module and    In sharp contrast, a different type I PKS in the lovastatin
six extending modules are required to process one propionate    pathway, LovF, which has nearly the same domain architec-
and  six  methylmalonyl-CoA  units  to  produce  6-dEB     ture as LovB, performs only a  single  iteration of chain


[PDF physical page 5]
DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2012.745476                                   PKS structure and protein–protein interactions   101





Figure 4.  Biosynthesis of lovastatin. (A) Domain organization of type I iterative PKSs LovB and LovF. (B) Biosynthesis of dihydromonacolin L on
LovB in presence of LovC. (C) Biosynthesis of 2-methylbutyrate side chain on LovF. (see colour figure online at www.informahealthcare.com/bmg).


extension and tailoring to yield the 2-methylbutyrate side    2010), KR-ER (Zheng et al., 2012) and TE (Tsai et al., 2001,
chain in lovastatin (Figure 4C) (Kennedy et al., 1999; Xie    2002; Akey et al., 2006, 2010) domains from type I modular
et  al., 2009). The contrast in programming rules between    PKSs. Structures of ACPs from different families of PKSs have
LovB and LovF  highlights  the  complexity and  perhaps    been obtained via high-resolution, liquid-state NMR analysis.
engineering potential of this subclass of type I PKSs.          These high-resolution structures have greatly increased our
   Because  of  the  similarity  in  the domain  organization    understanding of the structural biology and enzymology of the
between mFAS and type I PKSs (Figure 5A), the X-ray crystal   PKSs components and domains. A number of publications have
structures of mFAS have provided the  first look into the    reviewed the various aspects of structural enzymology of FASs
organization of the catalytic units in the multidomain type I    and PKSs (Smith & Tsai, 2007; Weissman & Muller, 2008; Tsai
PKS megasynthases (Maier et al., 2006, 2008). Much of the  & Ames, 2009; Keatinge-Clay, 2012).
finding in mFASs can be extended to that of type I PKSs,
although significant differences are expected. While the crystal
                                                    Biochemical and structural analysis of
structure of an intact module (from modular PKS) or an entire
                                           mammalian FASs
iterative PKS  is  not  yet  available,  significant  structural
information of individual PKS domains have been obtained   The head-to-head model of FASs was proposed through sets
in recent years. These include the X-ray structures of excised    of mutation complementation experiments (Witkowski et al.,
KS-AT (Tang et al., 2006, 2007), KR (Keatinge-Clay & Stroud,    1996; Joshi et al., 1997, 1998b). Inactivation mutations can be
2006; Keatinge-Clay, 2007; Zheng et  al., 2010; Zheng &    introduced to different catalytic domains without disrupting
Keatinge-Clay, 2011), DH (Keatinge-Clay, 2008; Akey et al.,    the folding of the domains, thereby allowing the combination


[PDF physical page 6]
102  W. Xu et al.                                                                                                             Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol, 2013; 48(2): 98–122





Figure 5.   Structural overview of mammalian FAS. (A) Comparison of the linear organizations of mFAS and type I PKSs. (B) The crystal structure of
mFAS with a resolution of 3.2 A˚. PDB code: 2VZ9 (C) Cartoon representation of the mFAS organization with predicted ACP–TE domains. (see colour
figure online at www.informahealthcare.com/bmg).


of different mutant monomers to generate homodimers and    domains were mapped out by fitting the density diagram with
heterodimers (Witkowski et  al., 1996). The ACP domains    previously solved type II FAS components, including FabB
were shown to crosstalk with the KS domain from either    (KS) (Olsen et al., 2001), FabA (DH) (Leesong et al., 1996),
subunits to accomplish chain elongations in FAS (Joshi et al.,   FabZ (DH) (Kimber et al., 2004) and FabG (KR) (Price et al.,
1998b), but could only interact with the DH domain from the    2001) from Escherichia coli; FabD (MAT, malonyl-CoA:ACP
same  subunit  (Joshi  et  al.,  1997,  1998a).  Heterodimers    transacylase) from Streptomyces coelicolor (Keatinge-Clay
containing one subunit with either an inactive KS or AT     et al., 2003) and a zinc-free quinone reductase (ER) from
domain, when combined with the other subunit inactivated in    Thermus thermophilus (Shimomura  et  al., 2003). Starting
any one of the other five domains, including ACP, KR, DH,    from the N-terminus of the mFAS, the dimeric KS domains
ER and TE domain, retained the ability to synthesize fatty    are located at the center of the lower body where each is
acids (Joshi et al., 1998a). Additionally, a null mutant FAS    connected to the monomeric ‘‘leg’’ MAT domain (Figure 5B
with all seven active site-compromised domains was capable    and C). Dimeric DH, ER and monomeric KR together form
of synthesizing fatty acid product in vitro after pairing with a    the upper body of the FAS, in which KR domains are the
wild-type FAS subunit (Joshi et al., 2003). In the head-to-     ‘‘arms’’. The ‘‘chest’’ DH adopts a ‘‘double-hot-dog’’ fold
head model, the ACP is able to interact with KS–AT from    containing portion from the core domain of FAS. KR domain
both subunits and can only interact with DH–ER–KR–TE    plays a central role in connecting the ‘‘shoulder’’ ER and DH
domains within the same subunit (Rangan et al., 2001). The    domains  as  well  as two newly  identified nonenzymatic
model was further supported by the crosslinking of KS and    domains consisting of the rest of the core domain. The first
ACP  via  1,3-dibromopropanone  (DBP),  in which  intra-    noncatalytic domain was named ‘‘pseudo-methyltransferase’
subunit  linked  heterodimers  were  recovered  (Witkowski     ( -MT) due to its structural similarity toward methyltransfer-
et al., 1999). The KS domains were proposed to be positioned    ase  family, while  the second domain was designated as
at the interface of the two subunits (Witkowski et al., 2004).    ‘‘pseudo-ketoreductase’’ ( -KR) resembling a truncated KR
This is motivated by biochemical evidences that KS domains     scaffold that interacts with the KR. In the lower body, the
from type I and type II FASs are always found as dimers     linker region between KS and MAT adopts a a2b3-fold (see
(Moche et al., 1999; Price et al., 2003; Witkowski et al.,   more discussion of this region in the PKS part). The upper
2004), and that the two subunits can be covalently crosslinked    body and lower body of the mFAS are barely in contact with
via bis-maleimido at low concentrations (Witkowski et al.,    each other with a contact surface area of 230 A˚. In contrast,
2004). Therefore the KS domains must play a key  role    the KS, DH and the ER domains contribute to   5000 A˚2
in  maintaining  the  dimeric  structures  of FAS, and by    dimer interface of the mFAS. The linker region between the
inference, PKSs.                            MAT and the DH domains interact with the KS domain from
  The 4.5 A˚ resolution X-ray structure of porcine FAS, which    the other subunit, also contributing to dimer formation.
was subsequently refined to 3.2 A˚ resolution, showed that the        Collectively,  the  dimeric mFAS  clearly  contains two
overall structure of mFAS adopts an X-shaped organization,    reaction chambers, in which fatty acid assembly could take
which is consistent with the head-to-head model (Asturias    place independently. Interestingly, the two reaction chambers
et al., 2005; Maier et al., 2006, 2008). The individual catalytic    appeared to be asymmetrical: the distance between the active


[PDF physical page 7]
DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2012.745476                                   PKS structure and protein–protein interactions   103





Figure 6.  Schematic configurations adopted by mFAS to position catalytic domains into the proximity of ACP domain for domain-domain
interactions. (A) A full 180  swiveling of lower body relative to the upper body permits the ACP to crosstalk with KS-AT domains from both subunits.
(B) A 25  rotation of the lower body against the upper body leads to the two states of the reaction chambers-open and closed. (see colour figure online
at www.informahealthcare.com/bmg).



sites of MAT and KR domains is 15 A˚ shorter in the narrower      To examine the dynamics of the flexible FAS that permit
chamber comparing to that in the wider chamber, suggesting    the functional interactions of the ACP with all the catalytic
that the fatty acid synthesis in each of the reaction chambers    domains, Asturias and Smith utilized single-particle electron
might  not proceed  at  the same pace and  conformation    microscopy (EM)  to  continuously  capture  a  series  of
changes. The anchor  point of ACP was revealed  at the    configurations  of FAS  dimer  from  Rattus  norvegicus
center of the upper portion of the reaction chambers. The    (Brignole  et   al.,  2009).  The FAS  mutant  (D22)  was
ACP and TE domains were unsolved in the reported mFAS    constructed by the removal of the 22-residue ACP-TE linker
crystal due to the inherent domain flexibility, but structures of     to restrict the mobility of the TE domain. When monitored by
standalone human TE (Chakravarty et al., 2004) and rat FAS    electron microscope in the absence of substrates, both ACP
ACP (Reed et al., 2003) are available. The  -MT domain is    and TE domains were visible in EM reconstructions. In the
located at the vicinity of the ACP anchor point, confining the    presence  of  substrates, asymmetrical arrangement  of  the
movement of ACP within the region of the active sites of the    upper b-processing domains was observed in both D22 and
catalytic domains. These structure features enable the holo-   DH0 mutant FASs. Specifically, a swinging motion (up to
ACP to dock at different locations and shuttle the substrate to    25 ) of the lower body relative to the upper body resulted in
the specific active site from one chamber but not active sites    the opening of one of the reaction chambers and closing of the
from the other. Considering that the upper and lower bodies of    other (Figure 6B). While the open configuration of one of the
the FAS is connected by the flexible MAT-DH linker and the    chamber is required by the b-process domains to catalyze the
limited protein–protein interactions between the two halves, it    reduction  steps,  the  closure  of  the  reaction chamber  is
is highly possible that the lower body of one subunit could    proposed to facilitate the substrate loading and condensation
swivel up to 180  with respects to the upper body to interact    reactions by the KS and AT domains. Additionally, since the
with the ACP from the other subunit (Figure 6A). This   TE domain is completely ‘‘locked’’ outside upon the closure
hypothesis is verified by the electron microscopic analysis, in    of the chamber, the chain-releasing step likely happens in the
which an 80–100  rotation of the lower body with respect to    open chamber.
the upper body was clearly present in reconstructed structures.
The  combined  X-ray  and EM  structures  explain  the
                                               Comparison between type I PKSs and mFAS
biochemical findings in mutant complementation and cross-
linking experiments. This swiveling mechanism also injects   The mammalian FASs are evolutionarily closely related to the
FASs with an additional catalytic route that contributes to    type I iterative and modular PKSs (Smith & Sherman, 2008).
approximately 20%  of  the  fatty  acid  synthesis  rate,  as    In  addition  to  the  highly  similar sequences  of  catalytic
estimated from in vitro mutant complementation (Rangan    domains and linear positioning of the domains (Figure 5A),
et al., 2001).                                                    the parallel between mFAS and PKSs can be extended to the


[PDF physical page 8]
104  W. Xu et al.                                                                                                             Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol, 2013; 48(2): 98–122

linker regions and nonenzymatic domains  -MT and  -KR.    domains in the reducing iterative PKSs to only function on
In particular, the presence of the  -MT domain in mFAS and    selected intermediates during the different cycles of chain
the catalytic MT domain in the iterative fungal PKSs indicate    extension, and how the overall chain length is determined.
shared evolutionary ancestor. Despite the domain similarities,    Currently, nearly no information is known regarding how the
the mFAS and type I PKSs are functionally very different. In     selectivity  is so precisely maintained. As a result of this
the case of modular PKSs, each module only performs one    cryptic selectivity, highly similar iterative PKSs can produce
chain elongation and one defined set of b-processing, and the     drastically different products. Recent genome sequences of
chain is passed unidirectionally down the assembly line to     different  fungi  species have  revealed  that each  contains
downstream modules. The different substrate specificities of    dozens of such PKSs with unknown products, yet unlike the
the domains, different combinations of KR-DH-ER cassette    modular PKSs, no product can be predicted from  these
and the juxtaposition of different mFAS-like modules,  all    enzymes due to the  utter lack of understanding of  their
contribute to the diverse structures that can be generated from    sequence–function relationships.  It  is expected that crystal
type I PKSs. So far, no X-ray structure of an intact PKS     structures of the iterative PKS domains, including KS, KR,
module has been solved, although the structures of nearly all   DH, ER, MT and ACP, will provide significant breakthroughs
the individual domains have been obtained. From a structural    needed for decoding these machineries.
point of view,  the  fascinating aspects  of modular PKSs
include the spatial arrangement of different modules with    Structures and catalytic mechanisms of PKS domains
respect to each other, and how protein–protein interactions
                                                      Ketosynthase
between the modules are facilitated through ACPs and linker
regions to achieve the assembly line like biosynthetic logic.   A KS domain accepts the polyketide chain from upstream (or
  While the modular PKSs is certainly Nature’s example of    cognate) ACP and  catalyzes  the decarboxylative Claisen
‘‘more  is  better’’ when  it comes to generating chemical    condensation between the growing polyketide in the form of
diversity, the iterative type I PKSs can be considered a more    an acyl-S-KS complex and an extender unit acyl-S-ACP to
compact version in which modules of different functions are    give an elongated product (Figure 7B). Several KS crystal
condensed into a single set of domains. Although iterative     structures from type I PKS system have been solved in the
PKSs are functionally and structurally more closely related to    context of standalone KS–AT didomain, including DEBS KS–
mFAS,  there  are  significant  differences  that make  this   AT3 (Tang et al., 2007) and KS–AT5 (Tang et al., 2006). The
subclass of PKS fascinating from a biochemical and structural   KS forms homodimer and each monomer adopts a thiolase-
perspective. Depending on the type of product,  different     like fold with ababa topology (Figure 7A, blue regions). The
tailoring domains are present in the PKS. For nonreduced    homodimeric nature of KS domains  is recognized  to be
polyketides  in which  b-processing  is  absent,  additional     crucial in maintaining the dimeric organizations of the entire
domains such as product template (PT) and Claisen-like   FASs and PKSs (Tang et al., 2006). The KS–KS interactions
cyclase (TE/CLC) are present to fix the regioselectivity of    are mainly via the backbone hydrogen bonds between two
intramolecular cyclization reactions. For reduced polyketides,     anti-parallel  b-strands. A  dimeric  coiled-coil  N-terminal
the more familiar KR, DH, ER and MT domains can be found    peptide, which  is  present  exclusively  in modular PKSs,
in the PKS, although it is common that some domains lost     offers an additional contact between the two KS monomers
their  functions  during  evolution. The  current  structural    (Tang et  al., 2006). This coiled dimer not only helps to
understanding of the domains from iterative type I PKSs is     stabilize the overall KS structure but also acts as a docking
not as extensive as in the modular PKS, mostly due to the     site for the upstream module during module–module com-
difficulties  in  isolating  functional and  soluble  domains.    munication (Figure 7A, orange regions). A   100 residue
In  recent  years, however, numerous  structures, including     linker is found connecting the KS and AT domains and has a
that of AT (Liew et al., 2012), PT (Crawford et al., 2009), TE/    unique aba fold with a helices close to the KS side and the b
CLC (Korman et al., 2010) have been solved, which have    strand interacting with the C-terminal a helix on the AT
provided insights into how some of these distinct domains can    domain (Figure 7A, yellow regions). The highly conserved
fit into the overall dimeric structure of the PKSs (Figure 11C,    hydrophobic interactions between KS and KS–AT linker, as
also see detailed discussion in the Section ‘‘DH and DH-like    well as AT and KS–AT linker are exclusively found in type I
domains’’). Another distinction between mFAS and iterative   PKSs and are proposed to anchor the relative positions of KS
PKS  is the recruitment of smaller, in trans enzymes  for    and AT domains. Lastly, a   30 residue post-AT linker loop
product tailoring and product release. This can be exemplified    has significant interactions with the KS domain through a
in the lovastatin biosynthesis, in which a dissociated ER    number of hydrogen bonds (Figure 7A, red regions).
enzyme (LovC) is required for the enoylreduction of three      Analogous to the well-studied FAS KSs, the KSs from type
intermediates on LovB  (Figure  4B),  and  a  dissociated     I PKSs have the same catalytic triad Cys–His–His, in which
acyltranferase (LovD) is required for product release/transfer    the  cysteine  is  the  nucleophile  involved  in  the  trans-
from LovF (Figure 4). From a limited number of experiments,     thioesterification  reactions. The cysteine  is buried  in the
the  interaction between the  iterative PKS and these  dis-     substrate pocket and can only be reached by pPant arm
sociated enzymes appear to be specific. Hence, understanding    attached to the ACP domain (Tang et al., 2006). The active
this unique protein–protein interaction is important for fully     sites of KS from the  different  crystal  structures can be
decoding the programming rules of iterative PKSs.               perfectly superimposed, indicating the arrangement of the
   Finally, the most intriguing differences between mFAS and     triad is likely optimum. The two histidine residues located in
iterative PKSs are undoubtedly the ability of the tailoring    the vicinity of the cysteine contribute to the formation of an


[PDF physical page 9]
DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2012.745476                                   PKS structure and protein–protein interactions   105





Figure 7.  Selected PKS KS structures. (A) KS–AT dimer from DEBS module 5. Orange: dimeric N-terminal coiled-coil peptide; Blue: KS domain;
Yellow: KS-AT linker; Green: AT domain; Red: post AT linker. PDB code: 2HG4. (B) Mechanism of KS catalyzed chain elongation. (C) KS–CLF
heterodimer. Blue: KS domain; Green: CLF domain; Orange: grasping loop; The reactive cysteine, Cys169, and a gating residue that regulates chain
length, Phe1160, are shown in sticks to the   17-A˚ polyketide tunnel. PDB code: 1TQY. (see colour figure online at www.informahealthcare.com/bmg).


oxyanion hole that stabilizes the tetrahedron intermediate and    binding region and a more variable acyl-binding region (Tang
presumably promote the decarboxylation of the extender unit     et al., 2006, 2007). The acyl-binding pockets of FAS KSs are
(Figure 7B).                                               mainly formed by hydrophobic residues and as a  result,
  While FAS KSs have higher affinity toward saturated acyl     specific toward saturated fatty acyl groups. In contrast, the
chains, the type  I PKS KS domains can exhibit varying    acyl-binding regions of PKS KSs are generally amphipathic,
degrees  of  substrate  specificity. The DEBS KSs show    allowing the formation of a hydrogen bond and a salt bridge to
promiscuity toward polyketide chains ranging from diketide     stabilize  the  acyl  intermediates  with  different  levels  of
to decaketide, and those with different oxidation states on the    reduction  (from unreduced  to  completely  reduced). The
b-carbons (Khosla et al., 1999). On the other hand, some type    substrate-binding channel of type I PKS KSs are also much
I PKSs KS domains appeared to be more selective toward the    wider compared to that of FAS KSs, which also contribute to
functional groups present on cognate intermediates (Khosla    the observed increased substrate tolerance.
et al., 1999, 2007). For example, KSs from trans-AT type I      The KS domains in PKSs have been associated with the
PKSs are highly specific toward the growing intermediates.    control of the polyketide chain length. This is particularly
Phylogenetic analysis of those KSs allows predicting structure    important in the iterative PKSs, such as the iterative type I
features on  the b/g  position  of  their  substrates  without    and bacterial type II systems. KS domain-swapping experi-
knowing information on the reductive domains in the previous    ments between two fungal  iterative PKSs that synthesize
modules (Nguyen  et  al., 2008). Crystal structures of KS    polyketides of different lengths have led to the biosynthesis of
domains show that the size and the shape of the substrate-   new polyketides of different chain lengths (Zhu et al., 2007).
binding pocket determine the specificity. The binding channel    Although the swapping experiment did not afford products of
can be divided into a well-conserved phosphopantetheinyl    expected sizes, the experiment nevertheless hinted that KS is


[PDF physical page 10]
106  W. Xu et al.                                                                                                             Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol, 2013; 48(2): 98–122

at least partially involved in controlling the chain length.   ACP and led to the effective production of 2-desmethyl-6-
Direct insight into chain-length control was obtained from   dEB (Kumar et al., 2003).
both mutagenesis and structural studies (Keatinge-Clay et al.,      Over the last decade, the structures of ATs from different
2004) on the KS–CLF heterodimer in type  II PKSs. The    biosynthetic systems have been determined, including MATs
chain-length factor (CLF) is a catalytically inactive version of    from E. coli (Serre et al., 1995) and S. coelicolor (Keatinge-
the KS domain and the interface of the KS–CLF dimer    Clay et al., 2003), modular type I PKS ATs from DEBS (Tang
defines  the  size  of  the  substrate-binding  channel. An     et al., 2006, 2007), trans-acting AT from disorazole pathway
amphipathic  polyketide binding  tunnel  is  clearly  visible,   (Wong  et  al., 2011) and  iterative type  I PKS AT from
originating from the active  site cysteine to the KS–CLF    dynemicin  pathway (DYN10)  (Liew  et  al.,  2012). The
interface (Figure 7C). When larger gatekeeping residues at the    monomeric ATs all share the same two-subdomain structure:
interface  of  the  act KS–CLF were changed  to  smaller    a core subdomain contains a/b hydrolases-like core with a
residues,  the  mutant KS–CLF  were  able  to  synthesize    smaller ferredoxin-like subdomain (Figure 8A). Both cis- and
longer polyketides. The opposite effect was observed when    trans-acting ATs use the highly conserved catalytic Ser-His
smaller gatekeeping residues were mutated to larger ones in    dyad and ping-pong bi-bi mechanism to transfer the acyl
the tcm KS–CLF (Tang et  al., 2003). The mechanism of    group from CoA to the ACP domains (Ruch & Vagelos,
chain-length control in both iterative type I and type II PKSs    1973). The nucleophilicity of catalytic serine hydroxyl group
is based on the size of the polyketide rather than the number     is strengthened through hydrogen bonding with the histidine,
of elongation cycles. This is supported by both the crystal    as evidenced by the  3 A˚ distance between the N"2 atom of
structure and through various precursor directed biosynthesis    the histidine and the Og atom of the serine (Figure 8B)
experiments (Watanabe et al., 2003; Tang et al., 2004).         (Keatinge-Clay et al., 2003). The oxyanion hole that stabilizes
                                                                 the  tetrahedron  intermediate  is formed by  the backbone
                                                        amides of a glutamine from the conserved PGQGXQ motif
Acyltransferase
                                                       and a residue adjacent upstream to the catalytic serine (Serre
AT is the catalytic domain that selects and loads the extender     et al., 1995; Keatinge-Clay et al., 2003) and the exiting CoA
acyl group onto the ACP domains during the elongation cycle     is protonated by the catalytic histidine. A second tetrahedral
of FAS and PKSs. AT domains  therefore  serve  as  the    intermediate  is formed when the ACP phosphopantetheine
gatekeeper in building block selection and play a key role in     thiol attacks the ester carbonyl. The acyl-binding  cleft  is
maintaining  the  fidelity  of  fatty  acid  and  polyketide     relatively hydrophobic, thus preventing the binding of water
biosynthesis. AT domains from FASs and iterative type  I    molecules and the hydrolysis of acylated enzyme oxyesters in
PKSs use malonyl-CoA as extender units. In comparison, AT    the absence of free thiol acceptors (Serre et al., 1995). In
domains from modular type I PKSs have a much broader    cases where hydrolysis is noted, the hydrolyzed acyl group
variation in substrate specificity. AT domains associated with    binds  to  the  pocket  noncovalently  and  greatly  inhibit
the loading of starter units have been shown to select acetyl-    the AT efficiency, as seen in dynemicin AT DYN10 (Liew
CoA, propionyl-CoA, isobutyryl-CoA, crotonyl-CoA, isopen-     et al., 2012).
tyl-CoA, etc. (Lau et al., 2000; Liou et al., 2003). Extender        Co-crystallization of MAT with either acetate or malonyl-
AT domains in PKSs have been shown to select a variety of   CoA showed that the presence of a positively charged side
extender units in addition to malonyl-CoA, such as the most    chain of the highly conserved arginine (for instance, Arg122
common  propionate-derived  2S-methylmolanyl-CoA.  The     in S. coelicolor MAT) can stabilize the 3-carboxylate group
biogenesis and incorporation of different acyl-CoAs by the    via a salt bridge (Serre et al., 1995; Rangan & Smith, 1997;
AT domain as a means to introduce structural diversity into    Keatinge-Clay et al., 2003). Molecular docking and bioinfor-
polyketides has been covered in several recent reviews (Chan    matics  studies of  different AT domains have led  to the
et al., 2009; Wilson & Moore, 2012).                             identification of several conserved sequences motifs that play
   In modular type I PKSs, instead of a dedicated AT domain    key roles in determining the substrate specificity. First, a
built in within each module, there are numerous examples of    motif  that  is located about 30 residues upstream of the
PKSs in which a disassociated trans-acting AT enzyme are     catalytic serine forms part of the substrate-binding pocket and
involved in the loading of the ACP domains with, in most    influences the selection between malonyl-CoA and methyl-
cases, malonyl-CoA (Cheng et al., 2003; Piel et al., 2004;    malonyl-CoA. After analyzing over 200 domains, Yadav et al.
Kopp et al., 2005; Nguyen et al., 2008; Zhao et al., 2010).    (2003)  mapped  a  conserved  ZTXX[AT][QE]  motif  to
These standalone AT enzymes interact with nearly all the    malonyl-specific ATs and [RQSED]V[DE]VVQ to methyl-
ACPs domains in the PKS assembly line, thereby exhibiting    malonyl-specific ATs (Z represents hydrophilic residue, while
broader ACP substrate specificities. For example, the trans-   X represents hydrophobic residue). This specificity code for
AT enzyme from disorazole pathway shows higher activity   AT was partially verified in motif-swapping experiment with
toward heterologous ACP domains than that of typical cis-   DEBS AT4 (Reeves et al., 2001). Second, the residue beyond
acting AT domains (Wong  et  al.,  2011). The malonyl-    the catalytic serine, which contributes to the formation of
CoA:ACP transacylase (MAT) involved  in the  fatty acid    oxyanion  hole,  is  also  sterically  important  in  substrate
biosynthesis in Streptomyces, which is commonly shared by    binding. A branched hydrophobic residue (Leu or Val)  is
different type II PKSs, can also act as a trans-AT enzyme on    present in malonyl-specific ATs, while a residue with more
type I PKSs. When the cis-acting AT domain in the sixth     linear side chains (Glu or Met) is found in this position for
module of DEBSs  is inactivated, MAT complemented the    methylmalonyl-specific ATs (Haydock et al., 1995). Third, a
otherwise stalled pathway, loaded a malonyl group onto the   YASH motif that includes the catalytic histidine is present


[PDF physical page 11]
DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2012.745476                                   PKS structure and protein–protein interactions   107





Figure 8.  Selected AT structures and typical catalytic mechanism. (A) Structure of ATDYN10 from dynemicin pathway. KS-AT linker (gray), a/b
hydrolases-like core (Blue) and ferrodoxin-like smaller subdomain (Red). The catalytic His–Ser dyad is shown as sticks. PDB code: 4AMP. (B)
Residues and region important to substrate binding or selection in DEBS AT5: catalytic dyad are shown as spheres; the arginine stabilizes the substrate
3-carboxylate group is shown as sticks; important region that defines the substrate specificity are labeled in magentas. PDB code: 2HG4. (C) Catalytic
mechanism of AT. (see colour figure online at www.informahealthcare.com/bmg).



exclusively in the methylmalonyl-specific DEBS ATs (Reeves    (type II) or a built-in domain in type I PKSs. Depending on
et  al., 2001), while a HAFH motif  is found in malonyl-    the stereochemistry (D/L) on the OH-bearing b-carbon in the
specific ATs. Lastly, in the DEBS KS–AT5 structure, the first    product, a type I KR can be classified as either an ‘‘A-type’’
a helix of aba loop of the C-terminal linker region was     (for L-configuration) or a ‘‘B-type’’ KR (for D-configuration)
positioned at the entrance of the substrate pocket and was    (Keatinge-Clay, 2007). When the substrate is an a-substituted
shown to be essential in determining the substrate specificity    b-ketoacyl intermediate, some KR may catalyze epimeriza-
through swapping between rapamycin AT2 and DEBS AT2     tion on the a-carbon before the ketoreduction (Keatinge-Clay,
(Lau et al., 1999) (Figure 8C).                               2007; Valenzano et al., 2009). Based on the configuration on
                                                                 the accepted a-carbon, the A- and B-type KRs can be further
                                                                      classified  into A1, A2, B1 and B2:  those  reducing an
Ketoreductase
                                                          unepimerized 2R substrate are denoted with a ‘‘1’’ and those
Ketoreductases in PKSs and FASs stereospecifically reduce    accepting an epimerized 2S substrate are denoted with a ‘‘2’’.
the carbonyl group of the b-ketoacyl-ACP  intermediates.    Reduction-incompetent KRs are called C type: C1-type for
They belong  to  the  short-chain dehydrogenase/reductases   KRs that lack both the catalytic tyrosine residue and NADPH
(SDR)  family, which  are  well known  to be NAD(P)þ/    binding motif; C2-type for KRs that contain the complete
NAD(P)H-dependent oxidoreductases. All of the reported     catalytic triad but miss the NADPH-binding motif. A protocol
KRs contain at least one highly conserved Rossmann fold,    was developed to assign substituent stereochemistry accord-
which is composed of a central, 6 or 7 strands b-sheet flanked    ingly by combining the KR fingerprints with the presence of
with 3 or 4 a-helices on each side. This structural moiety    other reductive domains (Keatinge-Clay, 2007). Four type I
creates a characteristic groove that binds the NADPH cofactor   KR domain crystal structures have been reported, including
(Kavanagh et  al., 2008). KR can be a standalone protein    one A-type KR (Amphotericin KR2 (Zheng et al., 2010)), two


[PDF physical page 12]
108  W. Xu et al.                                                                                                             Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol, 2013; 48(2): 98–122





Figure 9.  Selected KR structures and typical catalytic mechanism. (A) DEBS KR1 with cofactor binding, catalytic triads are shown as sticks. Blue:
structural subdomain; Green: catalytic subdomain; Orange: ‘‘LDD’’ moiety shown as sticks. Magenta: lid helix and loop. PDB code: 2FR0. (B)
Different paths of entrance result in different product stereochemistries in A- and B-type KRs. The presence of orange DLL loop in the B-type KR will
prevent substrate from entering behind the magenta lid. (C) Mechanism of KR catalyzed reduction. (D) Substrate-tuned stereoselectivity in Hpm8KR.
(see colour figure online at www.informahealthcare.com/bmg).


B-type KRs (DEBS KR1 (Keatinge-Clay & Stroud, 2006) and     substrate enters the active site from the opposite side relative
tylosin KR1 (Keatinge-Clay, 2007)) and one C2-type KR     to  the  lid (Figure 9B). The  different  positioning of  the
(pikromycin KR3 (Zheng & Keatinge-Clay, 2011)).              substrate leads to the hydride from the NADPH attacking
  Type I PKS KRs show pseudodimeric structures compris-    from different prochiral faces of the thioester carbonyl and
ing two SDR subdomains: a structural subdomain followed by    generating different ketoreduction stereochemistry.
a catalytic subdomain in sequence. In modules that contain      Based on sequences comparison, KRs from iterative PKSs
the ER domain, sequence for ER domain is inserted into those    should share similar two-subdomain structure as modular type
of the structural and catalytic subdomains. The NADPH-     I KRs. One would expect that since a single KR is utilized
binding site is missing in the structural subdomain and the    during the different iterations of chain elongation,  all the
catalytic subdomain is stabilized by the structural subdomain    b-carbonyls that are reduced by KR would display the same
(exemplified by DEBS KR1, Figure 9A). The conserved Ser–    stereochemistry. Interesting, careful stereochemistry analysis
Tyr–Lys triad in the catalytic subdomain is responsible for    of the hypothemycin PKS Hpm8 shows that the KR domain
activation of the target b-carbonyl group on the substrate and    can switch the stereoselectivity when processing substrates of
to stabilize the resulting oxyanion after the hydride addition     different lengths (Figure 9D). Mutations of A- and B-type KR
(Cane, 2010) (Figure 9C). Usually an inserted ‘‘lid’’ consists     ‘‘fingerprint residues’’ in Hpm8 did not alter the differential
of a helix and a loop helps to form the substrate-binding     stereoselectivity, which indicates additional structural features
pocket. Variations in residues between different KR types    are necessary to direct the substrate-binding mode. Through
have been found to dictate stereochemical outcome. In B-type    swapping sequences with another iterative type I PKS (Rdc5),
KR, an ‘‘LDD’’ motif is located in the loop that precedes the   Zhou et al. (2012) pointed out that the b5a5a6a motif should
active site (Figure 9A), while a tryptophan is found in at a key    be the determinant region that modulates this novel substrate-
position between catalytic serine and tyrosine in an A-type    tuned stereoselectivity (Zhou et al., 2012).
KR. These features result to two alternative substrate entry
modes  for A-type and B-type KRs. In A-type KRs, the
                                       DH and DH-like domains
phosphopantetheinyl arm slips into the active site from the
groove behind the lid helix, while in B-type KRs, that entry   The PKS  dehydratase domain (DH)  catalyzes  reversible
mode is prevented because of the LDD motif. Instead, the    dehydration reactions on the b-hydroxyl-acyl intermediate


[PDF physical page 13]
DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2012.745476                                   PKS structure and protein–protein interactions   109





Figure 10.  Selected DH structures and typical catalytic mechanism. (A) Double hot-dog structure in DEBS DH4. The catalytic histidine and aspartate
(shown as sticks) are provided from two different monomers. PDB code: 3EL6. (B) A typical catalytic mechanism of DH domain. (C) An extended DH
dimer conformation exemplified by DEBS DH4. PDB code: 3EL6. (D) ‘‘V’’-shaped DH dimer in mFAS. PDB code: 2VZ9. (see colour figure online at
www.informahealthcare.com/bmg).


bound to the ACP, resulting in an a,b-unsaturated acyl-ACP     aspartic acid. The configuration of the double bond formed is
intermediate in either the cis or trans configuration. The    determined mainly by the chirality of the b-hydroxyl group
downstream reactions catalyzed by ER, KS or TE will pull the    following ketoreduction by the KR domain  in the same
equilibrium toward the direction of dehydration. Both the    module. Products of A-type KRs are dehydrated to cis- (or Z)
mFAS and PKS DHs are hypothesized to have been evolved    double-bond products and B-type products to trans- (or E)
from a common type II dehydratase ancestor through gene    double-bonds. The  critical  constraint  that  results  in  this
duplication and fusion (Keatinge-Clay, 2008; Akey et  al.,     specificity is that the substrate a-hydrogen and b-hydroxyl
2010). Until now, X-ray structures of five DH domains from    groups need to be adjacent to the prepositioned histidine and
modular PKS have been reported, including DEBS DH4     aspartic acid, respectively, while within the confines of the
(Keatinge-Clay, 2008) and the four DHs from the curacin A     substrate tunnel. In vitro biochemistry assays have shown that
biosynthetic pathway (Akey et al., 2010). As shown in the     all of the (E)-2-ene-acyl-ACP products in modular PKSs
reported structures, the DH domains exist as a dimer, with    share a common syn dehydration mechanism (Guo et  al.,
each monomer itself forms a pseudodimer of two ‘‘hot-dog’’    2010; Valenzano et al., 2010) (Figure 10B).
folds, resulting in a ‘‘double hot-dog’’ fold. Each ‘‘hot-dog’’       In contrast to the highly similar structures for PKS and
fold composes  of a  ‘‘sausage-like’’ long  helix wrapped   mFAS DH monomers, the corresponding dimeric structures
around by  a  ‘‘bun’’  that  consists  of  a  curved  b-sheet    are  notably  different  in  the  angle  formed by  the two
(Figure 10A, sausages are in red and yellow, buns are in    monomers. All reported PKS DH dimers have similar flat
blue and green). The ‘‘catalytic dyad’’ active site in each    contour but the mFAS DH dimer is V-shaped (Keatinge-Clay,
monomer is located at a tunnel formed between the N- and    2008; Maier et al., 2008; Akey et al., 2010) (Figure 10C and
C-terminal ‘‘hot-dog’’ folds, comprising of a histidine from    D). The PKS DH dimer interface is formed by complementary
the  first ‘‘hot-dog’’ fold, and an aspartate from the other    contacts mainly between the residues on the b strands of
(Figure 10A, both residues are shown as sticks). Dimerization    N-terminal hot-dog folds in each monomer. The interface area
may not be necessary for catalysis as the complete active site    accounts only for 4%–6% of the total monomer surface area,
is formed without participation from the other monomer,    which is similar to that at the mFAS DH dimer interface. The
which is supported by the functional mFAS DH monomers    elongated DH dimer seems to be common in modular PKSs
(Smith et al., 2003). In the reported crystals, the substrate    because the hydrophobic residues involved in dimerization
tunnel in DH is covered by a flexible region formed by less    are conserved. Such conformations in the PKS DH dimers
ordered elements. Specific protein–protein interaction with   may be  a  requirement  in  spatially  assembling  multiple
ACP domains may be necessary for opening of the cover and    modules  of  PKSs,  and  suggests  that  the  multi-domain
delivery of the substrate.                                          architecture of the reducing portion of modular PKSs (Top
  The dehydration proceeds through deprotonation of the    portion in 3D structure) should be different from that of the
a-carbon by the histidine and abstraction of b-hydroxyl by the   mFAS (see the discussion in the Section ‘‘Enoylreductase’’).


[PDF physical page 14]
110  W. Xu et al.                                                                                                             Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol, 2013; 48(2): 98–122





Figure 11.  The crystal structure of the PT domain from PksA. (A) Ribbon representation of the PT dimer showing the double hot-dog (DHD) fold.
PDB code: 3HRR. (B) Surface representation of the PT monomer substrate pocket. The product analogue HC8 is co-crystallized and is shown as sticks.
(C) Predicted domain organization of PksA. (see colour figure online at www.informahealthcare.com/bmg).


   DH-like double hot-dog fold is also found in the reported    cyclization chamber, is also composed of a histidine and an
structure of product template domain (PT) (Figure 11A) from     aspartate from two different ‘‘hot-dog’’ folds like in the DH
a fungal  iterative, nonreducing PKS (PksA)  involved  in    domain. The catalytic histidine acts as base to deprotonate the
aflatoxin biosynthesis (Crawford et al., 2009). Phylogenetic    methylene and generates the nucleophile. The aspartate  is
analysis  (Kroken  et   al.,  2003)  suggests  that  iterative    involved  in  polarizing  the  catalytic  histidine,  instead  of
nonreducing PKSs are evolved from ancient reducing PKSs.    helping removing a hydroxyl as in DH domain. PT domains of
Combining this with the fact that the PksA PT was found to be     different cyclization regioselectivities have been functionally
dimeric both in the crystal and in solution, and has a double    characterized and can be grouped phylogenetically (Li et al.,
‘‘hot-dog’’ fold like the DH domain, it is reasonable to infer    2010). It is expected that the active site geometry will dictate
that PTs are evolved from the DH and are located at the    the positioning of the unreduced polyketide chain with respect
positions  of DH domains  in  the  three-dimensional (3D)     to the histidine residue, which can then lead to different
structure  (Figure 11C). PTs  catalyze  regio-specific  aldol    cyclization patterns.
cyclization of the unreduced poly-b-ketoacyl:ACP intermedi-
ate synthesized by the iterative PKS. The PT domain of PksA
                                                        Enoylreductase
catalyzes stepwise first- and second-ring cyclizations to yield
the ACP-tethered  bicyclic  intermediate (Crawford  et  al.,   The enoyl-acyl carrier protein reductases (ERs) catalyze the
2008). A deep pocket that can accommodate the phospho-    reduction of an enoyl-ACP to an a,b-saturated acyl-ACP.
pantetheinyl tethered intermediate chain is found in the PksA    Different from KRs, ERs use the 4-pro-R hydride instead of 4-
PT crystal. The pocket can be divided into three regions: a    pro-S hydride of NADPH for enoylreduction (Yin et al., 2001;
pPant-binding  region  close  to  the  surface, a  cyclization   Ames et al., 2012). Compared to other type I PKS domains,
chamber that can accommodate the bicyclic product core and   ER has the least structural and functional information. Very
a hexyl moiety-binding site sitting in the innermost part of     recently, structures of ER from both the modular and iterative
the pocket  that  is  specific  for  the hexanoyl  starter  unit   PKSs were reported, including SpnER2 (solved in the form of
(Figure 11B).  Notably, a  ‘‘wet’’ side  of  the  cyclization   ER-KR didomain) from spinosyn PKS module 2 (Zheng et al.,
chamber, which contains a network of crystallographic water    2012) and the trans-acting ER LovC involved in lovastatin
molecules and nearby hydrophilic residues, is proposed to    biosynthesis  (Ames  et   al.,  2012).  SpnER2  reduces  a
keep C9 in the substrate in the electrophilic keto tautomeric     tetraketide, while LovC interacts with LovB (containing a
form  for  the  intramolecular  aldol  cyclizations (Crawford     null ER) and  selectively  reduces  the  tetra-,  penta- and
et al., 2009). The catalytic dyad, located at the surface of the    heptaketides intermediates (Kennedy et al., 1999; Ma et al.,


[PDF physical page 15]
DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2012.745476                                   PKS structure and protein–protein interactions   111





Figure 12.  The crystal structures of the ER domains. (A) Structure of Spn(KRþER)2 didomain with cofactor (as spheres) binding. PDB code: 3SLK.
(B) Proposed schematic representation of a module in a multimodular PKS. (C) Structure of LovC. Brown: substrate binding subdomain; palegreen:
catalytic subdomain. PDB code: 3B70. (D) surface charge on LovC and predicted docking region with LovB ACP. Bound NADP is shown in sticks. (see
colour figure online at www.informahealthcare.com/bmg).


2009). Like the ER domain in mFAS, PKS ERs also belong to    the substrate, followed by protonation of the a-carbon by
the medium-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (MDR) super-     either a general acid or solvent. Structural-guided mutagen-
family (Nordling et al., 2002), which typically comprise of     esis studies on both SpnER2 and LovC show that a conserved
two  subdomains:  a  C-terminal  Rossmann-fold NADPH-     lysine (K422 in SpnER2 and K54 in LovC) is critical for the
binding subdomain and a  catalytic N-terminal  substrate-    enoyl  reduction  activity.  Compared  to  other  positions,
binding subdomain (Figure 12A and C). The NADPH-binding    mutations to this lysine lowers the activity more significantly,
site is located in a cleft between the two subdomains. In the    which agrees with the recent mutational study on the ER
LovC-crotonoyl-CoA  complex,  the  four-carbon  crotonoyl    domain from module 13 of rapamycin PKS (RAPS), which
group extends into a hydrophobic putative substrate-binding    also concluded that no single residue alone serves as an
pocket that is adjacent to the nicotinamide ring of the bound    oxyanion hole or the Brønsted acid (Kwan & Leadlay, 2010).
NADPþ. In contrast to most enzymes in the MDR family that    Tyr241  in SpnER2,  located  at  the opposite  side  of  the
form homodimers, both SpnER2 and LovC were shown to    conserved  lysine  in  the  active  site  cleft,  is proposed  to
exist  as monomers. The monomeric form of LovC was    protonate the a-carbon following hydride addition to generate
rationalized by the presence of an additional loop  (  10    the S configuration on the product. In vivo mutagenesis shows
residues) in the region between the catalytic and cofactor-     that changing the corresponding tyrosine to valine in DEBS
binding  domains.  Computer  modeling  shows  that  the   ER4 switches the product stereochemistry at the a-position
extended loop prevents homodimer formation because of    from S to R (Kwan et  al., 2008). Upon mutation of the
significant steric clash with the modeled dimeric partner. This     tyrosine, the aforementioned lysine is proposed to carry out an
additional loop in LovC  is conserved among other trans-    additional function  in protonating the a-carbon from the
acting ERs that are found in fungal iterative type I PKSs. The    opposite side and generates the R configuration.
monomeric form of these ER may be required for interaction        Crystallization of Spn(ER-KR)2 also allowed investigation
with the ACP partners in the PKSs. Indeed, gel–filtration    of the ER–KR interface in the modular type I PKS, which is
interaction study indicates that LovC forms a complex with     larger than that observed for mFAS. ER–KR contacts are
the LovB. A docking simulation using a homology model of    mostly found between the nonconserved hydrophilic residues
LovB ACP and the solved structure of LovC suggests that a     in the  catalytic subdomain of SpnKR2 and those in the
positively charged surface patch adjacent to the active site of    substrate-binding subdomain of SpnER2. The linkers that
LovC may be required for LovB–LovC interactions (Figure    connect ER and two KR subdomains help mediate  this
12D).                                                                 interface. The C-terminal end of the insertion loop is shorter
  Our current understanding of the enoylreduction process is    than that in mFAS, leading to the observed differences in the
that a hydride is transferred from NADPH to the b-carbon of   ER–KR  orientation. Divergent evolution of multimodular


[PDF physical page 16]
112  W. Xu et al.                                                                                                             Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol, 2013; 48(2): 98–122





Figure 13.  Selected structures of a/b-hydrolases TE domains in the PKS system. Lid region are shown in red and catalytic residues are shown in
magentas. (A) Structure of pikromycin TE (type I). PDB code: 1MNQ. (B) Surface representation of pikromycin TE dimer. (C) structure of Rifamycin
TE (Type II). PDB code: 3FLA. (D) A surface representation of rifamycin TE. (E) Catalytic mechanism of a/b -hydrolases TE (hydrolysis versus
macrocyclization). (see colour figure online at www.informahealthcare.com/bmg).



PKSs and mFASs based on the monomeric state of SpnER2 is    from these TEs (Figure 13E). In contrast, ‘‘hot-dog’’ fold TEs
proposed (Zheng et al., 2012). In the multimodular PKSs, the     feature a five-stranded anti-parallel b-sheet wrapping around
monomeric ER is necessary to enable sufficient flexibility of    a long a-helix and several shorter helices (Figure 14A) and
the ACP domain in the same module to interact with both the     utilize a different catalytic mechanism to cleave the thioester
intramodular domains and the downstream, dimeric catalytic    bond, in which no covalent enzyme-substrate intermediate is
domain (either KS or TE) (Figure 12B).                     formed (Figure 14C). To date, numerous TE structures have
                                                        been reported, including type  I TEs from modular PKSs
                                          DEBS (Tsai et al., 2001), pikromycin PKS (Tsai et al., 2002;
Thioesterase (TE)
                                                  Akey et al., 2006; Giraldes et al., 2006), tautomycetin PKS
As in mFAS, thioesterase (TE) in PKS system is involved in    (Scaglione et al., 2010) and curacin A PKS (Gehret et al.,
the product release. PKS TEs can break the ACP thioester    2011); from the iterative norsolorinic acid synthase (Korman
linkage by catalyzing the cyclization or hydrolysis of the acyl     et  al., 2010); type  II TE from the pathways of rifamycin
substrate. Two types of TEs with distinct structures are found    (Claxton  et  al.,  2009);  ‘‘hot-dog’’  fold TEs  from  the
in PKSs: a/b hydrolase-fold TEs and ‘‘hot-dog’’ fold TEs.    biosynthetic  pathways  of  the  enediynes  calicheamicin
The a/b hydrolase-fold TEs can be cis-acting domains located    (Kotaka et al., 2009) and dynemicin (Liew et al., 2010).
at the end of the modular PKS assembly line or at the C-     As TE from the mFAS (Chakravarty  et  al., 2004)  is
terminus of the iterative PKS (type I TEs), or dissociated    monomeric, all type I TEs from modular PKSs have been
enzymes responsible for the hydrolytic release of  stalled,     crystalized as dimers. The active-site triad (Ser-His-Asp/Glu)
aberrantly loaded  chains on PKSs  (types  II TEs). They    and most of the important secondary structure features of
facilitate covalent catalysis in which the acyl chain is first    a/b-hydrolases  are  conserved among  the  four  available
transferred to the active site serine, generating an acyl-O-TE     structures. The a/b-hydrolase core contains a central seven-
intermediate. Inter- or intramolecular nucleophilic attack on    stranded b-sheet connected by a-helices, with b2 antiparallel
the carbonyl of acyl-O-TE oxyester then releases the product     to the remaining strands. The characteristic aD helix between


[PDF physical page 17]
DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2012.745476                                   PKS structure and protein–protein interactions   113





Figure 14.  Selected structures of hot-dog fold TE domains in PKS system. (A) hot-dog fold dynemicin TE DynE7 tetramer structures (‘‘sausages’’ are
in red). PDB code: 2XEM. (B) Surface representation of DynE7 tetramer and the L-shaped substrate binding channel in orange box. (C) Mechanism of
decarboxylative hydrolysis in hot-dog fold TEs. (see colour figure online at www.informahealthcare.com/bmg).


b6 and b7 in the a/b-hydrolase family is replaced by a less-     sulfate group and decarboxylation to generate alkene products
conserved,  subdomain  that  functions  as  a  ‘‘lid’’.  The    from b-sulfated acyl-ACP substrates (Gehret et al., 2011).
substrate-binding region is formed between the a/b hydrolase      Type  II TEs remove incorrect acyl chains from carrier
core and the lid subdomain (Figure 13A and C). Depending    domains. This is to ensure no stalling of the PKS function
on the orientation of the lid subdomain with respect to the    occurs  due  to  incorrectly  loaded  or  tailoring  moieties.
core, TE can adopt either a closed or open conformation with    Disruption of type  II TE usually  results in a significant
respect  to  bulk  solvent.  The  DEBS,  pikromycin  and    decrease in product yield. Type II TEs also show the a/b
tautomycetin TEs are partially closed and the dimer interface    hydrolase fold similar to that of type I TEs (Figure 13C). In
is formed  through  the  hydrophobic  interaction  between    the reported crystal structure of rifamycin TE, several forms
helices in the lid subdomain. A long substrate channel  is    with different conformations of the lid were captured. The
visible in the structure and spans the entire width of the     flexibility is caused by a ‘‘lid loop’’ that is 16 residues long.
protein, with the active site triad located at the center of the   Movement of the lid helices and the flexible lid loop affects
channel (Figure 13B). The acyl substrate is delivered into    the size and shape of the substrate chamber, which allows the
the active site serine from one end of the channel by the   TE to bind a variety of different substrates. The interior
upstream ACP and  is exported from the other end at the    surface  of  the  substrate chamber  is  hydrophilic, which
completion of the reaction. The different residues that form    explains the board substrate specificity toward charged and
the substrate channel in the four TEs, mostly on the interior    uncharged  substrates,  short-  or medium-chain  length  or
side of the lid subdomain, account for the highly variable    branched acyl thioesters (Figure 13D). The slightly positive
channel shape and the substrate specificities. In the macro-    charged surface surrounding the phosphopantetheine entrance
lactone-forming DEBS and pikromycin TEs, the wide channel     is involved in the protein–protein interactions with ACP.
can accommodate the acyl chain in a cyclized conformation,       Unlike typical hot-dog fold TEs  that  utilize acyl-CoA
while in the hydrolytic tautomycetin TE, a narrower and more     substrates (Dillon & Bateman, 2004), enediyne hot-dog fold
constricted channel favoring a linear product is found. The   TEs release polyketide products from the ACPs. Important
size of the substrate channel can be affected by pH and    residues for ester bond activation and oxyanion intermediate
increases upon increasing pH in DEBS and pikromycin TEs     stabilization  in  other  hot-dog  fold TEs  are  missing  in
(Tsai et al., 2002). Curacin TE is an example of an open-    enediyne  hot-dog  fold  TEs, which  suggests  a  different
conformation TE. This domain can catalyze multiple reac-     catalytic mechanism. Actually these enediyne TEs, including
tions including the combination of hydrolysis, elimination of    the characterized CalE7 and DynE7, form a new TEBC


[PDF physical page 18]
114  W. Xu et al.                                                                                                             Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol, 2013; 48(2): 98–122





Figure 15.  Structure and mechanism of TE/CLC domain. (A) Surface representation of closed PksA TE. Red: lid region; Magentas: catalytic residues.
PDB code: 3ILS. (B) Mechanism of TE catalyzed Claisen condensation. (see colour figure online at www.informahealthcare.com/bmg).



subfamily (Liew et al., 2010) among the hot-dog fold TEs    After release of the freed ACP, the lid can close and the diketo
(Dillon & Bateman, 2004). They show as tetramers in solution    portion of the substrate can rotate into a conformation that
and in reported crystal structures (Figure 14A). Contacts    favors the enolate formation and subsequent attack on the
within  the primary dimer  create an L-shaped  substrate-    carbonyl of the oxyester (Figure 15B). Therefore, the ACP–
binding channel, comprising of a hydrophilic outer phospho-   TE/CLC protein–protein interaction and reorganization of the
pantetheinyl-binding channel and a hydrophobic inner poly-   TE/CLC pocket are prerequisites for substrate delivery and
ene binding channel (Figure 14B). Mutagenesis study (Kotaka    product formation. In support to this proposed interaction,
et al., 2009) shows that the presence of a highly conserved  NMR titration experiments have shown interaction between
arginine  residue  in  the  central  helix  is  essential  to  the    the analogous region of  the NRPS TE domain and  the
catalyzed decarboxylic hydrolysis and may function as an    peptidyl carrier protein partner (Frueh et al., 2008; Koglin
oxyanion hole (Figure 14C).                                         et al., 2008).
  Some C-terminal TE domains of nonreducing  iterative
PKSs from fungi catalyze the regioselective Claisen con-
                                                          Acyl carrier proteins
densation using thioester carbonyl as the electrophile and
release of the aromatic polyketide, and hence are also referred   ACP is a small (  80–100 residues) noncatalytic domain that
to as TE/CLC domain (Fujii et al., 2001). In the absence of     tethers the growing polyketide and building block on the
the TE/CLC domain, the polyketide intermediate can be    pPant arm. The posttranslational modification that transforms
released in as a-pyrone shunt products by nucleophilic attack    apo ACP domains  into  its holo form  is catalyzed by a
from an enolate oxygen atom (Fujii et al., 2001; Crawford    phosphopantetheinyl transferase (PPTase), such as sfp from
et  al., 2008; Ma  et  al., 2008). The monomeric TE/CLC    Bacillus subtillis (Quadri et al., 1998). Using the 20 A˚ pPant
domain from the norsolorinic acid PKS, PksA, shares a    arm, the ACP delivers substrates to the different catalytic
similar a/b-hydrolase fold with the typical modular PKS TEs    domains during PKS catalysis. To facilitate the assortment of
(Korman  et  al.,  2010). The  substrate-binding  region  is    protein-protein  interactions, ACP  binds  to  the  specific
similarly located between the core and the lid, and contains   enzyme partners through different structural features on the
hydrophobic residues for binding the aromatic substrate. A    small protein. Therefore, obtaining the structures of ACPs and
loop region in the lid is highly flexible, and is proposed to be    decoding the residues that are responsible for the different
the  entrance  to  the binding pocket  (Figure 15A). Once    (and orthogonal) interactions is the key in understanding the
delivered, the polyketide acyl intermediate is transesterified   PKS function. This is especially important in type I PKSs, in
from the pPant arm of the ACP to the active site serine.    which fine-tuned KS:ACP  interactions play key  roles  in


[PDF physical page 19]
DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2012.745476                                   PKS structure and protein–protein interactions   115

conferring the unidirectional substrate transfer of modular   The  well-conserved  ‘‘DSL’’  motif  containing  the  active
PKSs  (Kapur  et  al.,  2010,  2012),  and  controlling  the    serine  is located  at the N-terminus of helix  II, which  is
permutation of tailoring domain functions in iterative PKSs.     identified as the universal protein–protein ‘‘recognition helix’’
Due to the inherent flexibility of the ACP domains and the    (Zhang et al., 2003; Weissman et al., 2006; Tsai & Ames,
adjacent linker regions, ACPs are typically absent in the    2009). This recognition helix is featured by a large number of
crystallographic snapshots of intact megasynthases. However,    negatively charged residues and is demonstrated by mutagen-
the  solution  structures of ACPs have been obtained  via     esis studies to play a crucial role for ACPs to communicate
solution-phase NMR spectroscopy. To date, several solution    with other catalytic domains (Chen et al., 2006).
structures of ACPs have been characterized, including DEBS      Type II PKS ACPs sequester bound acyl chains within an
ACP2 (Alekseyev et al., 2007), holo and apo DEBS ACP6     internal cavity (Roujeinikova et al., 2002; Zornetzer et al.,
(Tran et al., 2010), calicheamicin ACP (Lim et al., 2011),    2006; Upadhyay et al., 2009; Evans et al., 2009), which was
curacin ACPI (Busche et al., 2012), apo- (Crump et al., 1997),    proposed to protect reactive intermediates from unintended
holo- (Evans et al., 2008), derivatized forms (Evans et al.,    intramolecular cyclization and bulk  solvent. Actinorhodin
2009; Haushalter et al., 2011) of actinorhodin ACP, frenolicin   ACP (actACP) represents the first PKS component in which
holo-ACP  (Li  et   al.,  2003),  oxytetracycline  apo-ACP    the 3D structure is determined, and is the most thoroughly
(Findlow  et  al., 2003) and  norsolorinic PKS holo-ACP    studied ACP. NMR studies identified the possible interactions
(Wattana-amorn et al., 2010).                               between the tethered substrate and ACP. The holo-form of the
   Despite the overall low sequence similarity among ACPs   ACP exhibits detectable conformational changes compared to
from different PKSs, nearly all ACPs exhibit a similar right-    the apo-ACP, with helix III moving closer to helix II. Leu43
handed twisted bundle consisting of three a-helices (helix I,    on helix II was reported to interact with the pantothenate
helix  II and helix IV) connected by two loops. In some    methyls on the pPant arm. This conformational change is used
structures an additional short helix (helix III) found in the     to account for the dissociation of the ACP-PPTase complex
second loop depends on its helix-loop equilibrium conforma-    (Evans et al., 2008), in which the ACP and PPTase mainly
tions (Sharma et al., 2006; Cantu et al., 2012). The longer     interact along helix II (Weissman et al., 2006). Structures of
helix-I is positioned anti-parallel to helix II and helix IV, while    several   short-chain   acyl  actACPs  were   determined.
helix I and helix IV are arranged at a small angle relative to    Development of nonhydrolyzable thioether or pantetheina-
each  other  (Figure 16A). The  overall  helical bundle  is    mide  analogues  of  the  thioester acylACPs  substrate  is
stabilized   via   inter-helical   hydrophobic   interactions.    necessary in some cases because of spontaneous hydrolysis





Figure 16.  Selected structures of PKS ACPs. (A) Ribbon representation and electrostatic potential surface of selected ACPs. PDB codes: act ACP:
2K0X; oct ACP: 1NQ4; PksA ACP: 2KR5; CalE8 ACP: 2L9F. (B) Type II ACP sequesters the hydrophobic polyketide chains. Comparison of different
forms of act ACP. PDB codes: apo: 2K0Y; holo: 2K0X; butyryl: 2KG9; octanoyl: 2KGC. (see colour figure online at www.informahealthcare.com/
bmg).


[PDF physical page 20]
116  W. Xu et al.                                                                                                             Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol, 2013; 48(2): 98–122

in water. High-resolution NMR structures revealed dramatic    phase NMR spectroscopy to probe the dynamic behaviors.
conformational changes of actACP when nonpolar acyl chains    ACP-centered protein–protein interaction in type I modular
including butyryl, hexanoyl and octanoyl are attached (Evans   PKSs are focused in the following discussion.
et al., 2009). Binding cavity within the ACP is created by the
movement of helix III (Figure 16B). Although the resulting   KS–ACP interactions
cleft formed between helix II and helix III is sufficiently deep,                                                                In type I modular PKS, KS shows broad polyketide substrate
the acyl chains still occupy only the front portion to keep the                                                                      specificity (Khosla et al., 1999) and KS–ACP protein–protein
thioester part availability for other enzymes. Another study                                                                    interactions play an important role in both catalytic steps
probed the interaction between act ACP and the tethered                                                               involving KS. The chain elongation step involves intramod-
substrate (Haushalter et al., 2011), using chemoenzymatically                                                                    ular KS–ACP  interactions (KSn–ACPn)  in which the KS
synthesized  emodic-act ACP  (La  Clair  et   al.,  2004;                                                                 catalyzes the decarboxylative condensation and transfers the
Worthington & Burkart, 2006; Haushalter et al., 2008). The                                                           extended polyketide product to the ACP within the same
emodyl moiety was used to mimic the late-stage polyaromatic                                                         module. The chain translocation step involves intermodular
intermediates in the actinorhodin pathway. Although the 3D                                           KS–ACP interactions (ACPn 1–KSn), in which the KS  is
structure of emodic-act ACP was not solved, comparison of                                                                acylated with the polyketide intermediate from the ACP of the
NMR signals between holo- and emodic-act ACP allowed the                                                              previous module prior to the elongation step. The polyketide
identification of interacting residues, which are also located                                                             chain transfer in type I modular PKS is unidirectional: from
near the acyl binding cavity between helix II and helix III.                                                                 the upstream ACPn  1 to KSn during the chain translocation
   In contrast to type II PKS ACPs, ACPs from type I PKSs                                                       and then  to ACPn during the chain elongation. Specific
are unable to sequester the hydrophobic chains in an acyl                                                ACPn–KSn interactions prevent the back transfer of elongated
binding cavity (Wattana-amorn et al., 2010; Lim et al., 2011;                                                               polyketide between the pair. This duel substrate specificity of
Busche et al., 2012). Usually no conformation changes of type                                                                 the KS in the two separate catalytic events is clearly supported
I PKS ACP are observed when acylated with polyketide                                                     by in vitro assays using dissected minimal PKS domains from
chains. The  type  I PKS ACPs  contain  relatively  fewer                                                                 the DEBS PKS (Gokhale et al., 1999; Tsuji et al., 2001; Wu
negative charges on the ‘‘recognition helix’’ compared to                                                                         et al., 2002; Chen et al., 2006).
the  freestanding  type  II PKS ACPs.  Only  very weak                                                            Recent  mechanistic  investigations  discovered  that  the
interactions between the relatively more hydrophobic surface                                                          docking sites on ACP for intermodular chain translocation
and the polyketide chain have been observed in a few cases                                                       and intramodular chain elongation are located at separate
(Lim et al., 2011). The lack of substrate binding in type I PKS                                                               regions in the ACP domain. Loop I of the ACP domain is
ACP is similar to the observation with the type I rat FAS ACP                                                              involved  in  the KSn-ACPn  recognition  during  the  chain
(Ploskon et al., 2008). The absence of a protective role in type                                                               elongation  step (Kapur  et  al., 2010), while  the  first 10
I PKS ACP has been attributed to those ACPs that are less                                                                 residues of helix I are responsible for controlling the ACPn 1–
exposed to solvent due to crowding from adjacent domains, as                                                 KSn interactions during the chain translocation step (Kapur
well as the expected higher efficiency of substrate delivery in                                                                         et al., 2012) (Figure 17). The orthogonal recognition regions
type I PKSs.                                                       were identified from separate kinetic assays that measure the
                                                                       rate of elongation (Chen et al., 2006) or back-transfer reaction
Protein–protein interactions involving ACP           (Wu et al., 2001) using dissected DEBS KS-AT didomain and
                                                            a large series of chimeric DEBS ACPs created from swapping
During each cycle  for polyketide  extension, the ACP  is
                                                           secondary structural elements between ACPs.
involved in  all the catalytic steps, including extender-unit
loading by AT, chain elongation and translocation by the KS,
reductive  modifications  by KR, DH, ER  and/or  other
domains. For the multidomain type  I PKSs, the mobility
and flexibility of the ACP domain facilitates the shuttling of
substrates to and between all the different active sites. The
binding of ACP with other functional domains are either
modulated by the recognition of the acyl substrates or a
specific region on the ACP or both. However, these dynamic
domain–domain interactions have to be weak and transient to
ensure efficient product synthesis. Studying the determinants
for efficient transport or delivery of carrier protein-tethered
substrates is essential for understanding the complex catalytic
process on PKSs.
   Because of their transient nature, detailed insights into
                                                                        Figure 17.  Structure features of DEBS ACP2. PDB code: 2JU2. (A)
ACP-based interactions are less likely to come from single                                                                Ribbon structure of DEBS ACP2, helix I in blue, helix II in red, helix IV
crystallographic snapshot of  intact multidomain enzymes.     in orange, loops in gray. (B) Regions in DEBS ACP2 that involved in
Currently, several approaches are involved to study the ACP-    ACP-KS/AT interactions. Docking interface for chain translocation is
centered  protein–protein  interactions,  including computer    shown in blue; docking interface for chain elongation  is shown in
                                                                     orange and key residues at position 44, 45 are shown in red; The rest
simulation of docking models based on reported structures,                                                                           of  the  protein  is  shown  in  gray.  (see  colour  figure  online  at
mutagenesis followed by biochemical assays and solution-     www.informahealthcare.com/bmg).


[PDF physical page 21]
DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2012.745476                                   PKS structure and protein–protein interactions   117

   In a molecular docking model that models the protein–     interface is mainly formed through electrostatic interactions
protein  interaction  during  chain  elongation,  homology     in two regions: the first is between a region close to the DSL
structure of ACP5 is docked into a deep cleft defined by    motif on ACP and the entrance of the substrate tunnel on the
KS5, KS5–AT5 linker and AT5 from the same polypeptide   AT larger subdomain; the second is between loops I, II of
strand (Kapur  et  al.,  2010).  Interestingly, no  significant   ACP and the KS–AT linker. Salt bridges formed between the
contact is found between ACP5 and KS5 domain from the    two domains contribute to a majority of the contacts. Some of
other subunit. Two regions of KS5–AT5 linker were identified    the  salt-bridge forming residues (Arg, Asp and Glu) are
to interact electrostatically with residues 44 and 45 in loop I    conserved among AT and ACP sequences. The importance of
of ACP5. Mutation of these two ACP residues led to 90%    these sites was confirmed by alanine-scanning mutagenesis
reduction in chain elongation activity.                          using the trans-acting disorazole ACP1. The AT showed 50%
  The molecular basis for intermodular chain transfer were    decreased  transacylation  activity toward disorazole ACP1
explained by another docking study using the homology   when Asp45 is mutated into an alanine (Wong et al., 2011).
structure of DEBS ACP4 and the crystal structure of KS5–AT5
(Kapur et al., 2012). ACP4 was found to dock in the same cleft   KR–ACP interactions
that ACP5 docks, but the position and orientation of the ACPs                                                               Detailed biochemical  studies using standalone KRs from
are very different. The position of ACP4 in the docking model                                          DEBS modules 1, 2 and 6 have shown that KRs are highly
is consistent with the NMR structure of the dimeric complex                                                                    specific toward the b-ketoacyl substrates and portions of the
formed between  the DEBS2  C-terminal (downstream  to                                                           pPant arm, but are more tolerant toward the ACP carrier
ACP4) and DEBS3 N-terminal linker domains (Broadhurst                                                                (Siskos et al., 2005; Chen et al., 2007). The molecular docking
et al., 2003). The ACP4 interacts with KS5–AT5 linker mainly                                                     model of DEBS-KR1 and its cognate diketide acyl-ACP was
by electrostatic interaction between E23 on ACP4 helix I and                                                                        built up in a stepwise fashion: first an apo-ACP/KR complex is
R551 on KS5–AT5  linker. This proposed interaction  site                                                              generated from the crystal structure of DEBS-KR1 and a
between ACPn  1 and KSn is supported by the NMR titration                                                     homology model of apo-ACP1 based on the solution structure
experiments using labeled ACP2 and unlabeled KS3–AT3, in                                                                of DEBS ACP2; then the pPant arm is attached to the ACP1;
which 1H–15N HSQC signals for some residues in helix I                                                                       finally the 2S-methyl-3-oxopentanoyl substrate is appended to
disappeared  in  the  presence  of  the KS3–AT3 didomain                                                                 the pPant arm (Anand & Mohanty, 2012). In the final docking
(Charkoudian et al., 2011).                                                          model, the acyl unit and the pPant arm were immobilized in
   This dual mode of binding by two ACPs on the same KS to                                                                 the shallow cavity of KR1 through hydrophilic and hydro-
achieve a unidirectional chain transfer can be extended to                                                           phobic interactions. An arginine and phenylalanine on KR1
other type  I modular PKS systems because these motifs                                                                       interact with the aspartate and leucine, respectively, in the
discussed above are highly conserved as revealed by the                                                           conserved ‘‘DSL’’ moiety of ACP1. In another docking model,
primary sequence alignments (Kapur et al., 2010). In iterative                                                            a homology model of amphotericin ACP2 was generated from
PKSs, the main difference is that the ACP can dock to both                                                                 the solution structure of DEBS ACP2 and was docked onto the
elongation and transfer sites. Indeed, construction of a mutant                                                          A-type KR2 (Zheng et al., 2010). The active site of ACP is
DEBS ACP that contains both ACPn  1 and ACPn recognition                                                          found facing the KR catalytic groove in an orientation that
features reprogrammed the noniterative DEBS module 3 to                                                                  favors the formation of the L-b-hydroxyl product. Protein–
catalyze two successive rounds of chain elongation (Kapur                                                                  protein interactions are found in two regions: between the
et al., 2012).                                            ACP2 helix II and the KR4 catalytic groove; and between the
                                            ACP2 loop II and the KR lid helix. A pair of hydrophobic
AT-ACP interactions                                              interaction is found between the valine immediately following
                                                                 the catalytic serine in ACP2 and a conserved leucine at the C-
The AT domains in PKSs not only need to select the correct                                                               terminal end of a4 in the KR structural subdomain. A salt
extender unit acyl CoA, but must also recognize the cognate
                                                              bridge is also found in this model between a conserved ACP2
ACP in the acyl transfer reaction. For example, the interaction                                                                  helix II arginine and an aspartate at the C-terminal end of a4.
between type II FAS HpMCAT and HpACP is moderate with
                                                               Similar docking model between ACP and KR is observed
a binding affinity of KD ¼ 4.31  10 5M (Zhang et al., 2007).                                                              using the B-type tylosin KR1. In this model, the pPant-bound
Biochemical analysis also indicated that ATs from modular
                                                                    substrate enters from the opposite side of the active site groove
PKSs show moderate  preference  (10–20:1)  toward  their
                                                                    to result in opposite stereospecific reduction.
cognate ACPs compared to noncogate ACPs (Wong et al.,
2010). Deletion of KS–AT linker or post-AT linker results in
                                            DH–ACP interactions
lower AT activity and ACP specificity, which suggests that
these  linkers play important  roles  in  catalysis and ACP   The  crystal  structure  of DEBS DH4  revealed  several
recognition (Wong et al., 2010).                              conserved hydrophobic residues that can interact with the
   Molecular docking studies using DEBS ACP3–AT3 (Wong    cognate ACP4. Comparing to type  II FAS DH, the ACP
et al., 2010) and dynemicin PKS ACP–AT (Liew et al., 2012)    docking region on DEBS DH4  is only  slightly  positive
showed that the ACP is docked in the cleft between KS–AT    charged (Keatinge-Clay, 2008; Anand & Mohanty, 2012). As
linker and the a/b hydrolases-like core (larger subdomain of   shown in FAS DH–ACP complex (Zhang et al., 2001; Kimber
AT), and is from the side accessible to the AT active site.     et al., 2004), a highly conserved phenylalanine and arginine
In the dynemicin ACP–AT complex, the fully extended pPant     pair near the DH active site entrance can interact with the
arm points toward the AT active  site, and the ACP–AT    leucine and aspartate residues, respectively, in the conserved


[PDF physical page 22]
118  W. Xu et al.                                                                                                             Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol, 2013; 48(2): 98–122

‘‘DSL’’ motif of ACP. This key role of the arginine was    Similar to all type I modular ACPs, ACPI adopts the four-
confirmed by the mutagenesis study, in which mutation of this    helix fold and the 3-hydroxyl-3-methyl-glutaryl substrate is
residue to aspartic acid in DH4 significantly decreased the    only weakly bound to the surface of ACPI. The interactions
catalytic efficiency of DEBS PKS (Keatinge-Clay, 2008). The    between ACPI and the halogenase is also weak, as titration of
acyl-ACP4/DH complex, which was built stepwise from the    the halogenase into the ACPI solution did not result in any
apo-ACP/DH complex, also confirmed the role of Phe–Arg    notable chemical  shift perturbations in the NMR signals.
pair in ACP docking, and showed details of substrate binding.    Mutagenesis  study  of  the  nonconserved,  solvent-exposed
The entire pentaketide acyl substrate and a portion of the    residues on ACPI led to the identification of several residues
pPant arm enter the deep cavity of the DH domain (Anand &     that have the strongest impact on chlorination efficiency,
Mohanty, 2012).                                         which included an asparagine and an isoleucine on helix II
                                                       and an alanine on helix III. These residues form a surface
TE-ACP interactions                                          patch surrounding  the ACPI pPant arm attachment  site,
                                                              thereby  providing  specific  contacts  for halogenase–ACPIA type I TE usually shows broad specificities toward the acyl
                                                                recognition (Busche et al., 2012).substrates (Aggarwal et  al., 1995; Weissman et  al., 1998;
Sharma & Boddy, 2007), while it interacts with ACP domains
                                          Summary and perspective
weakly. In DEBS, ACP6 in the last module is joined to the TE
domains through a linker of eleven residues. The interactions    Recent  development  on  X-ray  crystallography,  electron
between ACP6 and TE were studied using in vitro biochem-    microscopic  analysis and NMR techniques has promoted
ical assays and solution NMR (Tran et al., 2008, 2010). The     significant  advancement  in  our  understanding  of  the
covalent linkage between the ACP6 and DEBSTE has been     structural  and  mechanism  basis  of  multidomain  PKSs.
shown  to be  highly important  for  efficient  catalysis,  as    Almost  all the modular PKS  catalytic domains, both as
separating the two domains  into standalone proteins  sig-    standalone domains and as multi-domain fragments have
nificantly reduced the activity of the TE domain (Tran et al.,    solved 3D structures, which have provided detailed informa-
2008). This  result hinted  that protein–protein interactions     tion on the mechanism of catalysis and possible interactions
between the two domains may be minimal. This was further    with neighboring domains. However, the detailed informa-
supported by titration of TE into an ACP6 solution in a     tion regarding many domain–domain interactions are  still
solution NMR study. Similar results were also observed in a    unknown. Crystallization of a complete module of modular
titration experiment using the calicheamicin ACP and TE   PKS, or an intact iterative type  I PKS will be extremely
domains. Therefore, for most TE domains, only the acyl    informative toward complete understanding of these nano-
substrate and  part of the pPant arm  is required  for TE    machines and is the next grand challenge in this field. To
recognition, while the identity of the ACP substrate is not     date, most studies of the protein–protein interaction invol-
critical (Tran et al., 2010; Lim et al., 2011). This has been    ving ACPs are  still based on molecular docking between
widely used in the construction of hybrid and nonnatural type    reported crystal structures or homology structures. Because
I PKS assembly lines, in which the TE domain can be placed    of the dynamic nature of such protein–protein interactions
after different ACP domains to facilitate product release or    during  polyketide  biosynthesis,   it  is  difficult  for  X-ray
cyclization (Bedford et al., 1996). In addition, the TE has    crystallography to capture the weak or transient interactions.
been shown to catalyze hydrolysis or cyclization reaction    Recently,  researchers  are  pursuing  a  strategy  to  install
using acyl substrates attached as N-acetylcysteamine thioe-    mechanism-based crosslinkers onto the pPant arm of the
sters (Wang et al., 2009). Iterative type I PKS TEs have also   ACP  and  covalently  capture  these  proteins  in  action
been found to be broadly specific toward acyl substrates,    (Worthington et al., 2006, 2010; Kapur et al., 2008; Meier
while  not   requiring  an  ACP   partner   for   catalysis.     et  al., 2010). Using  similar  linkers, X-ray  structure  that
This is demonstrated using the Gibberella zeae PKS13TE    captured the TE-PCP (peptidyl carrier protein) interactions
domain (Zhou et al., 2008) as a biocatalytic tool in the release     in the related nonribosomal peptide synthetase was recently
of dihydromonacolin L from the iterative PKS LovB (Ma    reported (Liu et al., 2011). The PCP–TE didomain from E.
et al., 2009).                                                         coli  enterobactin  synthetase was  captured  in  the  crystal
                                                                    structure where the PCP domain forms extensive hydro-
Halogenase–ACP interactions                              phobic  interactions  with  the TE domain. The  substrate
                                                     bound pPant moiety  fits in a channel leading to the TE
In the modular PKS CurA involved in the biosynthesis of                                                                       catalytic triad, which provides detailed insight into how the
curacin A, a set of three ACPs (ACPI–ACPII–ACPIII) are                                                           pPant arm of holo carrier protein interacts with its partner
found in tandem. The three ACPs are highly identical in                                                   enzyme to stabilize domain–domain interactions. Such tools
sequence and function synergistically with each other (Busche                                                                    will also be highly useful for the PKS system. In parallel,
et al., 2009, 2012). This module also contains a nonheme                                                         development of new NMR techniques, such as paramagnetic
Fe2þ/a-ketoglutarate-dependent halogenase domain, of which                                                                  relaxation enhancement (Wang et al., 2012), for investigat-
the crystal structure was reported previously (Khare et al.,                                                               ing transient processes will also be highly beneficial.
2010). The ACP–halogenase interaction in CurA is specific,
as the g-chlorination only occurs when the acyl substrate is
loaded on cognate ACPI. The protein–protein interactions   Acknowledgements
between ACPI and the halogenase domain was investigated   We gratefully acknowledge Dr Yit-Heng Chooi for critical reading of this
using solution NMR spectroscopy (Busche  et  al., 2012).     manuscript.


[PDF physical page 23]
DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2012.745476                                   PKS structure and protein–protein interactions   119

Declaration of interest                                    Cheng YQ, Tang GL, Shen B. (2003). Type  I polyketide synthase
                                                                               requiring a discrete acyltransferase for polyketide biosynthesis. Proc
This manuscript is submitted to Critical Reviews in Biochemistry and       Nat Acad Sci USA 100:3149–54.
Molecular Biology exclusively. The authors report no declarations of     Claxton HB, Akey DL, Silver MK, et al. (2009). Structure and functional
interest. Research in our laboratory on related topics are supported by the        analysis  of  RifR,  the  type  II  thioesterase  from  the  rifamycin
National Institute of Health (1R01GM085128).                                biosynthetic pathway. J Biol Chem 284:5021–9.
                                                         Cox RJ. (2007). Polyketides, proteins and genes in fungi: programmed
                                                                      nano-machines begin  to  reveal  their  secrets. Org Biomol Chem
                                                                        5:2010–26.
References                                                      Crawford JM, Korman TP, Labonte JW, et al. (2009). Structural basis for
                                                                               biosynthetic programming of fungal aromatic polyketide cyclization.
Aggarwal R, Caffrey P, Leadlay PF, et al. (1995). The thioesterase of the
                                                                        Nature 461:1139–43.
  erythromycin-producing polyketide synthase – mechanistic studies                                                                   Crawford JM, Thomas PM, Scheerer JR, et al. (2008). Deconstruction
   invitro to investigate  its mode of action and substrate-specificity.                                                                              of  iterative  multidomain  polyketide  synthase  function.  Science
   J Chem Soc, Chem Commun 1519–20.                                                                        320:243–6.
Akey DL, Kittendorf JD, Giraldes JW, et al. (2006). Structural basis for                                                        Crump MP, Crosby J, Dempsey CE, et al. (1997). Solution structure of
  macrolactonization by the pikromycin thioesterase. Nat Chem Biol                                                                               the  actinorhodin  polyketide  synthase  acyl  carrier  protein  from
  2:537–42.                                                                        Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). Biochemistry 36:6000–8.
Akey DL, Razelun JR, Tehranisa J, et al. (2010). Crystal structures of                                                                          Dillon  SC, Bateman  A.  (2004). The  hotdog  fold:  wrapping  up
  dehydratase domains from the curacin polyketide biosynthetic path-                                                                         a superfamily of thioesterases and dehydratases. BMC Bioinform
  way. Structure 18:94–105.                                                                             5:109.
Alekseyev VY, Liu CW, Cane DE, et al. (2007). Solution structure and                                                    Du L, Lou L. (2010). PKS and NRPS release mechanisms. Nat Prod Rep
  proposed domain domain recognition interface of an acyl carrier                                                                        27:255–78.
   protein domain from a modular polyketide synthase. Protein Sci                                                                Evans SE, Williams C, Arthur CJ, et al. (2008). An ACP structural
  16:2093–107.                                                               switch: conformational differences between the apo and holo forms of
Ames BD, Nguyen C, Bruegger J, et al. (2012). Crystal structure and                                                                               the   actinorhodin   polyketide   synthase   acyl   carrier   protein.
  biochemical studies of the trans-acting polyketide enoyl reductase                                                         ChemBioChem 9:2424–32.
  LovC  from  lovastatin  biosynthesis.  Proc  Nat Acad  Sci USA    Evans SE, Williams C, Arthur CJ, et al. (2009). Probing the Interactions
  109:11144–9.                                                              of early polyketide intermediates with the actinorhodin ACP from S.
Anand  S, Mohanty D.  (2012). Modeling holo-ACP:DH and  holo-        coelicolor A3(2). J Mol Biol 389:511–28.
  ACP:KR complexes of modular polyketide synthases: a docking and    Findlow SC, Winsor C, Simpson TJ, et al. (2003). Solution structure and
  molecular dynamics study. BMC Struct Biol 12:10.                     dynamics of oxytetracycline polyketide synthase acyl carrier protein
Asturias  FJ, Chadick JZ, Cheung IK,  et  al. (2005). Structure and       from Streptomyces rimosus. Biochemistry 42:8423–33.
  molecular organization of mammalian fatty acid synthase. Nat Struct     Fischbach MA, Walsh CT.  (2006). Assembly-line enzymology  for
  Mol Biol 12:225–32.                                                      polyketide and nonribosomal Peptide antibiotics: logic, machinery,
Auclair K, Sutherland A, Kennedy J, et al. (2000). Lovastatin nonaketide       and mechanisms. Chem Rev 106:3468–96.
  synthase  catalyzes an  intramolecular  Diels–Alder  reaction  of  a    Frueh DP, Arthanari H, Koglin A, et al. (2008). Dynamic thiolation–
   substrate analogue. J Am Chem Soc 122:11519–20.                          thioesterase structure of a non-ribosomal peptide synthetase. Nature
Bedford D, Jacobsen JR, Luo G, et al. (1996). A functional chimeric       454:903–6.
  modular  polyketide synthase  generated  via domain  replacement.      Fujii  I, Watanabe A, Sankawa U,  et  al.  (2001).  Identification  of
  Chem Biol 3:827–31.                                                     Claisen  cyclase  domain  in  fungal  polyketide  synthase  WA,
Brignole EJ, Smith S, Asturias FJ. (2009). Conformational flexibility of       a  naphthopyrone  synthase  of  Aspergillus  nidulans. Chem  Biol
  metazoan fatty acid synthase enables catalysis. Nat Struct Mol Biol       8:189–97.
  16:190–7.                                                          Gehret JJ, Gu L, Gerwick WH, et al. (2011). Terminal alkene formation
Broadhurst RW, Nietlispach D, Wheatcroft MP,  et  al. (2003). The      by  the  thioesterase  of  curacin A  biosynthesis:  structure  of  a
   structure of docking domains in modular polyketide synthases. Chem       decarboxylating thioesterase. J Biol Chem 286:14445–54.
  Biol 10:723–31.                                                        Giraldes JW, Akey DL, Kittendorf JD, et al. (2006). Structural and
Busche AE, Aranko AS, Talebzadeh-Farooji M, et al. (2009). Segmental       mechanistic insights into polyketide macrolactonization from polyke-
   isotopic labeling of a central domain in a multidomain protein by        tide-based affinity labels. Nat Chem Biol 2:531–6.
   protein trans-splicing using only one robust DnaE  intein. Angew    Gokhale RS, Tsuji SY, Cane DE, et al. (1999). Dissecting and exploiting
  Chem Int Ed Engl 48:6128–31.                                           intermodular  communication  in  polyketide  synthases.  Science
Busche AE, Gottstein D, Hein C, et al. (2012). Characterization of       284:482–5.
  molecular interactions between ACP and halogenase domains in the    Guo  X,  Liu  T,  Valenzano CR,  et  al.  (2010).  Mechanism  and
   curacin A polyketide synthase. ACS Chem Biol 7:378–86.                   stereospecificity of a fully saturating polyketide synthase module:
Cane DE. (2010). Programming of erythromycin biosynthesis by a       nanchangmycin synthase module 2 and its dehydratase domain. J Am
  modular polyketide synthase. J Biol Chem 285:27517–23.             Chem Soc 132:14694–6.
Cane DE, Walsh CT. (1999). The parallel and convergent universes of     Haushalter RW, Filipp FV, Ko KS, et al. (2011). Binding and pK(a)
   polyketide synthases and nonribosomal peptide synthetases. Chem       modulation of a polycyclic substrate analogue in a type II polyketide
  Biol 6:R319–25.                                                           acyl carrier protein. ACS Chem Biol 6:413–18.
Cantu DC, Forrester MJ, Charov K, et al. (2012). Acyl carrier protein     Haushalter RW, Worthington AS, Hur GH, et al. (2008). An orthogonal
   structural  classification and normal mode  analysis.  Protein  Sci        purification strategy for isolating crosslinked domains of modular
  21:655–66.                                                                  synthases. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 18:3039–42.
Chakravarty B, Gu Z, Chirala SS, et  al. (2004). Human fatty acid    Haydock SF, Aparicio JF, Molnar I, et al. (1995). Divergent sequence
   synthase:  structure and  substrate  selectivity  of  the  thioesterase        motifs correlated with the substrate specificity of (methyl)malonyl-
  domain. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 101:15567–72.                        CoA:acyl carrier protein transacylase domains in modular polyketide
Chan YA, Podevels AM, Kevany BM, et al. (2009). Biosynthesis of        synthases. FEBS Lett 374:246–8.
   polyketide synthase extender units. Nat Prod Rep 26:90–114.           Hertweck C. (2009). The biosynthetic logic of polyketide diversity.
Charkoudian LK, Liu CW, Capone  S,  et  al.  (2011). Probing  the      Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 48:4688–716.
   interactions of an acyl carrier protein domain from the 6-deoxyery-    Jenke-Kodama H, Sandmann A, Muller R, et al. (2005). Evolutionary
   thronolide B synthase. Protein Sci 20:1244–55.                             implications  of  bacterial  polyketide  synthases. Mol  Biol  Evol
Chen AY, Cane DE, Khosla C. (2007). Structure-based dissociation of a       22:2027–39.
  type I polyketide synthase module. Chem Biol 14:784–92.                Joshi AK, Rangan VS, Smith S. (1998a). Differential affinity labeling of
Chen AY, Schnarr NA, Kim CY, et al. (2006). Extender unit and acyl        the two subunits of the homodimeric animal fatty acid synthase allows
   carrier   protein   specificity  of  ketosynthase  domains  of  the        isolation  of heterodimers  consisting  of  subunits  that have been
  6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase. J Am Chem Soc 128:3067–74.           independently modified. J Biol Chem 273:4937–43.


[PDF physical page 24]
120  W. Xu et al.                                                                                                             Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol, 2013; 48(2): 98–122

Joshi AK, Rangan VS, Witkowski A, et al. (2003). Engineering of an    Kwan DH, Sun Y, Schulz F, et al. (2008). Prediction and manipulation of
   active animal fatty acid synthase dimer with only one competent        the  stereochemistry  of  enoylreduction  in  modular  polyketide
   subunit. Chem Biol 10:169–73.                                             synthases. Chem Biol 15:1231–40.
Joshi AK, Witkowski A, Smith  S. (1997). Mapping  of  functional    La Clair JJ, Foley TL, Schegg TR, et al. (2004). Manipulation of carrier
   interactions between domains of the animal fatty acid synthase by        proteins in antibiotic biosynthesis. Chem Biol 11:195–201.
  mutant complementation in vitro. Biochemistry 36:2316–22.            Lambalot RH, Gehring AM, Flugel RS, et al. (1996). A new enzyme
Joshi AK, Witkowski A, Smith S. (1998b). The malonyl/acetyltransfer-       superfamily –  the  phosphopantetheinyl  transferases. Chem  Biol
  ase and beta-ketoacyl synthase domains of the animal  fatty acid       3:923–36.
  synthase can cooperate with the acyl carrier protein domain of either    Lau J, Cane DE, Khosla C. (2000). Substrate specificity of the loading
   subunit. Biochemistry 37:2515–23.                                    didomain of the erythromycin polyketide synthase. Biochemistry
Kapur S, Chen AY, Cane DE, et al. (2010). Molecular recognition between       39:10514–20.
  ketosynthase and acyl carrier protein domains of the 6-deoxyerythro-    Lau J, Fu H, Cane DE, et al. (1999). Dissecting the role of acyltransferase
   nolide B synthase. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 107:22066–71.                domains of modular polyketide synthases in the choice and stereo-
Kapur S, Lowry B, Yuzawa S, et al. (2012). Reprogramming a module of       chemical fate of extender units. Biochemistry 38:1643–51.
   the 6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase for iterative chain elongation.    Leesong M, Henderson BS, Gillig JR, et al. (1996). Structure of a
  Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 109:4110–5.                                     dehydratase-isomerase from the bacterial pathway for biosynthesis of
Kapur S, Worthington A, Tang Y, et  al. (2008). Mechanism based        unsaturated fatty acids: two catalytic activities in one active  site.
   protein crosslinking of domains from the 6-deoxyerythronolide B        Structure 4:253–64.
   synthase. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 18:3034–8.                          Li Q, Khosla C, Puglisi JD,  et  al. (2003). Solution  structure and
Kavanagh K, Jornvall H, Persson B, et al. (2008). The SDR superfamily:       backbone dynamics of the holo form of the frenolicin acyl carrier
   functional and structural diversity within a family of metabolic and        protein. Biochemistry 42:4648–57.
   regulatory enzymes. Cell Mol Life Sci 65:3895–906.                   Li Y, Xu W, Tang Y. (2010). Classification, prediction, and verification
Keatinge-Clay AT. (2007). A tylosin ketoreductase reveals how chirality        of the regioselectivity of fungal polyketide synthase product template
   is determined in polyketides. Chem Biol 14:898–908.                     domains. J Biol Chem 285:22762–71.
Keatinge-Clay AT.  (2008).  Crystal  structure  of  the  erythromycin    Liew CW, Nilsson M, Chen MW, et al. (2012). Crystal structure of the
   polyketide synthase dehydratase. J Mol Biol 384:941–53.                    acyltransferase  domain  of  the  iterative  polyketide  synthase  in
Keatinge-Clay AT. (2012). The structures of type I polyketide synthases.       enediyne biosynthesis. J Biol Chem 287:23203–15.
  Nat Prod Rep 29:1050–73.                                      Liew CW, Sharff A, Kotaka M, et al. (2010). Induced-fit upon ligand
Keatinge-Clay AT, Maltby DA, Medzihradszky KF, et al. (2004). An       binding revealed by crystal structures of the hot-dog fold thioesterase
   antibiotic factory caught in action. Nat Struct Mol Biol 11:888–93.          in dynemicin biosynthesis. J Mol Biol 404:291–306.
Keatinge-Clay AT, Shelat AA, Savage DF, et  al. (2003). Catalysis,    Lim J, Kong R, Murugan E, et al. (2011). Solution structures of the acyl
   specificity, and ACP docking site of Streptomyces coelicolor malonyl-        carrier protein domain from the highly reducing type  I  iterative
  CoA:ACP transacylase. Structure 11:147–54.                               polyketide synthase CalE8. PLoS One 6:e20549.
Keatinge-Clay AT, Stroud RM. (2006). The structure of a ketoreductase    Liou GF, Lau J, Cane DE, et al. (2003). Quantitative analysis of loading
  determines the organization of the beta-carbon processing enzymes of       and  extender  acyltransferases  of  modular  polyketide  synthases.
  modular polyketide synthases. Structure 14:737–48.                       Biochemistry 42:200–7.
Kennedy  J, Auclair K, Kendrew SG,  et  al. (1999). Modulation of     Liu Y, Zheng T, Bruner SD. (2011). Structural basis for phosphopan-
   polyketide synthase activity by accessory proteins during lovastatin        tetheinyl  carrier domain  interactions  in  the  terminal module  of
   biosynthesis. Science 284:1368–72.                                     nonribosomal peptide synthetases. Chem Biol 18:1482–8.
Khare D, Wang B, Gu LC, et al. (2010). Conformational switch triggered   Ma SM, Li JW, Choi JW, et al. (2009). Complete reconstitution of a
  by alpha-ketoglutarate in a halogenase of curacin A biosynthesis. Proc        highly reducing iterative polyketide synthase. Science 326:589–92.
  Nat Acad Sci USA 107:14099–104.                        Ma SM, Zhan J, Xie X, et al. (2008). Redirecting the cyclization steps of
Khosla C. (2009). Structures and mechanisms of polyketide synthases.       fungal polyketide synthase. J Am Chem Soc 130:38–9.
   J Org Chem 74:6416–20.                                          Maier T, Jenni S, Ban N. (2006). Architecture of mammalian fatty acid
Khosla C, Gokhale RS, Jacobsen JR,  et  al. (1999). Tolerance and       synthase at 4.5 A resolution. Science 311:1258–62.
   specificity of polyketide synthases. Annu Rev Biochem 68:219–53.      Maier T, Leibundgut M, Ban N. (2008). The crystal structure of a
Khosla  C,  Tang  Y,  Chen  AY,   et   al.  (2007).  Structure  and      mammalian fatty acid synthase. Science 321:1315–22.
  mechanism  of  the  6-deoxyerythronolide B  synthase. Annu Rev    McDaniel R, Thamchaipenet A, Gustafsson C, et al. (1999). Multiple
  Biochem 76:195–221.                                                      genetic modifications of the erythromycin polyketide synthase to
Kimber MS, Martin F, Lu Y, et al. (2004). The structure of (3R)-       produce a library of novel ‘‘unnatural’’ natural products. Proc Nat
  hydroxyacyl-acyl   carrier   protein   dehydratase   (FabZ)   from      Acad Sci USA 96:1846–51.
  Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J Biol Chem 279:52593–602.                Meier JL, Burkart MD. (2009). The chemical biology of modular
Koglin A, Lohr F, Bernhard F, et al. (2008). Structural basis for the        biosynthetic enzymes. Chem Soc Rev 38:2012–45.
   selectivity of the external thioesterase of the surfactin synthetase.    Meier JL, Haushalter RW, Burkart MD. (2010). A mechanism based
  Nature 454:907–11.                                                         protein crosslinker for acyl carrier protein dehydratases. Bioorg Med
Kopp M, Irschik H, Pradella S, et al. (2005). Production of the tubulin     Chem Lett 20:4936–9.
   destabilizer disorazol in Sorangium cellulosum: biosynthetic machin-    Moche M, Schneider G, Edwards P, et  al. (1999). Structure of the
  ery and regulatory genes. ChemBioChem 6:1277–86.                    complex between the antibiotic cerulenin and its target, beta-ketoacyl-
Korman TP, Crawford JM, Labonte JW, et al. (2010). Structure and        acyl carrier protein synthase. J Biol Chem 274:6031–34.
   function  of an  iterative polyketide synthase  thioesterase domain    Newman DJ, Cragg GM. (2012). Natural products as sources of new
   catalyzing Claisen cyclization in aflatoxin biosynthesis. Proc Nat       drugs over the 30 years from 1981 to 2010. J Nat Prod 75:311–35.
  Acad Sci USA 107:6246–51.                                   Nguyen T, Ishida K, Jenke-Kodama H, et al. (2008). Exploiting the
Kotaka M, Kong R, Qureshi  I, et al. (2009). Structure and catalytic       mosaic  structure of  trans-acyltransferase polyketide synthases  for
  mechanism of the thioesterase CalE7 in enediyne biosynthesis. J Biol        natural product discovery and pathway dissection. Nat Biotechnol
  Chem 284:15739–49.                                                  26:225–33.
Kroken S, Glass NL, Taylor JW, et al. (2003). Phylogenomic analysis of     Nordling E, Jornvall H, Persson B. (2002). Medium-chain dehydro-
  type  I  polyketide  synthase  genes  in  pathogenic  and  saprobic        genases/reductases  (MDR).  Family   characterizations  including
  ascomycetes. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 100:15670–5.                   genome comparisons and  active  site modeling. Eur  J Biochem
Kumar  P, Koppisch AT, Cane DE,  et  al.  (2003). Enhancing  the       269:4267–76.
  modularity of the modular polyketide synthases: transacylation in     Olsen JG, Kadziola A, von Wettstein-Knowles P, et al. (2001). Structures
  modular  polyketide  synthases  catalyzed  by  malonyl-CoA:ACP        of beta-ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein synthase I complexed with fatty
   transacylase. J Am Chem Soc 125:14307–12.                               acids elucidate its catalytic machinery. Structure 9:233–43.
Kwan DH, Leadlay PF. (2010). Mutagenesis of a modular polyketide     Piel J, Hui DQ, Fusetani N, et al. (2004). Targeting modular polyketide
  synthase enoylreductase domain reveals insights into catalysis and       synthases with iteratively acting acyltransferases from metagenomes
   stereospecificity. ACS Chem Biol 5:829–38.                                of uncultured bacterial consortia. Environ Microbiol 6:921–7.


[PDF physical page 25]
DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2012.745476                                   PKS structure and protein–protein interactions   121

Ploskon E, Arthur CJ, Evans SE, et al. (2008). A mammalian type I fatty    Tang Y, Tsai SC, Khosla C. (2003). Polyketide chain length control by
   acid synthase acyl carrier protein domain does not sequester acyl       chain length factor. J Am Chem Soc 125:12708–9.
   chains. J Biol Chem 283:518–28.                                    Tran L, Broadhurst RW, Tosin M, et al. (2010). Insights into protein–
Price AC, Rock CO, White SW. (2003). The 1.3-Angstrom-resolution        protein and enzyme-substrate  interactions  in modular  polyketide
   crystal structure of beta-ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein synthase II from        synthases. Chem Biol 17:705–16.
  Streptococcus pneumoniae. J Bacteriol 185:4136–43.                  Tran L, Tosin M, Spencer JB, et al. (2008). Covalent linkage mediates
Price AC, Zhang YM, Rock CO, et al. (2001). Structure of beta-ketoacyl-       communication between ACP and TE domains in modular polyketide
   [acyl  carrier  protein]  reductase from  Escherichia  coli:  negative        synthases. ChemBioChem 9:905–15.
   cooperativity and its structural basis. Biochemistry 40:12772–81.         Tsai SC, Ames BD.  (2009).  Structural enzymology  of  polyketide
Quadri LE, Weinreb PH, Lei M, et al. (1998). Characterization of Sfp, a        synthases. Methods Enzymol 459:17–47.
   Bacillus subtilis phosphopantetheinyl transferase for peptidyl carrier     Tsai SC, Lu HX, Cane DE,  et  al.  (2002).  Insights  into channel
   protein domains in peptide synthetases. Biochemistry 37:1585–95.           architecture and substrate specificity from crystal structures of two
Rangan VS, Joshi AK, Smith S. (2001). Mapping the functional topology       macrocycle-forming thioesterases of modular polyketide synthases.
   of the animal fatty acid synthase by mutant complementation in vitro.       Biochemistry 41:12598–606.
  Biochemistry 40:10792–9.                                              Tsai SC, Miercke LJ, Krucinski J, et al. (2001). Crystal structure of the
Rangan VS, Smith S. (1997). Alteration of the substrate specificity of the       macrocycle-forming thioesterase domain of the erythromycin polyke-
  malonyl-CoA/acetyl-CoA:acyl   carrier   protein   S-acyltransferase        tide synthase: versatility from a unique substrate channel. Proc Nat
  domain of the multifunctional fatty acid synthase by mutation of a      Acad Sci USA 98:14808–13.
   single arginine residue. J Biol Chem 272:11975–8.                       Tsuji SY, Cane DE, Khosla  C.  (2001).  Selective  protein–protein
Reed MAC, Schweizer M, Szafranska AE, et al. (2003). The type I rat        interactions direct channeling of intermediates between polyketide
   fatty acid synthase ACP shows structural homology and analogous       synthase modules. Biochemistry 40:2326–31.
  biochemical properties to type II ACPs. Org Biomol Chem 1:463–71.    Upadhyay SK, Misra A, Srivastava R, et al. (2009). Structural insights
Reeves CD, Murli S, Ashley GW,  et  al. (2001). Alteration of the        into the acyl intermediates of the Plasmodium falciparum fatty acid
   substrate specificity of a modular polyketide synthase acyltransferase        synthesis pathway: the mechanism of expansion of the acyl carrier
  domain through site-specific mutations. Biochemistry 40:15464–70.         protein core. J Biol Chem 284:22390–400.
Roujeinikova A, Baldock C, Simon WJ, et al. (2002). X-ray crystal-     Valenzano CR, Lawson RJ, Chen AY, et al. (2009). The biochemical
   lographic studies on butyryl-ACP reveal flexibility of the structure        basis for stereochemical control in polyketide biosynthesis. J Am
  around a putative acyl chain binding site. Structure 10:825–35.         Chem Soc 131:18501–11.
Ruch FE, Vagelos PR. (1973). The isolation and general properties of     Valenzano CR, You YO, Garg A, et al. (2010). Stereospecificity of the
  Escherichia coli malonyl coenzyme A-acyl carrier protein transacy-       dehydratase domain of the erythromycin polyketide synthase. J Am
   lase. J Biol Chem 248:8086–94.                              Chem Soc 132:14697–9.
Scaglione JB, Akey DL, Sullivan R, et al. (2010). Biochemical and    Walsh CT. (2008). The chemical versatility of natural-product assembly
   structural characterization of the tautomycetin thioesterase: analysis of         lines. Acc Chem Res 41:4–10.
  a stereoselective polyketide hydrolase. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl    Wang M, Zhou H, Wirz M, et al. (2009). A thioesterase from an iterative
  49:5726–30.                                                              fungal polyketide synthase shows macrocyclization and cross coupling
Serre L, Verbree EC, Dauter Z, et al. (1995). The Escherichia coli        activity and may play a role in controlling iterative cycling through
  malonyl-coa-acyl carrier protein transacylase at 1.5-angstrom resolu-       product offloading. Biochemistry 48:6288–90.
   tion – crystal structure of a fatty acid synthase component. J Biol    Wang  Y,  Schwieters CD, Tjandra N.  (2012).  Parameterization  of
  Chem 270:12961–4.                                                        solvent–protein interaction and  its use on NMR protein structure
Sharma AK, Sharma SK, Surolia A, et al. (2006). Solution structures of        determination. J Magn Reson 221:76–84.
  conformationally  equilibrium  forms  of  holo-acyl  carrier  protein    Watanabe K, Wang CC, Boddy CN,  et  al. (2003). Understanding
  (PfACP) from Plasmodium falciparum provides  insight  into  the        substrate specificity of polyketide synthase modules by generating
  mechanism of activation of ACPs. Biochemistry 45:6904–16.              hybrid multimodular synthases. J Biol Chem 278:42020–6.
Sharma KK, Boddy CN. (2007). The thioesterase domain from the    Wattana-amorn  P, Williams C, Ploskon E,  et  al.  (2010). Solution
  pimaricin and  erythromycin  biosynthetic  pathways can  catalyze        structure of an acyl carrier protein domain from a fungal type  I
   hydrolysis of simple thioester substrates. Bioorg Med Chem Lett        polyketide synthase. Biochemistry 49:2186–93.
  17:3034–7.                                                  Weissman KJ. (2009). Introduction to polyketide biosynthesis. Complex
Shen B. (2003). Polyketide biosynthesis beyond the type I, II and III      enzymes  in  microbial  natural  product.  Biosynthesis  Part  B:
   polyketide synthase paradigms. Curr Opin Chem Biol 7:285–95.            Polyketides Aminocoumarins Carbohydrates 459:3–16.
Shimomura Y, Kakuta Y, Fukuyama K. (2003). Crystal structures of the    Weissman KJ, Hong H, Popovic B, et al. (2006). Evidence for a protein–
  quinone oxidoreductase from Thermus thermophilus HB8 and  its        protein interaction motif on an acyl carrier protein domain from a
  complex  with NADPH:  implication  for NADPH  and  substrate       modular polyketide synthase. Chem Biol 13:625–36.
   recognition. J Bacteriol 185:4211–18.                             Weissman KJ, Muller R. (2008). Protein–protein interactions in multi-
Siskos AP, Baerga-Ortiz A, Bali S,  et  al. (2005). Molecular basis      enzyme megasynthetases. ChemBioChem 9:826–48.
   of Celmer’s rules: stereochemistry of catalysis by isolated ketor-    Weissman KJ, Smith CJ, Hanefeld U, et al. (1998). The thioesterase
  eductase domains from modular polyketide synthases. Chem Biol        of  the erythromycin-producing  polyketide  synthase:  influence  of
  12:1145–53.                                                               acyl chain structure on the mode of release of substrate analogues
Smith JL, Sherman DH. (2008). Biochemistry: an enzyme assembly line.       from  the  acyl  enzyme  intermediates. Angew Chem  Int  Edn
  Science 321:1304–5.                                                  37:1437–40.
Smith S, Tsai SC. (2007). The type I fatty acid and polyketide synthases:    Wilson MC, Moore  BS.  (2012).  Beyond  ethylmalonyl-CoA:  the
  a tale of two megasynthases. Nat Prod Rep 24:1041–72.                    functional role of crotonyl-CoA carboxylase/reductase homologs in
Smith   S,  Witkowski  A,   Joshi  AK.   (2003).   Structural  and       expanding polyketide diversity. Nat Prod Rep 29:72–86.
   functional organization of the animal fatty acid synthase. Prog Lipid    Witkowski A, Ghosal A, Joshi AK, et al. (2004). Head-to-head coiled
  Res 42:289–317.                                                      arrangement of the subunits of the animal fatty acid synthase. Chem
Staunton J, Weissman KJ. (2001). Polyketide biosynthesis: a millennium       Biol 11:1667–76.
   review. Nat Prod Rep 18:380–416.                                  Witkowski A, Joshi A, Smith S. (1996). Fatty acid synthase: in vitro
Tang Y, Chen AY, Kim CY, et al. (2007). Structural and mechanistic       complementation of inactive mutants. Biochemistry 35:10569–75.
   analysis of protein interactions in module 3 of the 6-deoxyerythro-    Witkowski A, Joshi AK, Rangan VS, et al. (1999). Dibromopropanone
   nolide B synthase. Chem Biol 14:931–43.                                   cross-linking  of  the  phosphopantetheine and  active-site  cysteine
Tang Y, Kim CY, Mathews II, et al. (2006). The 2.7-angstrom crystal         thiols of the animal fatty acid synthase can occur both inter- and
   structure of a 194-kDa homodimeric fragment of the 6-deoxyery-        intrasubunit – reevaluation of the side-by-side, antiparallel subunit
   thronolide B synthase. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 103:11124–9.             model. J Biol Chem 274:11557–63.
Tang  Y, Lee  TS,  Khosla  C.  (2004).  Engineered  biosynthesis  of    Wong FT, Chen AY, Cane DE, et al. (2010). Protein–protein recognition
   regioselectively  modified  aromatic  polyketides  using  bimodular       between acyltransferases and acyl carrier proteins in multimodular
   polyketide synthases. PLoS Biol 2:227–38.                                 polyketide synthases. Biochemistry 49:95–102.


[PDF physical page 26]
122  W. Xu et al.                                                                                                             Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol, 2013; 48(2): 98–122

Wong FT, Jin X, Mathews II, et al. (2011). Structure and mechanism of        structure and  its interaction with acyl carrier protein. Protein Sci
   the  trans-acting  acyltransferase  from  the  disorazole  synthase.       16:1184–92.
  Biochemistry 50:6539–48.                                      Zhang YM, Rao MS, Heath RJ, et al. (2001). Identification and analysis
Worthington   AS,   Burkart  MD.   (2006).   One-pot   chemo-        of the acyl carrier protein (ACP) docking site on beta-ketoacyl-ACP
  enzymatic  synthesis  of  reporter-modified  proteins. Org Biomol       synthase III. J Biol Chem 276:8231–8.
  Chem 4:44–6.                                                Zhang YM, Wu B, Zheng J, et al. (2003). Key residues responsible for
Worthington AS, Porter DF, Burkart MD. (2010). Mechanism-based        acyl carrier protein and beta-ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein reductase
   crosslinking  as  a  gauge  for  functional  interaction  of  modular       (FabG) interaction. J Biol Chem 278:52935–43.
   synthases. Org Biomol Chem 8:1769–72.                          Zhao C, Coughlin JM, Ju J, et al. (2010). Oxazolomycin biosynthesis in
Worthington AS, Rivera H, Torpey JW, et al. (2006). Mechanism-based       Streptomyces albus JA3453 featuring an ‘‘acyltransferase-less’’ type I
   protein cross-linking probes to investigate carrier protein-mediated        polyketide synthase  that incorporates two  distinct extender  units.
   biosynthesis. ACS Chem Biol 1:687–91.                                       J Biol Chem 285:20097–108.
Wu N, Cane DE, Khosla C.  (2002).  Quantitative  analysis  of  the    Zheng J, Gay DC, Demeler B, et al. (2012). Divergence of multimodular
   relative  contributions  of  donor  acyl  carrier  proteins,  acceptor        polyketide synthases revealed by a didomain structure. Nat Chem Biol
   ketosynthases,  and  linker  regions  to  intermodular  transfer  of       8:615–21.
   intermediates   in   hybrid   polyketide   synthases.   Biochemistry    Zheng J, Keatinge-Clay AT. (2011). Structural and functional analysis of
                                                                      C2-type ketoreductases from modular polyketide synthases. J Mol  41:5056–66.
Wu N, Tsuji SY, Cane DE, et al. (2001). Assessing the balance between       Biol 410:105–17.
                                                             Zheng J, Taylor CA, Piasecki SK, et al. (2010). Structural and functional   protein–protein interactions and enzyme–substrate interactions in the
                                                                                 analysis of A-type ketoreductases from the amphotericin modular  channeling of intermediates between polyketide synthase modules.
                                                                             polyketide synthase. Structure 18:913–22.   J Am Chem Soc 123:6465–74.
                                                           Zhou H, Gao ZZ, Qiao KJ, et al. (2012). A fungal ketoreductase domainXie X, Meehan MJ, Xu W, et al. (2009). Acyltransferase mediated
                                                                                      that displays substrate-dependent stereospecificity. Nat Chem Biol   polyketide release from a fungal megasynthase. J Am Chem Soc
                                                                          8:331–3.  131:8388–9.
                                                           Zhou H, Zhan J, Watanabe K, et al. (2008). A polyketide macrolactoneYadav G, Gokhale RS, Mohanty D. (2003). Computational approach for
                                                                           synthase from the filamentous fungus Gibberella zeae. Proc Nat Acad
   prediction of domain organization and substrate specificity of modular
                                                                            Sci USA 105:6249–54.
   polyketide synthases. J Mol Biol 328:335–63.
                                                          Zhu X, Yu F, Li XC, et al. (2007). Production of dihydroisocoumarins in
Yin YF, Gokhale R, Khosla C, et al. (2001). Erythromycin biosynthesis.
                                                                    Fusarium verticillioides by swapping ketosynthase domain of the
  The 4-pro-S hydride of NADPH is utilized for ketoreduction by both
                                                                            fungal iterative polyketide synthase Fum1p with that of lovastatin
  module 5 and module 6 of the 6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase.                                                                                 diketide synthase. J Am Chem Soc 129:36–7.
  Bioorg Med Chem Lett 11:1477–9.                                                                        Zornetzer GA, Fox BG, Markley JL. (2006). Solution structures of
Zhang   L,  Liu  W,  Xiao    J,   et   al.   (2007).  Malonyl-CoA:                                                                          spinach acyl carrier protein with decanoate and stearate. Biochemistry
   acyl carrier protein transacylase from Helicobacter pylori: crystal                                                                       45:5217–27.