
[PDF physical page 1]
    marine drugs


Editorial
Marine Microbial Diversity as a Source of Bioactive
Natural Products


Didier Stien

 Laboratoire de Biodiversité et Biotechnologie Microbiennes, Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LBBM, Observatoire
 Océanologique, 66650 Banyuls-sur-Mer, France; didier.stien@cnrs.fr


 Received: 9 April 2020; Accepted: 14 April 2020; Published: 16 April 2020




    Some 3.5 billion years ago, microorganisms were the ﬁrst to colonize Earth. They have gradually
evolved, within intricate systems of microbial and macroscopic species, to occupy virtually all the
available niches on the planet.  Genetic drift and natural selection have molded the phenotypic
expression of a trillion diﬀerent microbial species [1], shaping their metabolisms and oﬀering ever-more
advantageous abilities to expand, with the production of new metabolites being one key to the ﬁtness
and evolutionary success of new species [2].
    The rate of discovery of new natural products of microbial origin has increased signiﬁcantly since
the 1970s with the advent of modern methods of puriﬁcation and structural determination, and later,
with holistic approaches to chemical analysis and genetic information-based exploration of natural
chemodiversity [3–6]. With these tools in hand and the exploration of innovative and ecologically
relevant sources of microorganisms, it is possible to rapidly expand the exploration of chemodiversity
on a global scale, and eventually isolate innovative compounds. It should be noted that the enthusiasm
to discover new scaﬀolds is not necessarily relevant in the context of the search for active or useful
natural products. Structural modiﬁcations that do not aﬀect the core scaﬀold of a metabolite may
provide a signiﬁcant beneﬁt that can be developed for a therapeutic use. A notable example is in
the immense diversity of terpenes built on a limited number of scaﬀolds. Terpenes have diﬀerent
functional roles—and therefore diﬀerent biological activities—and have largely contributed to the
diversiﬁcation of higher plants [2,7].
     Today, marine microbes can still be regarded as a relatively underappreciated potential source of
active compounds yet to be discovered. Some microorganisms can live freely in the water column,
while many others live in association. For example, sponges host microorganisms that contribute
to their holometabolome, while many coral species host microalgae and symbiotic prokaryotes.
Furthermore, many microorganisms contribute to the construction of interspeciﬁc bioﬁlms covering
biotic and abiotic surfaces. While recent advances in natural-product science now provide access to
an unknown dimension of chemodiversity, metabolic engineering will eventually allow the production
of active marine compounds in amounts necessary for pharmaceutical development.
    The Special Issue “Marine Microbial Diversity as a Source of Bioactive Natural Products” was
aimed at collecting papers with up-to-date information regarding the characterization of marine
microbes’ metabolic diversity and the evaluation of the therapeutic potential of marine microbes’
metabolites. The interest of the Special Issue was also to show that the exploration of underrated
reservoirs of marine microorganisms can lead to the discovery of valuable secondary metabolites.
In total, 10 articles were accepted and included in the Special Issue.
    Most of the articles in this special issue deal with marine fungi, biological and chemical diversity,
and their active metabolites. This may be a sign that marine fungi have been under studied to date,
and are perceived by many researchers as an important source of discovery in this ﬁeld [8]. Focusing on
marine Arthrinium spp.  isolates, Heo et al. conducted a phylogenetic analysis based on internal
transcribed spacers, nuclear large subunit rDNA, β-tubulin, and translation elongation factor region



Mar. Drugs 2020, 18, 215; doi:10.3390/md18040215                                 www.mdpi.com/journal/marinedrugs


[PDF physical page 2]
Mar. Drugs 2020, 18, 215                                                                                     2 of 5



sequences [9]. The 28 analyzed strains were obtained by cultivation of seaweed tissues (including
several Sargassum fulvellum individuals) and Arctoscopus japonicus egg masses. It was found that the
28 isolates were in fact 15 species, 11 of which being new to Science. Most of the fungal extracts
exhibited radical-scavenging activity, and some showed antifungal activity, tyrosinase inhibition, and
quorum sensing inhibition. Interestingly, three species were found in both S. fulvellum and A. japonicus
egg masses, perhaps because these ﬁsh usually lay eggs on S. fulvellum. The known compound gentisyl
alcohol was found to be responsible for the radical-scavenging activity of two of the Arthrinium extracts.
A fungal diversity analysis was also conducted on decommissioned salterns and neighboring mudﬂats
in the Yellow Sea of South Korea [10]. Comparative fungal community analysis showed that the salterns
that had been abandoned for more than 35 years had recovered to mudﬂats. The Yongyudo saltern was
abandoned less than one year before the analysis and had not recovered. Its fungal community was
more diverse and was dominated by Entorrhizomycota, while Chytridiomycota and Mortierellomycota
dominated elsewhere. It has been hypothesized that Entorrhizomycota may include plant pathogenic
fungi and that the dominance of this phylum may originate from the occurrence of their host plants
at the initial stage of ecological succession after the saltern was abandoned. It should be mentioned
that a large number of fungi could not be identiﬁed, indicating a lack of DNA-based phylogenetic
information on marine fungi. Eventually, 53 fungal strains were isolated from the diﬀerent sampling
locations. The cultivable fungi were not necessarily the main taxa from the community analyses.
A total of 18 isolates were possibly new species, and the authors provide the antioxidant, antifungal,
tyrosinase inhibition, and quorum quenching activity of all isolates.
    Fungal spores are easily dispersed and are detectable in community analyses. As a result,
not all fungi detected in marine environments by rDNA-based analysis are genuine marine species.
The challenging question of the isolation of marine fungi sensu stricto is key to the future exploration
of the chemical diversity of marine fungi, and possibly the exploitation of their secondary metabolites.
A best-practice guide for the isolation of marine fungi from diﬀerent matrixes and their conservation
is presented by Overy et al. [11]. Generalist, osmotolerant/halotolerant genera such as Aspergillus
and Penicillium are highly cited in the literature but taxonomic groups composed predominantly of
marine fungi sensu stricto such as Halosphaeriaceae, Torpedosporales, and Lulworthiales have been
little studied for now. It should also be noted that mycologists have been studying marine fungi for
decades, and that currently cryopreserved marine fungi may represent an easily accessible source for
the exploration of their chemical diversity and the isolation of active secondary metabolites.
   One of the sources frequently explored in the search for marine fungi are sedimentary deposits.
Examination of the full genome of the marine-derived fungus Penicillium brasilianum HBU-136,
isolated from the Bohai sea in China, highlighted that the strain harbors multiple non-ribosomal
peptide synthetase (NRPS) biosynthetic gene clusters (BGC), including one showing high similarity
to the BGC of fumitremorgins A-C in the fungus Aspergillus fumigatus [12]. The strain was already
known to produce a spirocyclic diketopiperazine alkaloid and cyclotryprostatin B when cultivated
on rice medium. More fermentation conditions were experimented and it was eventually discovered
that three new and unusual indole-diketopiperazines 1–3 were produced by fermentation in a rice
medium supplemented with 1% MgCl2 (Figure 1). The proposed BGC is likely responsible for the
synthesis of these metabolites. Compound 1 was cytotoxic on HL-60 cells (6.0 µM), and compounds
2 and 3 were active on MCF-7 cell line (7.6 and 10.8 µM, respectively). The marine-derived fungus
Aspergillus fumigatus CUGBMF170049 was also isolated from the Bohai sea sediments and was shown to
produce new pseurotin analogs 4 and 5 (Figure 1) [13]. These metabolites were identiﬁed by thorough
analysis of spectroscopic data, but unfortunately, were not active in the antimicrobial assays used
in this work. Incidentally, the known compound helvolic acid isolated from the same fungus was
very active on both Staphylococcus aureus and methicillin-resistant S. aureus, with a minimal inhibitory
concentration (MIC) of 0.78 µg/mL. The fungus Geosmithia pallida FS140 was isolated from a sediment
collected at 2403 m depth in the South China Sea [14]. Twelve diketopiperazines, including the three
new thiodiketopiperazines geospallins A-C (6–8), were isolated from this fungus (Figure 1). The three


[PDF physical page 3]
Mar. Drugs 2020, 18, 215                                                                                     3 of 5


new compounds exhibited substantial angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitory activity, with IC50
values of 29–35 µM.





                   Figure 1. Compounds isolated from marine-sediment-derived fungi.

     In the sea, many fungal species are associated with macroscopic organisms [9,11,15]. The isolation
of marine fungi from macroorganisms’ tissues may in fact be a fairly straightforward way of isolating
marine fungi sensu stricto. The fungus Aspergillus ﬂocculosus 168ST-16.1 was isolated from the algae
Padina sp., collected at a depth of 10 m in Da Nang, Vietnam [16]. Five new sesterterpene ophiobolins
together with four known ones were isolated from a broth culture of this fungus and identiﬁed
by spectroscopic methods.  Interestingly, all these compounds were active against six cancer cell
lines with 50% growth inhibition (GI50) values in the range of 0.14 to 2.01 µM. The new compound
14,15-dehydro-6-epi-ophiobolin K (9, Figure 2) was among the most active ones, with a GI50 of
about 0.2 µM on all tested cell lines. The fungal strain Botryosphaeria ramosa L29 was isolated as an
endophyte of the mangrove plant species. Four new isocoumarin derivatives, namely botryospyrones
A, B (10), C, and D (Figure 2) were isolated from this fungus. Interestingly, a ﬁfth compound (11)
was produced only when the culture medium was supplemented with the host plant ﬂavonoid
(2R,3R)-3,5,7-trihydroxyﬂavanone 3-acetate, which had been found to slightly inhibit the endophyte
growth. Owing to the ease of isomerization of animals by successive ring-opening and ring-closing
steps, it is expected that such compound would eventually generate the more stable stereoisomer, i.e.,
the cis ring junction isomer. Further, the 13C NMR spectrum of compound 11 is similar enough to the one
previously reported in the literature to conclude that the proposed structure was probably erroneous [17].
Compound 11 is in fact likely the (3aR,8aS)-1-acetyl-1,2,3,3a,8,8a-hexahydropyrrolo[2,3-b]indol-3a-ol
rather than the (3aS,8aS) stereoisomer. Three coumarins and compound 11 were evaluated in vitro for
antifungal activity toward three phytopathogenic fungi. It is interesting to point out that compound
11, which is only produced by the fungus exposed to a metabolite of the plant, was the most active,
with MIC values in the 28-57 µM range.


[PDF physical page 4]
Mar. Drugs 2020, 18, 215                                                                                     4 of 5





       Figure 2. Examples of secondary metabolites isolated from fungi associated to algae and plants.

     Finally, describing and understanding the metabolic diversity of marine species will allow
a better understanding of the whole marine ecosystem, a better understanding of the mechanisms that
regulate interspeciﬁc interactions in the sea, and possibly, a better understanding of the evolutionary
processes involved. Moreover, the sea is the cauldron of a great diversity of useful and valuable
compounds, whether known or not. As such, many marine microorganisms can become important
sources of compounds useful to humankind. The carotenoid-producing yeast strain Rhodotorula
sp. RY1801 was isolated from the exposed intertidal zone along the South Yellow Sea in Dongtai,
China [18]. The culture conditions were optimized to increase the microbial biomass and the carotenoid
yield of the strain. Eventually, it was possible to reach nearly 1 mg/L carotenoids in the culture,
demonstrating that this fast growing Rhodotorula sp. strain may be used for the commercial production
of carotenoids. The comparison of the phylogenetic and metabolomic proﬁles of 12 microalgal species
from diﬀerent lineages provided novel insights into the potential of chemotaxonomy in marine
phytoplankton [19]. The most abundant and diversiﬁed metabolites identiﬁed over the 12 strains were
polar lipids and pigments. Historically, analysis of pigment composition has been used to assist the
classiﬁcation of microalgae. Here, it was found that lipid classes and some speciﬁc lipids within classes
may serve as phylogenetic markers. For example, within the tested Mamiellales, the Ostreococcus
genus diﬀers by the presence of two monogalactosyldiacylglycerols (MGDG 20:5/16:3 and 16:1/16:1),
and the species O. tauri has six 1,2-diacylglyceryl-3-O-4’-(N,N,N-trimethyl)-homoserines (DGTSs) that
are not found in O. mediterraneus. Overall, a good overlap of phylogenetic and chemotaxonomic
signals was demonstrated, in particular when the analysis focused on the major metabolites of
algae, and evolutionary divergence between species could be inferred in good congruence with the
phylogenies. These results support the hypothesis of a metabolomics equivalent to the “molecular
clock” based on the analysis of sequence data.
    As seen from the above synopsis, the papers included in this Special Issue provide an interesting
overview of chemical diversity of marine fungi and algae. New, bioactive, marine-derived fungal
metabolites were isolated and characterized. The articles presented in this Special Issue underline the
central role of the sea as a provider of valuable chemicals for human use.
     In conclusion, the Guest Editor thanks all the authors who contributed to this Special Issue,
all the reviewers for evaluating the submitted manuscripts, and the Editorial board of Marine Drugs,
especially, Orazio Taglialatela-Scafati, Editor-in-Chief of the journal, and Estelle Fan, Assistant Editor,
for their kind help in bringing this book into reality.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.


References

1.    Locey, K.J.; Lennon, J.T. Scaling laws predict global microbial diversity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016, 113,
     5970–5975. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Courtois, E.A.; Dexter, K.G.; Paine, C.E.T.; Stien, D.; Engel, J.; Baraloto, C.; Chave, J. Evolutionary patterns
     of volatile terpene emissions across 202 tropical tree species. Ecol. Evol. 2016, 6, 2854–2864. [CrossRef]
    [PubMed]


[PDF physical page 5]
Mar. Drugs 2020, 18, 215                                                                                     5 of 5



3.    Pye, C.R.; Bertin, M.J.; Lokey, R.S.; Gerwick, W.H.; Linington, R.G. Retrospective analysis of natural products
     provides insights for future discovery trends. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2017, 114, 5601–5606. [CrossRef]
    [PubMed]
4.   Wolfender, J.-L.; Litaudon, M.; Touboul, D.; Ferreira Queiroz, E. Innovative omics-based approaches for
      prioritisation and targeted isolation of natural products – new strategies for drug discovery. Nat. Prod. Rep.
     2019, 36, 855–868. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.   Gerwick, W.H.; Moore, B.S. Lessons from the past and charting the future of marine natural products drug
     discovery and chemical biology. Chem. Biol. 2012, 19, 85–98. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.    Lauritano, C.; Ferrante, M.I.; Rogato, A. Marine natural products from microalgae: An -omics overview.
     Mar. Drugs 2019, 17, 269. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.   Rodrigues, A.M.S.; Eparvier, V.; Odonne, G.; Amusant, N.; Stien, D.; Houël, E. The antifungal potential of
      (Z)-ligustilide and the protective eﬀect of eugenol demonstrated by a chemometric approach. Sci. Rep. 2019,
      9, 8729. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.    Gladfelter, A.S.; James, T.Y.; Amend, A.S. Marine fungi. Curr. Biol. 2019, 29, R191–R195. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.   Heo, Y.M.; Kim, K.; Ryu, S.M.; Kwon, S.L.; Park, M.Y.; Kang, J.E.; Hong, J.-H.; Lim, Y.W.; Kim, C.; Kim, B.S.;
      et al. Diversity and ecology of marine algicolous Arthrinium species as a source of bioactive natural products.
     Mar. Drugs 2018, 16, 508. [CrossRef]
10.  Heo, Y.M.; Lee, H.; Kim, K.; Kwon, S.L.; Park, M.Y.; Kang, J.E.; Kim, G.-H.; Kim, B.S.; Kim, J.-J. Fungal
      diversity in intertidal mudﬂats and abandoned solar salterns as a source for biological resources. Mar. Drugs
     2019, 17, 601. [CrossRef]
11.  Overy, D.P.; Rämä, T.; Oosterhuis, R.; Walker, A.K.; Pang, K.-L. The neglected marine fungi, sensu stricto,
    and their isolation for natural products’ discovery. Mar. Drugs 2019, 17, 42. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.  Zhang, Y.-H.; Geng, C.; Zhang, X.-W.; Zhu, H.-J.; Shao, C.-L.; Cao, F.; Wang, C.-Y. Discovery of bioactive
     indole-diketopiperazines from the marine-derived fungus Penicillium brasilianum aided by genomic
     information. Mar. Drugs 2019, 17, 514. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.  Xu, X.; Han, J.; Wang, Y.; Lin, R.; Yang, H.; Li, J.; Wei, S.; Polyak, S.W.; Song, F. Two new spiro-heterocyclic
     γ-lactams from a marine-derived Aspergillus fumigatus strain CUGBMF170049. Mar. Drugs 2019, 17, 289.
     [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.  Sun, Z.-H.; Gu, J.; Ye, W.; Wen, L.-X.; Lin, Q.-B.; Li, S.-N.; Chen, Y.-C.; Li, H.-H.; Zhang, W.-M. Geospallins
    A–C: new thiodiketopiperazines with inhibitory activity against angiotensin-converting enzyme from
     a deep-sea-derived fungus Geosmithia pallida FS140. Mar. Drugs 2018, 16, 464. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.  Rédou, V.; Vallet, M.; Meslet-Cladière, L.; Kumar, A.; Pang, K.-L.; Pouchus, Y.-F.; Barbier, G.; Grovel, O.;
     Bertrand, S.; Prado, S.; et al. Marine fungi. In The marine microbiome; Stal, L.J., Cretoiu, M.S., Eds.; Springer
     International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2016; pp. 99–153. ISBN 978-3-319-33000-6.
16.  Choi, B.-K.; Trinh, P.T.H.; Lee, H.-S.; Choi, B.-W.; Kang, J.S.; Ngoc, N.T.D.; Van, T.T.T.; Shin, H.J. New
     ophiobolin derivatives from the marine fungus Aspergillus ﬂocculosus and their cytotoxicities against cancer
       cells. Mar. Drugs 2019, 17, 346. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.  Yang, S.-W.; Cordell, G.A. Metabolism studies of indole derivatives using a staurosporine producer,
     Streptomyces staurosporeus. J. Nat. Prod. 1997, 60, 44–48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.  Zhao, Y.; Guo, L.; Xia, Y.; Zhuang, X.; Chu, W. Isolation, identiﬁcation of carotenoid-producing Rhodotorula sp.
     from marine environment and optimization for carotenoid production. Mar. Drugs 2019, 17, 161. [CrossRef]
    [PubMed]
19.  Marcellin-Gros, R.; Piganeau, G.; Stien, D. Metabolomic insights into marine phytoplankton diversity.
     Mar. Drugs 2020, 18, 78. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

           © 2020 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                           article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                  (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).