
[PDF physical page 1]
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 21 January 2020
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.03018
Edited by:
Jae-Hyuk Yu,
University of Wisconsin–Madison,
United States
Reviewed by:
Wanping Chen,
Huazhong Agricultural University,
China
Matthew Mead,
Vanderbilt University, United States
Kathryn Bushley,
University of Minnesota Twin Cities,
United States
*Correspondence:
Jérôme Collemare
j.collemare@wi.knaw.nl
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Fungi and Their Interactions,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Microbiology
Received: 17 September 2019
Accepted: 16 December 2019
Published: 21 January 2020
Citation:
Navarro-Muñoz JC and
Collemare J (2020) Evolutionary
Histories of Type III Polyketide
Synthases in Fungi.
Front. Microbiol. 10:3018.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.03018
Evolutionary Histories of Type III
Polyketide Synthases in Fungi
Jorge Carlos Navarro-Muñoz and Jérôme Collemare*
Westerdijk Fungal Biodiversity Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands
Type III polyketide synthases (PKSs) produce secondary metabolites with diverse
biological activities, including antimicrobials. While they have been extensively studied in
plants and bacteria, only a handful of type III PKSs from fungi has been characterized
in the last 15 years. The exploitation of fungal type III PKSs to produce novel bioactive
compounds requires understanding the diversity of these enzymes, as well as of their
biosynthetic pathways. Here, phylogenetic and reconciliation analyses of 522 type III
PKSs from 1,193 fungal genomes revealed complex evolutionary histories with massive
gene duplications and losses, explaining their discontinuous distribution in the fungal
tree of life. In addition, horizontal gene transfer events from bacteria to fungi and, to
a lower extent, between fungi, could be inferred. Ancestral gene duplication events
have resulted in the divergence of eight phylogenetic clades. Especially, two clades
show ancestral linkage and functional co-evolution between a type III PKS and a
reducing PKS genes. Investigation of the occurrence of protein domains in fungal type
III PKS predicted gene clusters highlighted the diversity of biosynthetic pathways, likely
reﬂecting a large chemical landscape. Type III PKS genes are most often located next
to genes encoding cytochrome P450s, MFS transporters and transcription factors,
deﬁning ancestral core gene clusters. This analysis also allowed predicting gene clusters
for the characterized fungal type III PKSs and provides working hypotheses for the
elucidation of the full biosynthetic pathways. Altogether, our analyses provide the
fundamental knowledge to motivate further characterization and exploitation of fungal
type III PKS biosynthetic pathways.
Keywords: gene duplication, gene loss, horizontal gene transfer, secondary metabolite, gene cluster, resorcinol,
pyrone, comparative genomics
INTRODUCTION
The genomic era has revealed that fungal genomes carry many more biosynthetic pathways than
known compounds, demonstrating that the fungal kingdom has been an underexploited resource
of secondary metabolites (SMs). Access to this hidden biodiversity is hampered by the strict
regulation of SM biosynthetic pathways under speciﬁc conditions that are diﬃcult to reproduce
in the laboratory (Keller, 2019). Assessing the diversity of biosynthetic pathways encoded in fungal
genomes is therefore the ﬁrst step to prioritize the activation of candidate gene clusters toward
exploiting fungal natural products and engineering novel compounds.
Fungi possess a high potential to produce SMs of the polyketide family (Collemare et al.,
2008), some of them are well characterized because of their biological activities or toxicity
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
1
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 2]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
(Keller, 2019). Fungal polyketides are synthesized through
diﬀerent routes, each involving a speciﬁc class of polyketide
synthase (PKS). Type I iterative PKSs are multidomain mega-
enzymes that are responsible for the production of most fungal
polyketide compounds (Herbst et al., 2018). A second route relies
on type III PKSs, which are enzymes consisting of a single keto-
synthase (KS) domain (Yu et al., 2012). While type I PKSs have
been well characterized and found to be abundant in fungal
genomes, only a handful of fungal type III PKSs have been
characterized so far (Hashimoto et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2016;
Ramakrishnan et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2018; Kaneko et al., 2019;
Manoharan et al., 2019).
Type III PKSs were initially found in the 1970s in
plants, with the best representative enzyme being chalcone
synthases, which catalyze the precursors of plant ﬂavonoids,
isoﬂavonoids and anthocyanins (Ferrer et al., 1999; Austin
and Noel, 2003). Until the 1990s, their occurrence was
thought to be restricted to plants, but type III PKSs were
then identiﬁed and characterized in bacteria. The ﬁrst bacterial
representative
is
RppA
from
Streptomyces
griseus,
which
catalyzes
1,3,6,8-tetrahydroxynaphthalene,
a
precursor
of
hexahydroxyperylenequinone melanin (Funa et al., 1999).
Genome analysis of the fungus Aspergillus oryzae at the
beginning of the 21st century revealed that this fungus contains
four type III PKS genes (CsyA, CsyB, CsyC, and CsyD), and that
other fungi also possess type III PKS genes (Seshime et al., 2005).
Since then, type III PKS genes are regularly reported in fungal
genomes (for examples, see Lackner et al., 2012; Bertrand et al.,
2018; Sayari et al., 2018). Phylogenetic analyses of type III PKSs
from plants, bacteria and fungi consistently revealed a unique
origin for the fungal clade (Seshime et al., 2005; Goyal et al., 2008
Hashimoto et al., 2014; Shimizu et al., 2017; Yan et al., 2018).
Although three distinct phylogenetic clades have been reported
(Shimizu et al., 2017), a detailed phylogenetic analysis of fungal
type III PKSs is lacking.
Polyketides produced by type III PKSs are typically grouped
into α-pyrones (or 2-pyrones), resorcylic acids/resorcinols, and
chalcones, according to the cyclization type (Shimizu et al.,
2017). These molecules exhibit diverse biological activities and
functions, including antimicrobial activities, raising interest in
understanding their biosynthesis (Austin and Noel, 2003; Lim
et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2016). In addition, α-pyrones are
building blocks for many SMs and are thus of great interest
in synthetic chemistry to produce new compounds with diverse
biological activities (Lee, 2015). Type III PKSs catalyze the
iterative condensation of a starter fatty acyl-CoA and of several
extender units, mostly malonyl-CoA, as well as intramolecular
lactone, aldol or Claisen cyclization (Lim et al., 2016; Shimizu
et al., 2017). Although they can accept a wide range of fatty
acyl-CoA starter units, from short to long linear (e.g., acetyl-
CoA, steraoyl-CoA), branched (e.g., isobutyryl-CoA) or cyclic
(e.g., p-coumaryl-CoA, benzoyl-CoA) molecules (Shimizu et al.,
2017), they always show higher aﬃnity for speciﬁc substrates
(Funa et al., 2007; Rubin-Pitel et al., 2008; Li et al., 2011; Jeya
et al., 2012; Ramakrishnan et al., 2018; Manoharan et al., 2019).
The diﬀerent aﬃnity for diverse starter units is explained by
changes in the structure of type III PKSs (Goyal et al., 2008;
Rubin-Pitel et al., 2008; Seshime et al., 2010b; Mori et al., 2015).
The diversity of substrates and enzymatic reactions result in a
high diversity of compounds produced by type III PKSs. A recent
review suggested a functional classiﬁcation of type III PKSs to
take into account the starter unit, number of elongation units and
cyclization type (Shimizu et al., 2017).
Only eleven type III PKSs have been characterized in
the fungal kingdom, ten from Ascomycota and one from
Basidiomycota. The ﬁrst fungal type III PKS to be functionally
characterized
is
the
pentaketide
resorcylic
acid
synthase
ORAS from Neurospora crassa. In vitro characterization of
a recombinant ORAS protein showed that this enzyme can
accommodate C4 to C20 fatty acyl-CoA starter units, but it
exhibits a clear preference for longer chains to produce tetra
and pentaketide resorcylic acids (Funa et al., 2007). Similar
results were obtained with recombinant Aspergillus niger AnPKS
and An-CsyA (Li et al., 2011; Kirimura et al., 2016), Botrytis
cinerea BPKS (Jeya et al., 2012), Sporotrichum laxum Sl-PKS2
(Sun et al., 2016), Sordaria macrospora SmPKS and Chaetomium
thermophilum CtPKS (Ramakrishnan et al., 2018), and Fusarium
incarnatum FiPKS (Manoharan et al., 2019). However, fungal
type III PKSs expressed in a fungal host yield compounds that
are diﬀerent from the recombinant proteins. For example,
overexpression of the A. niger type III PKS yields four products
only, of which the major one is protocatechuic acid (Lv et al.,
2014). The type III PKS SsArs from Sharaia sp. Slf14 produces
six alkylresorcinols from long starter units when heterologously
expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Yan et al., 2018). Similarly,
CsyA produces in A. oryzae three related compounds, with the
major product being the pentaketide 3,5-dihydroxybenzoic
acid (Seshime et al., 2010b), while recombinant CsyA yields
tri and tetraketide pyrones from C4 to C18 starter units, with
a preference for C6 and C7 fatty acyl-CoAs (Yu et al., 2010).
In A. oryzae, CsyB produces csypyrones from acetoacetyl-CoA
starter unit and a ketoacyl diketide unit (Seshime et al., 2010a;
Hashimoto et al., 2013; Mori et al., 2015). Recently, the type
III PKS PspB from Penicillium soppi was shown to accept
as starter unit an unsaturated linear polyketide produced
by a reducing type I PKS, PspA, yielding the alkylresorcinol
soppiline B (Kaneko et al., 2019). Type III PKSs can also
accommodate long fatty acids as shown with SsArs which
can use unsaturated fatty acids from soybean oil to produce
5-(8′Z,11′Z-heptadecadienyl)resorcinol (Yan et al., 2018). These
ﬁndings extend the diversity of starter units fungal type III PKSs
can accommodate. In addition to these characterized enzymes,
several type III PKS genes have been reported in fungal genomes
(Muggia and Grube, 2010; Lackner et al., 2012; Bertrand et al.,
2018; Sayari et al., 2018). In other fungi, newly identiﬁed SMs
are predicted to be synthesized by a type III PKS (Rusman et al.,
2018), suggesting that these fungi also contain type III PKS genes.
Despite
interesting
and
diverse
biological
activities,
polyketides produced by type III PKSs have been neglected
in fungi. In order to fully exploit these compounds, it is timely
to obtain a comprehensive overview of their occurrence and
diversity in fungal genomes. In the present study, we report
the ﬁrst evolutionary analysis of fungal type III PKSs at the
whole kingdom level. Phylogenetic analyses identiﬁed distinct
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
2
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 3]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
evolutionary histories that have likely resulted in biosynthetic
pathway diversiﬁcation. Analysis of the type III PKS gene loci
identiﬁed diﬀerent putative gene clusters that likely contribute
to the diversity of compounds produced by these pathways.
Our results establish a reliable foundation for directing the
future identiﬁcation of novel polyketides with interesting
biological activities.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Retrieval of PKS Sequences and Gene
Clusters in Fungal Genomes
A total of 1,193 genomes (on 2019-04-17; genomes from
Saccharomycotina spp. were omitted because an initial search did
not retrieve any type III PKS gene; Supplementary Table S1)
were retrieved from the Joint Genome Institute (JGI) Mycocosm
repository (Grigoriev et al., 2014), and were analyzed with
antiSMASH 4 (parameters: –minimal) (Blin et al., 2017), which
reported 38,525 regions potentially containing biosynthetic gene
clusters (BGCs). A total of 557 sequences were identiﬁed as
type III PKSs and were analyzed for conserved domains with
HMMER v3.2.11. The sequences that contain both the chalcone
and stilbene synthase N- and C- terminal domains (PF00195
and PF02797, from version 32 of the Pfam database (El-Gebali
et al., 2019) were selected from the antiSMASH results. Both
domains are speciﬁc of type III PKSs. We did not include
sequences that contain only one of these conserved domain
because these sequences likely correspond to pseudogenes or
wrongly predicted genes. Additionally, a query in JGI Mycocosm
with both Pfam terms reported three sequences that were below
the default cut-oﬀof antiSMASH, yielding a total of 522 type III
PKS sequences (Supplementary Material S1). The automated
gene structure prediction of 19 sequences were manually curated
(Supplementary Material S1). Forty characterized sequences of
fungal, bacterial and plant origins were added as reference from
the Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic Gene Cluster
(MIBiG) database (Medema et al., 2015) and from literature for
a total of 74 sequences, including 10 characterized fungal type III
PKS (Supplementary Material S2).
All BGCs predicted by antiSMASH to contain a type III
PKS of fungal origin were searched for reducing PKS sequences
as characterized by the presence of either PF08659 (KR keto-
reductase) or PF14765 (PS-DH dehydratase) domains; and the
absence of any signature domain from non-reducing PKSs (either
PF16073, SAT starter unit:ACP transacylase or TIGR04532, PT
product template). This search produced a list of 46 sequences,
which were complemented with all reducing PKS sequences from
the MIBiG database, as well as the characterized PspA PKS
(Kaneko et al., 2019), for a total of 110 sequences (Supplementary
Material S3).
For fungal sequences that were found to be closely related to
bacterial type III PKSs, a blastp search was performed on the
NCBI server using the -nr database and the best hit sequence was
retrieved (Supplementary Material S4).
1hmmer.org
Phylogenetic Tree Construction
Amino acid sequences were aligned using Clustal Omega
v1.2.4 (parameters –hmm –in using PF00195.19 as a guide for
type III PKSs and PF00109.25 as a guide for reducing PKSs;
no model was used to build the tree to assign bacteria-to-
fungi HGT events) (Sievers and Higgins, 2018). Poorly aligned
regions were removed using Trimal v1.4.rev15 (build[2013-
12-17]; parameters: -automated1) (Capella-Gutiérrez et al.,
2009). Maximum-likelikhood phylogenetic trees were built
using IQ-TREE v1.6.11-he860b03_0 bioconda (Nguyen et al.,
2015) with model ﬁnder (Kalyaanamoorthy et al., 2017)
and ultrafast bootstrap (parameters: -bb 1000 -alrt 1000 -nt
AUTO) (Hoang et al., 2018). Phylogenetic trees were displayed
using iTOL (Letunic and Bork, 2019). All curated alignments
and phylogenetic tree ﬁles are provided in Supplementary
Material S5. Sequence logos were generated using WebLogo 3
(Crooks et al., 2004).
Species Tree Construction
The core eukaryotic genes KOG1753 (Ribosomal Protein
S9 RPS9), KOG0189 (phosphoadenylphosphosulfate reductase
PAP) and KOG2314 (translation initiation factor 3, subunit b
eIF-3b) were retrieved from the JGI Mycocosm repository for
all genomes that contain a type III PKS. Nucleotide sequences
were aligned using MAFFT (Katoh and Standley, 2013) and
phylogenetic trees were built using FastTree (Price et al., 2010).
These preliminary trees were used to identify paralogs and
exclude them from the species tree construction. Orthologous
sequences of RPS9, PAP and eIF-3b genes were independently
aligned with MAFFT, poorly aligned regions were removed using
Trimal v1.4.rev15 (build[2013-12-17]; parameters: -automated1)
(Capella-Gutiérrez et al., 2009), and the phylogenetic tree was
built with IQ-TREE (parameters: -nt AUTO -m MFP + MERGE
-alrt 1000 -bb 1000 -bspec GENESITE) (Nguyen et al., 2015)
with ultrafast bootstrap (Hoang et al., 2018). The tree was rooted
using the single early diverging chytrid species, Geranomyces
variabilis (Gervar1), and displayed using iTOL (Letunic and
Bork, 2019). The ﬁnal curated alignment and phylogenetic
tree ﬁles are provided in Supplementary Material S5. The
obtained phylogenetic species tree is consistent with previously
published ones that were built with genomic datasets (Robbertse
et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2009; Ebersberger et al., 2012;
Spatafora et al., 2017).
Reconciliation Analysis
Reconciliation between the gene trees and rooted species tree
was performed using NOTUNG 2.9 (Stolzer et al., 2012).
Rearrangements in the gene trees were performed when
weak edges were present, using an edge weight threshold
of 98 (ultrafast bootstrap value). The reconciliation was
then performed using the DTL (Duplication-Transfer-Loss)
model
with
duplication,
loss,
transfer
and
co-divergence
costs of 1.5, 1, 6 and 0, according to a previously published
analysis
of
metabolic
enzymes
(Wisecaver
et
al.,
2014).
Reconciliation without inferring transfer with the DL mode
was also performed.
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
3
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 4]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
Protein Domain Analysis
All proteins from type III PKS gene clusters as predicted by
antiSMASH were scanned with HMMER using the Pfam database
(v32). Predicted BGCs from each deﬁned monophyletic clade
were analyzed with BiG-SCAPE (Navarro-Muñoz et al., 2019)
in order to identify BGC families. When calculating distances
between BGCs to build families, BiG-SCAPE assigns weights to
the diﬀerent distance components. By default, these weights diﬀer
between the “type I PKS” class and “PKS Other biosynthetic” class
that includes type III PKSs and other types of (bacterial) PKSs.
We assumed that fungal type III PKS BGCs do not fundamentally
diﬀer from type I PKS BGCs. Therefore, we manually assigned the
same weights as the “type I PKS” class (J = 0.22, DSS = 0.76 and
AI = 0.02) to the “PKS Other biosynthetic” class and we doubled
the domain sequence similarity subcomponent of the anchor type
III PKS domains. We did not apply the last step of the BiG-
SCAPE algorithm which calls an aﬃnity propagation clustering
algorithm to separate high-density networks of mostly similar
BGCs. Instead, we considered each network (cutoﬀ= 0.5) as a
representation of a gene cluster family. For each monophyletic
clade C, the occurrence O of domain d is calculated as the
normalized sum of all the occurrences of that domain within each
gene cluster family n, counting domain d only once per BGC B:
OC,d =
X
n∈C
P
B∈n 1 if d ∈B
|n|
Domains from proteins marked as biosynthetic (e.g., KS,
KR, etc.) were not considered.
For each phylogenetic clade, the occurrence of frequently
observed domains (as shown in Figure 6 and Supplementary
Tables S15–S23) was measured in antiSMASH predicted type III
PKS BGCs, type I PKS BGCs and other type BGCs. The
occurrence was also measured in the rest of the predicted
proteomes (i.e., not predicted to be located in a BGC). The
total number of genes predicted in the four abovementioned
groups was also measured for each clade. Chi-square tests
with Yates’ estimation was performed to identify domains
signiﬁcantly enriched in either type III PKS, type I PKS or other
type BGCs compared to the predicted “non-BGC” proteome
(Supplementary Table S24).
RESULTS
Widespread Occurrence of Fungal
Type III PKSs in the Fungal Kingdom
Fungal type III PKS protein sequences were retrieved from
1,193 fungal genomes available at the JGI Mycocosm repository
(Grigoriev et al., 2014). A total of 522 type III PKSs were found
in only 407 fungal species (34% of all included genomes), 318 of
these species carrying a single sequence and 89 having between
two and ﬁve copies (Supplementary Tables S1–S3). As expected
for SM genes, type III PKSs show a discontinuous distribution
in the fungal tree of life (Figure 1). They are mostly present
in Ascomycota (360 species representing 58% of the available
Ascomycota genomes) and they are found to a lower extent in
Basidiomycota (40 species representing 9% of the Basidiomycota
genomes), with a single early divergent fungal genome belonging
to the Chytridiomycota (Figure 1). The presence-absence pattern
of type III PKSs in fungal classes is very diverse. Classes like
the Dacrymycetes, Sordariomycetes, and Leotiomycetes exhibit
conserved type III PKSs in 83, 81, and 97%, respectively, of fungal
genomes in these respective classes (Figure 1). In contrast, in
most other fungal classes, type III PKs are found in less than 50%
of the genomes available in the respective classes. Considering
the strict criteria we used to only retrieve likely functional type
III PKSs in fungal genomes, these results underestimate the
occurrence of type III PKSs in the fungal kingdom.
The Phylogeny of Type III PKSs Reveals
Bacteria-to-Fungus Horizontal Gene
Transfers
A phylogenetic tree with all 522 fungal type III PKSs, together
with characterized ones from plants and bacteria, was built
(Figure 2A). This tree conﬁrms that plant, bacterial and
fungal type III PKSs have evolved independently, forming
distinct monophyletic clades. However, eight type III PKSs
form two fungal clades within the bacterial clade, indicative of
independent bacteria-to-fungi horizontal gene transfers (HGTs)
(Figure 2A). The Ascobolus immersus type III PKS (Ascim1|
416225) shares 72% identity with a type III PKS from the
Actinobacteria Nocardioides lianchengensis (Table 1). The locus
of this gene in A. immersus genome does not contain any
other gene of bacterial origin (Supplementary Table S4),
ruling out a contamination during genome sequencing. This
HGT is consistent with the observation that A. immersus
is the single genome with a type III PKS within the
Pezizomycetes (Figure 1). The other clade corresponds to
another HGT event from Actinobacteria. Type III PKSs from the
Sordariomycetes Dactylonectria estremocensis (Daces1| 533080),
Neonectria radicicola (Neora1| 900087), Ilyonectria robusta
(Ilyrob1| 539821) and Dactylonectria macrodidyma (Dacma1|
857528) are closely related to PKSs from the Mycobacterium
genus. The locus in these four species is conserved, the type III
PKS gene belonging to a predicted gene cluster consisting of
two methyltransferases and a ﬂavin-containing monooxygenase
(Figure 2B). The three other fungal species (one Eurotiomycetes
and two Sordariomycetes) are closely related to PKSs from
the Nocardia genus (Table 1). However, a phylogenetic tree
that includes all these Actinobacteria sequences supports a
single HGT event (Figure 2B). The type III PKS gene in
Aspergillus brevijanus (Aspbrev1| 281936) is downstream of
an O-methyltransferase as found in Dactylonectria and related
species (Figure 2B and Supplementary Tables S5–S9). Similarly
to A. immersus, no other bacterial gene can be found at the locus
in these fungal species (Supplementary Tables S5–S11). The
type III PKS locus in the Mycobacterium and Nocardia species is
conserved for a few genes only, but it does not show any similarity
to the fungal locus, suggesting that only the type III PKS gene was
horizontally acquired (Figure 2B).
The phylogenetic tree also reveals a clear fungus-to-fungus
HGT event (Figure 2A). The Basidiomycota Oliveonia pauxilla
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
4
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 5]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
FIGURE 1 | Occurrence of type III polyketide synthases (PKSs) in the fungal kingdom. Presence/absence of fungal type III PKSs in the fungal tree of life. The species
tree was built with fungal classes that contain type III PKSs only. The pie charts and numbers at the end of the branches or above the pies indicate, for each phylum
and class in which at least one fungal type III PKS was identiﬁed, the number of genomes that do not contain a type III PKS (red, ﬁrst number) or contain at least one
type III PKS (green, second number). Bootstrap values above 90 are indicated at the nodes of the tree.
type III PKS (Olipa1| 744902) shares 67% identity with a
type III PKS from the Sordariomycetes Neonectria ditissima
(Table 1). Other genes at this locus in O. pauxilla genome
share homology with Basidiomycota sequences (Supplementary
Table S12), suggesting that this HGT event involved the type III
PKS gene only. Other inconsistencies between the gene tree and
species tree cannot be reliably assigned to HGTs because of low
node support or very mixed topologies.
The Phylogeny of Fungal Type III PKSs
Shows Patterns of Gains Through Gene
Duplications, and of Massive Losses
A phylogenetic tree with sequences of fungal origin only was
built in order to investigate the evolutionary relationships of
fungal type III PKSs in more details. Several paralogs due to
duplication events can be deduced from this phylogenetic tree,
deﬁning eight monophyletic clades with strong bootstrap support
(Figure 3A). Within each clade, gene duplication, loss, transfer
and co-evolution events were inferred by reconciliation with the
rooted species tree using the DTL model (and compared to the
DL model) (Stolzer et al., 2012), and manual inspection (Table 2).
Clade 1 is conserved from Basidiomycota to Ascomycota and
seems to have followed a relatively simple evolutionary route as
the gene tree follow the species tree at the class taxonomic level
(Figure 3A). Reconciliation with inferring horizontal transfers
failed to ﬁnd temporally feasible solutions and thus could
not detect any HGT (Table 2). In addition to the above
mentioned HGT from a Sordariomycete to O. pauxilla, the
phylogenetic tree suggests another HGT to Zasmidium cellare
(Zasce1| 25004), the only Dothideomycete fungus in clade 1
(Figure 3A). Z. cellare type III PKS shows highest similarity
with the Lecanoromycete Umbilicaria pustulata (49% amino acid
identity; Supplementary Table S13), suggesting that the donor
could have belonged to this class. However, Z. cellare type III
PKS does not belong to the Lecanoromycetes branch in clade 1
(Figure 3A). In addition, the two upstream genes in Z. cellare
show highest similarity with genes from another class, the
Leotiomycetes (Supplementary Table S13). Both observations
suggest an accelerated evolutionary rate at the Z. cellare locus that
might explain the position of this PKS in the phylogenetic tree
(Gabaldón and Koonin, 2013). When transfers are not inferred,
the reconciliation analysis reports 34 gains and 126 losses (Table 2
and Supplementary Material S6).
Clades 3, 4, and 5 are speciﬁc to the Agaricomycetes,
Eurotiomycetes and Dothideomycetes, respectively (Figure 3A).
No transfer was inferred in the ﬁrst two clades, while a
single transfer was inferred in the latter in Paraconiothyrium
sporulosum (Parsp1| 1186637; Table 2 and Supplementary
Material S6). However, this transfer is not strongly supported
because of a lower bootstrap support and longer distance for
this branch (Figure 3A). Although these three clades comprise
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
5
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 6]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
FIGURE 2 | Phylogenetic analysis of type III polyketide synthases (PKSs). (A) Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree of type III PKSs identiﬁed in fungal genomes.
Published and characterized type III PKSs from bacteria, plants and fungi are included. The taxonomy of each branch is indicated with colors (kingdom for bacteria
and plants; class for fungi) on the three outer circles. Inferred horizontal gene transfers (HGTs) are indicated. The tree was rooted with the bacterial clade. Bootstrap
values over 90 are indicated with black dots at the nodes. (B) Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree of fungal sequences putatively acquired from bacteria with their
most homologous bacterial sequences (Supplementary Tables S4–S11) and characterized plant, bacterial and fungal type III PKS sequences. Only the clade with
the HGT from bacteria to Sordariomycetes/Eurotiomycetes is not collapsed. The taxonomy color coding indicates the kingdom as in the (A) panel. Bootstrap values
over 90 are indicated with black dots at the nodes. Synteny between loci of HGT-acquired type III PKSs in Sordariomycetes and Eurotiomycetes. Homologous genes
are represented with the same color. A putative gene cluster is predicted in four Sordariomycetes (Daces1: Dactylonectria estremocensis; Neora1: Neonectria
radicicola; Ilyrob1: Ilyonectria robusta; Dacma1: Dactylonectria macrodidyma) and Aspergillus brevijanus (Aspbrev1), while the locus is not conserved in Bombardia
bombarda (Bombom1) and Lasiosphaeriaceae sp. AZ0830 (Bombar1). The closest characterized bacterial type III PKS is the tri- and tetraketide pyrone PKS18
1TED_A from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Genbank accession number: YP_177803.1). Mycsul: Mycobacterium szulgai; Mycgas: Mycobacterium gastri; Nocyam:
Nocardia yamanashiensis; Nocsp: Nocardia sp. SYSU K10002; Nocjia: Nocardia jiangxiensis.
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
6
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 7]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
TABLE 1 | Fungal type III polyketides synthases putatively originating from horizontal gene transfer events.
Species
Protein IDa
Best blastp hitb
e-value
Identity %
Ascobolus immersus
416225
Type III polyketide synthase Nocardioides lianchengensis (WP_090860924.1)
8e-174
72
Dactylonectria estremocensis
533080
Polyketide synthase Mycobacterium gastri (WP_036411827.1)
2e-141
56
Neonectria radicicola
900087
Type III polyketide synthase Mycobacterium szulgai (WP_085671214.1)
3e-140
58
Ilyonectria robusta
539821
Type III polyketide synthase Mycobacterium szulgai (WP_085671214.1)
2e-144
60
Dactylonectria macrodidyma
857528
Type III polyketide synthase Mycobacterium szulgai (WP_085671214.1)
1e-142
58
Aspergillus brevijanus
281936
Type III polyketide synthase Nocardia sp. SYSU K10002 (WP_109525636.1)
2e-147
59
Bombardia bombarda
507539
Type III polyketide synthase Nocardia jiangxiensis (WP_085997644.1)
2e-131
61
Lasiosphaeriaceae sp. AZ0830
591841
Type III polyketide synthase Nocardia yamanashiensis (WP_084535445.1)
4e-150
54
Oliveonia pauxilla
744902
Hypothetical protein AK830_g3657 Neonectria ditissima (KPM42895.1)
0.0
67
aFrom the Joint Genome Institute Mycocosm repository. bPerformed with the NCBI nr database. The best bacterial hit is indicated. Genbank accession numbers are
indicated in between parentheses.
a limited number of homologs, up to 15 duplication events
were inferred in clade 3 and up to 31 losses were inferred in
clade 4 (Table 2 and Supplementary Material S6). Especially
in clades 3 and 4, recent duplication events were identiﬁed
(Figures 3B,C). Paralogs in clade 3 are mostly present in
the genus Mycena. As the Agaricomycetes Trametopsis cervina
(Trace1) genome contains a paralog in both clades 1 and
3, an ancestral duplication event followed by losses is likely
at the origin of the divergence between these Basidiomycota-
containing clades.
Clades 2 and 6 comprise homologs from diﬀerent classes
of Basidiomycota and Ascomycota, respectively (Figure 3A).
One transfer is inferred within the Basidiomycota clade
2, but the alternative inference of one duplication and
10 losses with the DL model appears as likely when the
frequency of duplications in other Basidiomycota clades is
considered (Table 2 and Supplementary Material S6). Four
transfers are inferred in clade 6, likely due to the position
of the Eurotiomycetes Exophiala sideris (Exosi1| 115876),
the Lecanoromycetes Cladonia grayi (Clagr3| 8243) and the
Dothideomycetes Trypethelium eluteriae (Tryvi1| 523642) type
III PKSs (Figure 3A and Supplementary Material S6). The
position of these homologs in clade 6 is similar to the Z. cellare
homolog in clade 1 and thus an accelerated evolutionary rate
could also be invoked to explain this topology (Gabaldón and
Koonin, 2013), especially because the alternative inference of
8 duplications and 72 losses seems plausible (Table 2 and
Supplementary Material S6).
Finally, clades 7 and 8 show a mosaic patterns of homologs
from diverse taxonomic classes (Figure 3A). As expected, the
reconciliation analysis favors transfer events, inferring 5 and 26
HGTs in clades 7 and 8, respectively (Table 2 and Supplementary
Material S6). Reconciliation without inferring transfers in clade
8 results in a scenario of 19 duplications and 290 losses, while a
single duplication and 41 losses are invoked in clade 7 (Table 2
and Supplementary Material S6). The observation that the
other clades appear to be restricted to a few fungal taxa only or
follow the species tree suggests that diﬀerent selection pressures
are acting on sequences in clades 7 and 8. Sequences in the
other clades seem to be under purifying selection. Overall, the
evolutionary history of fungal type III PKSs has been marked by
a remarkable number of gene duplication and gene loss events, as
well as potential HGT events.
Genetic Linkage Between Type III
Polyketides Synthase Genes and Other
SM Core Genes
The vast majority (474) of fungal type III PKS genes are
located in regions that do not contain any other core SM gene.
Thirty loci contain two to four type III PKS genes (Figure 3A,
Supplementary Table S14, and Supplementary Material S7).
These loci are restricted to Basidiomycota and correspond to
tandem gene duplications as indicated by the close phylogenetic
relationship of paralogs found at the same locus (Figure 3B,
Supplementary Materials S7, S8). In Phanerochaete carnosa
(Phaca1), the two type III PKS copies are located next to each
other in opposite directions (Supplementary Material S8). The
deletion of the orthologs of each of these copies in the closely
related fungus S. laxum, showed that only one copy is responsible
for the production of resorcinols, while the other appears
non-functional (Sun et al., 2016). Experiments are needed to
determine whether all duplicated copies in that clade have been
inactivated after duplication or some have remained functional.
Sixty-seven type III PKS genes are located at a genomic
locus that contains another type of SM core gene encoding
either a reducing PKS (rPKS), non-reducing PKS (nrPKS), non-
ribosomal peptide synthetase (NPS), NPS-like or terpene cyclase
(TC) (Figure 3A). Fungal type III PKSs are most frequently
found associated with rPKSs. Remarkably, type III PKS genes
located next to a rPKS gene mostly belong to clades 7 and 8,
suggesting ancestral linkage between both genes (Figure 3A). To
address this hypothesis, a phylogenetic tree of rPKSs associated
with type III PKSs was built. Both phylogenetic trees harbor
the same topology (Figure 4), conﬁrming the co-evolution of
both genes. Both type III PKSs and rPKSs phylogenetic trees
are consistent with a duplication event at the origin of the
divergence between clades 7 and 8 (Figure 4). Examination of
the loci revealed the two PKS genes are located next to each
other, often in opposite directions (Figure 5 and Supplementary
Material S8). In Paecilomyces niveus (Bysni1), remnants of the
rPKS are found upstream of the type III PKS, explaining that
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
7
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 8]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
FIGURE 3 | Phylogeny of type III polyketide synthases (PKSs) in the fungal kingdom. (A) Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree of type III PKSs on fungal origin.
Published and characterized fungal type III PKSs are included. The fungal taxonomic class of each branch is indicated with colors on the outer circle. Red stars
indicate fungal type III PKSs that have been functionally characterized. The functional classiﬁcation of characterized type III PKS according to Shimizu et al. (2017) is
indicated next to the star. Black circles indicate the nodes that deﬁne fungal phylogenetic clades, which are indicated on the inner circle. The middle ring indicates
the core gene content in the predicted gene clusters. The size of the circles is proportional to the number of core gene present at the locus. Yellow triangles indicate
potential horizontal gene transfers according to the reconciliation analysis; transfers within clades 7 and 8 are not shown because too many events were inferred.
The outer circle indicates the phylum: Ascomycota, Basidiomycota and Chytridiomycota are indicated with dark green, dark red and dark gray colors, respectively.
Phylogenetic clades 3 (B) and 4 (C) as deﬁned in (A) show four and 15 duplication events, respectively, according to the reconciliation analysis. Other phylogenetic
clades were collapsed. Paralogs are linked by black and red lines, the latter linking paralogs located at the same locus. Duplication events are indicated with red
circles. Only sub-tree topology is shown. Bootstrap values over 90 are indicated with black dots at the nodes.
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
8
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 9]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
TABLE 2 | Evolutionary events inferred in the type III PKS phylogenetic tree from
reconciliation with the fungal species tree.
Clade
Duplications
Transfers
Losses
Number of optimal solutions
1
−(34)
−(0)
−(126)
−(1)
2
0 (1)
1 (0)
3 (10)
2 (1)
3
15 (15)
0 (0)
25 (25)
1 (1)
4
4 (4)
0 (0)
31 (31)
1 (1)
5
3 (5)
1 (0)
23 (30)
1 (1)
6
6 (8)
4 (0)
38 (72)
16 (1)
7
0 (1)
5 (0)
3 (41)
16 (1)
8
3 (19)
26 (0)
46 (290)
1,382,400 (1)
Total
31 (87)
37 (0)
169 (625)
–
Reconciliation was performed using Notung 2.9 with the DTL model for
each phylogenetic clade. No co-divergence was detected. Numbers between
parentheses are results obtained with the DL model.
it was not predicted as a full rPKS (Figure 5). In Podospora
curvicolla (Podcur1) and Cercophora caudata (Cercau1), a second
rPKS is found at the locus (Figure 5) and likely corresponds
to the merging of another rPKS gene cluster with the type
III PKS gene cluster, consistent with the distant phylogenetic
relationship between both rPKSs (Figure 4). Penicillium solitum
(Pensoli1) is the sole species with a locus harboring a type
III PKS and rPKS in a Penicillium-speciﬁc branch of clade 8,
suggesting a loss in the ancestor of these species because no
close homolog could be retrieved using BlastP search (Figure 4).
Both genes at the locus are not consecutive like in other fungal
species, suggesting rearrangements between two PKS loci in
this species (Supplementary Material S8). Consistently, the
rPKS from this locus is not closely related to other rPKSs
associated with type III PKS clades 7 and 8 (Figure 4).
Three similar independent rearrangements that merged type
III PKS and rPKS genes have occurred in Stachybotrys elegans
(Stael1), Phaeosphaeriaceae sp. PMI_808 (PhaPMI808) and
in an ancestor of Penicillium subrubescens (Pensub1) and
Aspergillus nomius (Aspnom1 and Aspnom13137_1) (Figure 4).
Finally, independent rearrangements might have occurred in
Melanconium sp. NRRL 54901 (Melsp1), Apiospora montagnei
(Apimo1) and Microsporum canis (Micca1) because the three
rPKSs do not seem closely related (Figure 4). Most of the loci
with linked type III PKS and rPKS also contain genes that
encode cytochrome P450 monooxygenases, also suggesting an
ancestral linkage. However, although the two PKSs may function
together to produce the same intermediate in all fungal species,
the diversity of tailoring genes predicted at these loci suggests
that diﬀerent compounds are likely produced (Figure 5 and
Supplementary Material S8).
Twenty-six fungal type III PKS genes are also found next
to NPS and NPS-like genes (Figure 3A and Supplementary
Table S14). This type of mixed gene cluster has been
functionally characterized in bacteria and it was suggested
that the type III PKS, with other tailoring enzymes, is
involved in synthesizing a non-proteogenic amino acid for
one of the NPS modules (Chen et al., 2017). The single
predicted gene cluster comprising type III PKS and TC
genes in Spathularia ﬂavida (Spaﬂ1) could be responsible for
the production of a prenylated polyketide (Figure 3A). The
prediction of mixed gene clusters require further experimental
investigation in order to validate the hypothesis that fungal
type III PKSs can provide/accept precursors to/from other
core SM enzymes, increasing the diversity of compounds
fungi can produce.
Fungal Type III PKS Predicted
Biosynthetic Gene Clusters
Apart from the soppiline BGC in P. soppi (Kaneko et al.,
2019), only single type III PKSs have been characterized in
fungi. In P. soppi, the BGC comprises a cytochrome P450
monooxygenase gene in addition to the two core type III and
reducing PKS genes (Kaneko et al., 2019). As mentioned above
in clades 7 and 8, fungal type III PKS genes are located at
loci that comprise genes encoding diverse tailoring functions
(Figure 5 and Supplementary Material S8). In order to gain
more insights about the diversity of putative type III PKS BGCs
in fungi, the composition in conserved protein domains of the
BGC regions identiﬁed by antiSMASH was analyzed in each
phylogenetic clade. BGC families were determined using BiG-
SCAPE in order to avoid any bias in frequencies due to very
closely related species. The normalized occurrence of conserved
domains in each clade thus represents the number of BGC
families in which they are found (Supplementary Table S15).
In total, 1,001 diﬀerent conserved domains were identiﬁed,
but only 165 could manually be assigned to fungal secondary
metabolism, suggesting that antiSMASH reports large regions
with many genes unlikely to belong to BGCs. Consistently,
the vast majority of protein domains is speciﬁc to a single
phylogenetic clade (Figure 6A), and occurs in less than ﬁve
families (Figure 6B). In contrast, most of the protein domains
present in higher frequency (in more than 10 families) and found
in several clades are typical of SM BGCs (Figure 6B). The three
most frequent conserved domains found at type III PKS loci
correspond to major facilitator superfamily (MFS) transporters,
fungal speciﬁc transcription factors and cytochrome P450
monooxygenases. Indeed, MFS transporter (PF07690) is the only
conserved domain found in all eight clades; cytochrome P450
(PF00067), FAD-binding (PF01494) and alcohol dehydrogenase
GroES-like (PF08240) domains are found in seven clades in
relatively high frequencies; conserved domains for transcription
factors (PF00172 and PF04082), dehydrogenases (PF00106 and
PF00107), ABC transporters (PF00005) and methyltransferases
(PF13489) are all found in six diﬀerent clades (Figure 6B and
Supplementary Table S15). Remarkably, ﬁve conserved domains
that have not been linked to fungal SM are frequently found
in several clades (Figure 6B): F-box-like (PF12937), protein
kinase (PF00069), sugar (and other) transporter (PF00083), HET
heterokaryon incompatibility protein (PF06985) and ankyrin
repeats (PF12796) conserved domains. All these domains are
also found in other types of BGCs (Supplementary Table S24).
The HET and protein kinase domains are actually found in high
frequency and are not statistically enriched in any of the predicted
type III PKS BGCs (Supplementary Table S24). In contrast,
F-box-like, sugar transporter and ankyrin repeats domains are
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
9
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 10]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
FIGURE 4 | Co-evolution of type III and reducing polyketide synthases (PKSs). Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic trees of genetically linked type III PKSs (left) and
reducing PKSs (right). The rPKS tree comprises characterized fungal enzymes from the Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic Gene cluster (MIBiG) database
(name written in gray with GenBank accession number) (Medema et al., 2015). Light green lines connect genes that co-evolved according to the common gene tree
topologies. Red lines indicate linked genes that do not follow the expected tree topology. The orange lines indicate additional linkage with a second rPKS. Blue lines
indicate independent linkage events. The red circles show the duplication event that resulted in the divergence of clades 7 and 8.
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
10
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 11]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
FIGURE 5 | Locus organization of predicted mixed type III and reducing polyketide synthases (PKSs) gene clusters. The regions are shown as reported by
antiSMASH 4.0 (Blin et al., 2017) for clade 7. The core genes in opposite direction are indicated within the red square. Homologs in the different species are
indicated with the same color code. The loci in Podcur1 and Cercau1 genomes were longer and thus split as indicated with the double slash. The
maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree shown on the left is the clade 7 branch from the large tree in Figure 3A.
statistically enriched in certain BGCs, suggesting that they may
play a role in these biosynthetic pathways.
At the phylogenetic clade level, the composition of predicted
BGCs signiﬁcantly diﬀer (Supplementary Tables S16–S23
and Supplementary Material S8). Cytochrome P450 and
transcription factor conserved domains are frequently found next
to the type III PKS in clade 1, while MFS transporter, ABC
transporter and enoyl reductase domains are found in about 10%
of the BGCs (Figure 6C). In clades 2 and 3, the MFS transporter
domain is frequently found, but a common BGC is not detected
(Figures 6D,E and Supplementary Material S8). The MFS
transporter domain shows also highest frequency in clades 4 and
6, but other conserved domains related to fungal SM deﬁne sub-
BGCs in these two clades (Figures 6F,H and Supplementary
Material S8). In the related clades 7 and 8, although both
share an rPKS, the loci comprise diﬀerent conserved domains.
Cytochrome P450 and mycolic acid cyclopropane synthetase
domains are shared by nearly all loci in clade 7 (Figure 6I),
while transcription factor, cytochrome P450 and MFS transporter
domains are found in 20–40% of loci in clade 8 (Figure 6J).
Finally, the most frequent domain in clade 5, the HET domain,
is not known to be involved in fungal SM, but about 30% of the
loci also encode an MFS transporter domain (Figure 6G).
No obvious BGC could be determined at the orthologous
locus of the ORAS, SmPKS and SsArs type III PKS genes.
The other characterized type III PKS genes seem to belong to
BGCs (Figure 7 and Supplementary Material S8). In A. oryzae,
CsyB appears to be located next to an MFS transporter gene
only, suggesting that the csypyrone compounds reported for
this PKS might be the ﬁnal compounds (Seshime et al., 2010a;
Hashimoto et al., 2013). In contrast, CsyA seems to belong to
a BGC that comprises four putative tailoring genes encoding a
multicopper oxidase, an EthD domain-containing decarboxylase
(Griﬃths et al., 2016), an haloacid dehalogenase-like hydrolase
and a thiamine pyrophosphate enzyme (Figure 7). Further
analyses are needed to validate the role of these tailoring
genes in the modiﬁcation of the polyketide 3,5-dihydroxybenzoic
acid released by CsyA (Seshime et al., 2010b). Similarly,
while the activity of AnPKS and An-CsyA is known from
recombinant proteins only (Li et al., 2011; Kirimura et al.,
2016), the corresponding gene is located at a well conserved
locus in Aspergillus species (Supplementary Material S8), which
comprises putative tailoring genes encoding carboxylesterases,
a 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase acetyltransferase, a 2-oxoglutarate
dehydrogenase and a glutathione-S-transferase, which could
be involved in detoxiﬁcation (Dasari et al., 2018) (Figure 7).
Thus, it is likely that AnPKS produces a polyketide backbone
that is further modiﬁed. The characterized type III PKS genes
within clade 1 appears to belong to diﬀerent BGCs. The CtPKS
gene is located next to P450 and thiolase genes, as well as
a sugar transporter and F-box-like genes, which function in
fungal SM remains to be demonstrated (Figure 7). B. cinerea
BPKS gene is located next to P450, enoyl(-acyl carrier protein)
reductase, and transcription factor genes (Figure 7). Here
again, the compounds produced by these biosynthetic pathways
are likely diﬀerent from the compounds reported from the
expression of recombinant proteins. The Basidiomycota Sl-Pks2
type III PKS was shown to be responsible for the production
of spirolaxine. A biosynthetic route has been proposed based
on the activity of the recombinant protein and includes three
hydroxylation, one methylation and three ring formation steps
(Sun et al., 2016). Sl-Pks2 closest orthologs belong to a putative
BGC that is not fully consistent with these predicted steps:
genes encoding putative membrane-bound O-acetyl transferase,
membrane-associating domain (MARVEL) protein, WD domain
protein, carboxyl transferase, DUF2838 protein of unknown
function, oxidoreductase and hypothetical methyltransferase are
found at this locus (Figure 7). Finally, the soppiline BGC in
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
11
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 12]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
FIGURE 6 | Occurrence of conserved protein domains at fungal type III polyketide synthase (PKS) loci. For each phylogenetic clade, regions that contain a type III
PKS as reported by antiSMASH 4.0 (Blin et al., 2017) were processed using BIG-SCAPE (Navarro-Muñoz et al., 2019) in order to build gene cluster families and
avoid bias of closely related fungal species. Conserved domains identiﬁed using the Pfam database (El-Gebali et al., 2019) were counted in each region (excluding
domains found in core enzymes) and normalized to the total number of gene cluster within each gene cluster family. (A) Number of conserved domains associated or
(Continued)
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
12
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 13]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
FIGURE 6 | Continued
not with fungal secondary metabolism (SM) and which are found in one to eight type III PKS phylogenetic clades. The black dots indicate SM domains and the gray
dots indicate domains that are not associated with fungal SM (non-SM). (B) Occurrence in gene cluster families of the 1,001 conserved domains found in 1–8 type III
PKS phylogenetic clades. Black dots indicate the most frequent conserved domains typically associated with fungal SM and the gray dots indicate non-SM
domains. The name and occurrence of the most frequent conserved domains are indicated on the right with the non-SM domains written in gray. The colored dots
correspond to the colored text. The dashed lines separate domains that occur frequently in gene cluster families and in many phylogenetic clades (upper right
corner) from low frequency domains (lower left corner). (C–J) Frequency of the top 20 most frequent conserved domains in each clade, calculated as domain
occurrence divided by the number of gene cluster families in the corresponding clade: black bars indicate conserved domains reported to play a role in fungal SM
and gray bars indicate conserved domains that are not commonly found in SM biosynthetic pathways. BGC: Biosynthetic Gene Cluster.
P. soppi was shown to contain an rPKS and a P450 gene
(Kaneko et al., 2019), but the BGC might also comprise genes
encoding an MFS transporter and a protein of unknown function
(DUF829) (Figure 7).
DISCUSSION
Polyketides produced by type III PKSs exhibit a diverse range
of biological activities and are interesting chemical backbone
for the synthesis of active compounds (Austin and Noel, 2003;
Lee, 2015; Lim et al., 2016). They have been particularly studied
in plants, especially ﬂavonoid compounds that protect them
from biotic and abiotic stresses (Ferrer et al., 1999; Austin
and Noel, 2003). Type III PKSs have been discovered in fungi
only at the beginning of the 21st century thanks to genome
analyses (Seshime et al., 2005) and the ﬁrst fungal type III PKS
was functionally characterized in 2007 (Funa et al., 2007). The
number of characterized fungal type III PKSs has doubled in
the last couple of years (Ramakrishnan et al., 2018; Yan et al.,
2018; Kaneko et al., 2019; Manoharan et al., 2019). However,
most of these studies result from the random selection of fungal
species. It is therefore timely to provide a reliable basis for the
further characterization of new fungal type III PKSs and their
BGCs, which will ultimately allow the rational exploitation of
these biosynthetic pathways to produce new active molecules.
In this work, we present the ﬁrst evolutionary study of fungal
type III PKSs at the kingdom level. The phylogeny of these
enzymes allowed the deﬁnition of eight phylogenetic clades that
have likely originated from ancestral gene duplications as clearly
shown for clades 1 and 3, and for clades 7 and 8 (Figures 3A, 4).
This phylogeny is rather complex, making the inference of
evolutionary events a diﬃcult task. However, it appears that the
discontinuous distribution of type III PKS genes in the fungal tree
of life (Figure 1) is mainly due to duplications (between 31 and
87 events depending on the inference of transfers) and massive
losses (between 169 and 625 events depending in the inference of
transfers) (Table 2). Especially, Basidiomycota have experienced
recent gene tandem duplication events, resulting in loci with
multiple type III PKS paralogs (Figures 3A,B). Duplication
has previously been reported as the major mechanism that
drives gene cluster evolution (Wisecaver et al., 2014; Marcet-
Houben and Gabaldón, 2019). In our analysis, gene losses appear
to occur 5–7 times more frequently than gene duplications.
This ratio is consistent with a previous reconstruction of gene
duplication and loss in Pezizomycotina (Wapinski et al., 2007)
and with the observation in S. cerevisiae that duplicated gene
copies can be lost as soon as after tenth of generations (Naseeb
et al., 2017). The reconciliation analysis inferred 37 HGT events
in clades 2, 5, 6, 7, and 8, a low number considering that
evolutionary events could not be inferred with transfers in
clade 1 (Table 2). However, these predictions would indicate a
minimum HGT frequency of 7% for fungal type III PKSs. This
number is nearly the double of the reported HGT frequency
of 4% for metabolic enzymes (Wisecaver et al., 2014), but is
much lower than the 25–35% reported for SM gene clusters
by Marcet-Houben and Gabaldón (2019). Manual inspection
of inferred HGTs in our study suggests that the total number
of events is actually overestimated by reconciliation software
like NOTUNG, which has been recently reported (Villani et al.,
2019). The weak support of certain branches is likely due to
accelerated evolution in certain fungal species, as exempliﬁed
with Z. cellare (Zasce1) in clade 1 and P. niveus (Bysni1) in
clade 7. Genes do not necessarily evolve at a gene-speciﬁc
rate, but their evolution speed can vary between orthologs and
evolutionary rates in duplicated genes can also vary greatly
(Gabaldón and Koonin, 2013). Newly acquired genes seem to
evolved faster than core conserved genes that are under purifying
selection (Wolf et al., 2009). It was shown that orthologous
genes can experience accelerated evolution in certain organisms
only (Ely et al., 2019). Similarly, recently duplicated paralogs
appear to evolve faster than orthologs with the same level of
divergence and the duplicated genes will thus evolve toward
diﬀerent fates (Kondrashov et al., 2002; Innan and Kondrashov,
2010). In addition, the diﬃculties to infer co-divergence events
(Xu and Yang, 2016), especially in ancestors, also contribute
to favoring HGT events. The reconciliation analysis, although
using no cost for co-divergence, did not infer any event of this
kind. However, absence of co-divergence appears very unlikely
considering that gene clusters are polymorphic within fungal
populations, including ancestral ones (Ward et al., 2002; Lind
et al., 2017). These diﬀerent aspects in gene evolution are diﬃcult
to estimate and are likely to yield inconsistencies between gene
and species trees.
Independently from the reconciliation analysis, several
obvious
HGT
events
were
detected,
one
between
a
Sordariomycete fungus and the Basidiomycota O. paxilla,
and three transfers from Actinobacteria to Sordariomycetes and
Eurotiomycetes species (Figure 2). HGT of type III PKSs from
Actinobacteria to Proteobacteria were previously reported (Gross
et al., 2006), suggesting that Actinobacteria could be a recurrent
source of new type III PKS genes in diverse organisms. To the
best of our knowledge, bacteria-to-fungi HGTs were suggested
only for 6-methylsalicylic acid synthase (MSAS)-type I reducing
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
13
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 14]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
FIGURE 7 | Predicted gene clusters of characterized fungal type III polyketides synthases (PKSs). The locus of type III PKSs was manually inspected for the
presence of conserved protein domains that are associated with fungal secondary metabolism. Genes predicted to belong to a putative gene cluster are represented
as black arrows and the lower panel indicates the predicted functions. Gray arrows indicate genes that are not expected to belong to the gene cluster. The genomes
that contain Sl-PKS2, AnPKS and PspB were either not included in this study or were not available. For these three genes, the closest orthologous locus was
inspected as the locus composition is likely conserved (see Supplementary Material S7).
PKSs and for a hybrid non-ribosomal peptide synthetase-PKS
enzyme from Cochliobolus heterostrophus (Kroken et al., 2003).
MSAS-like rPKSs form the outgroup branch in the rPKS
phylogenetic tree (Figure 4), consistent with an ancestral HGT
event from bacteria (Kroken et al., 2003). The MSAS-like rPKS in
S. elegans (Stael1) is the only example of linkage between this type
of rPKS genes and type III PKS genes. Based on similarity, only
transfer of the single type III PKS gene was detected. Remarkably,
one of these transferred type III PKS genes is located next to three
other genes of fungal origin and which encode enzymes with
activities commonly found in SM biosynthetic pathways, namely
two methyltransferases and one ﬂavin-binding monooxygenase
(Figure 2). The type III PKS gene could have inserted in between
these genes after transfer, or these so-called tailoring genes
could have been recruited after transfer to form a functional
BGC. Experimental validation is needed to determine whether
a bacterial type III PKS acquired through HGT has evolved to
function with eukaryotic tailoring enzymes.
In most Ascomycota classes, type III PKS genes are present
in at most 50% of the genomes included in this study. However,
the Pezizomycetes have experienced nearly complete loss while
nearly all Orbiliomycetes and Leotiomycetes genomes contain
a type III PKS gene (Figure 1). Similarly, while the majority
of Basidiomycota genomes do not contain a type III PKS gene,
nearly all genomes from the Dacrymycetes class contain at least
one (Figure 1). Fungal species within these three classes are
not very closely related, meaning that a bias in the sampling
for sequencing does not explain the conserved presence of
type III PKSs. The evolutionary forces that contribute to the
discontinuous distribution of type III PKSs in the fungal tree
of life and their complete loss or conservation in diﬀerent
taxonomic classes are diﬃcult to determine. The large diversity
of lifestyles within each fungal class makes it diﬃcult to correlate
the presence of type III PKSs to speciﬁc lifestyles or ecological
niches. Further studies are needed, ideally at the population level,
to obtain insights in the evolutionary forces that are acting on
these biosynthetic pathways. It must be noted that our search
for type III PKS genes in fungal genomes was rather strict
and they are likely present as wrongly predicted genes in a
number of genomes.
Our phylogenetic and comparative genomics analyses have
identiﬁed clades 7 and 8 which comprise type III PKS genes that
are linked to an rPKS. As expected from the co-evolution of
both genes, their recent functional analysis in P. soppi showed
that the rPKS provides the starter unit to the type III PKS
(Kaneko et al., 2019). The P450 monoxygenase gene found
at this locus is involved in the oxidation of the polyketide
released by the type III PKS (Kaneko et al., 2019). This P450
gene is conserved in nearly a third of BGCs predicted in clade
8, suggesting that similar compounds are likely produced in
these species (Figure 6). However, many other genes encoding
enzymes with activities commonly found in SM biosynthetic
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
14
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 15]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
pathways are found and are expected to contribute to the
diversiﬁcation of polyketides produced by pairs of rPKSs and
type III PKSs. Similarly, the sister clade 7 comprises a P450
gene in all species, but most predicted BGCs also appear
to contain a gene that encodes a predicted mycolic acid
cyclopropane synthetase (Figure 6). Functional analyses are
needed to illuminate the diversity of compounds produced by
BGCs from these two particular clades. In other phylogenetic
clades, P450, MFS and transcription factor genes are frequent
and likely form a core BGC in many cases (Figure 6).
In each clade, sub-BGCs have likely emerged by recruiting
additional tailoring genes encoding diverse functions. Functional
analyses based on these predictions are likely to provide
a large diversity of polyketides with potentially interesting
biological activities.
In addition to the conserved domains that are commonly
found in fungal BGCs, our analyses highlighted the high
frequency of conserved domains with no known function in
fungal SM, especially sugar transporters, HET proteins, F-box like
proteins, protein kinases and ankyrin repeats (Figure 6). In clade
2, a protein of unknown function is also frequently found and
several other proteins of unknown functions could be found at
the locus of characterized type III PKS genes. These observations
could be due to the localization of type III PKSs at conserved
loci and these genes could indicate BGC borders. For example,
the HET proteins and protein kinases are not enriched in fungal
BGCs, suggesting that they are not involved in fungal secondary
metabolism (Supplementary Table S24). Alternatively, these
domains could be involved in biosynthetic pathways and their
roles need to be determined experimentally. For example, F-box
and ankyrin conserved domains are structural domains involved
in protein dimerization (Bai et al., 1996; Michaely et al., 2002)
and these protein may interact with enzymes from a given
pathway to modify or enhance their enzymatic activities. The
ankyrin repeats, F-box-like and sugar transporter domains are
signiﬁcantly enriched in BGCs from clades 1 and 6, 3 and 5, and
1 and 5, respectively (Supplementary Table S24). These domains
are present in other BGC clades, but they are not signiﬁcantly
enriched, suggesting that these proteins may be involved in
certain biosynthetic pathways only. Certain non-SM domains
like phosphotransferase enzyme family (PF01636.23), syntaxin-
like protein (PF14523.6) and SNARE domain (PF05739.19),
and Erg28-like protein (PF03694.13) are found and signiﬁcantly
enriched in single clades 2, 3, and 7, respectively (Figure 6
and Supplementary Table S24). These proteins could play a
diﬀerent role in self-protection against a toxic compound as
decoy, a function that has been found encoded within a few
fungal BGCs (Yeh et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2018; Kjærbølling et al.,
2019). Some proteins with unknown functions could also play a
biosynthetic role, as shown for DUF1772 proteins in emodin-like
BGCs, which was found to exhibit an anthrone oxidase activity
(Lim et al., 2012a,b).
Our analysis is certainly not showing the complete picture
because it is restricted to conserved domains from the PFAM
database and many genes were not reported to contain any
conserved domains. It is likely that many of these genes
actually harbor a functional conserved domain either not in
the PFAM database, divergent enough to not be detected with
the detection thresholds we used, or need to be functionally
characterized. A recent example showed that the Orf3 protein
from the ACE1 BGC in Pyricularia oryzae, while not harboring
any known conserved domain, is likely a Dies-Alderase enzyme
(Wang et al., 2019).
The phylogeny of fungal type III PKSs matches the enzymatic
activities of the characterized type III PKSs. Consistent with their
characterized common enzymatic activity, SmPKS, CtPKS and
ORAS are close orthologs in the phylogenetic tree (Figure 3A).
BPKS shares the same speciﬁcity and belong to the same
phylogenetic clade 1, suggesting that most type III PKS in this
clade will preferentially produce resorcinols from long starter
units. The characterized Basidiomycota ortholog Sl-PKS2 also
produce resorcinols from long starter unit, but incorporate fewer
malonyl-CoA units (Sun et al., 2016), an activity that is shared
with the distant Shiraia SsArs and P. soppi PspB enzymes from
clade 5 and clade 8, respectively (Yan et al., 2018; Kaneko et al.,
2019) (Figure 3A). Although the characterized type III PKS from
A. niger, AnPKS, belongs to the diﬀerent clade 6 (Figure 3A), it
exhibits the same speciﬁcity and ﬂexibility than ORAS, SmPKS
and CtPKS (Funa et al., 2007; Li et al., 2011; Ramakrishnan
et al., 2018). Yet, it was reported that AnPKS can also accept
aromatic and branched starter units, which was also reported for
FiPKS (Li et al., 2011; Manoharan et al., 2019). CsyA and CsyB
from A. oryzae are paralogs belonging to clade 3 (Figure 3A).
These enzymes appear to produce preferentially pyrones from
short starter units (Seshime et al., 2010a,b). Divergence after
duplication seems to have modiﬁed the processivity of these
type III PKSs because CsyB incorporate fewer units than CsyA,
and CsyA also uses acetoacetyl extender units (Seshime et al.,
2010b). Finally, PspB from clade 8 accepts a linear polyketide
produced by the rPKS located in the corresponding BGC (Kaneko
et al., 2019). Considering the complex evolution observed in
clade 8, it remains to determine whether all rPKSs are producing
the same starter units and, if so, how the production of
diﬀerent precursors could have impacted the speciﬁcity of the
corresponding type III PKSs. No type III PKS from clades 2,
3, and 7 has been characterized so far. Comparison of the
sequence logos (Supplementary Material S9) between each
fungal clade, plant and bacterial clades (Figures 2, 3A) highlights
the highly conserved Cys-His-Asn catalytic triad, as well as the
Phe residue that was reported to control product speciﬁcity
(Rubin-Pitel et al., 2008; Mori et al., 2015). These sequence
logos also highlight clade speciﬁc sequences, conserved motifs,
and conserved amino acids, which require further functional
analyses to understand their role in the speciﬁcity and activity of
fungal type III PKSs.
CONCLUSION
Our study provides important information to further characterize
fungal type III PKSs and investigate their diversity. In
contrast to previous studies, it is now possible to select
speciﬁc candidate PKSs with likely diﬀerent activities for
characterization. In addition, the domain analysis provides
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
15
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 16]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
a basis to further study the diversiﬁcation of chemical structures
produced by type III PKS biosynthetic pathways. Thus, our work
is expected to promote research on these overlooked enzymes and
pathways, and might lead to the production and engineering of
novel bioactive compounds.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
All datasets generated for this study are included in the
article/Supplementary Material.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
JC designed the analyses, performed the phylogenetic analyses,
analyzed all data, and wrote the manuscript. JN-M performed the
domain analyses, built phylogenetic trees, analyzed the data, and
revised the manuscript.
FUNDING
JN-M is ﬁnancially supported by the Odo van Vloten Foundation.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.
2019.03018/full#supplementary-material
TABLE S1 | Genomes used in this study.
TABLE S2 | Distribution of type III PKSs in fungal genomes at the phylum level.
TABLE S3 | Distribution of type III PKSs in fungal genomes at the class level.
TABLE S4 | Best sequence similarity of proteins encoded at the locus of the type
III PKS in Ascobolus immersus.
TABLE S5 | Best sequence similarity of proteins encoded at the locus of the type
III PKS in Dactylonectria estremocensis.
TABLE S6 | Best sequence similarity of proteins encoded at the locus of the type
III PKS in Neonectria radicicola.
TABLE S7 | Best sequence similarity of proteins encoded at the locus of the type
III PKS in Ilyonectria robusta.
TABLE S8 | Best sequence similarity of proteins encoded at the locus of the type
III PKS in Dactylonectria macrodidyma.
TABLE S9 | Best sequence similarity of proteins encoded at the locus of the type
III PKS in Aspergillus brevijanus.
TABLE S10 | Best sequence similarity of proteins encoded at the locus of the type
III PKS in Bombardia bombarda.
TABLE S11 | Best sequence similarity of proteins encoded at the locus of the type
III PKS in Lasiosphaeriaceae sp. AZ0830.
TABLE S12 | Best sequence similarity of proteins encoded at the locus of the type
III PKS in Oliveonia pauxilla.
TABLE S13 | Best sequence similarity of proteins encoded at the locus of the type
III PKS in Zasmidium cellare.
TABLE S14 | Number of core secondary metabolism genes at type III PKS loci.
TABLE S15 | Normalized occurrence of protein conserved domains in predicted
type III PKS gene clusters.
TABLE S16 | Normalized occurrence of protein conserved domains in predicted
type III PKS gene clusters in clade 1.
TABLE S17 | Normalized occurrence of protein conserved domains in predicted
type III PKS gene clusters in clade 2.
TABLE S18 | Normalized occurrence of protein conserved domains in predicted
type III PKS gene clusters in clade 3.
TABLE S19 | Normalized occurrence of protein conserved domains in predicted
type III PKS gene clusters in clade 4.
TABLE S20 | Normalized occurrence of protein conserved domains in predicted
type III PKS gene clusters in clade 5.
TABLE S21 | Normalized occurrence of protein conserved domains in predicted
type III PKS gene clusters in clade 6.
TABLE S22 | Normalized occurrence of protein conserved domains in predicted
type III PKS gene clusters in clade 7.
TABLE S23 | Normalized occurrence of protein conserved domains in predicted
type III PKS gene clusters in clade 8.
TABLE S24 | Enrichment analysis of frequent conserved domains in predicted
type III PKS gene clusters.
MATERIAL S1 | Protein sequences of type III polyketide synthases retrieved from
the Joint Genome Institute genomes.
MATERIAL S2 | Protein sequences of characterized type III polyketide synthases
used in this study.
MATERIAL S3 | Protein sequences of reducing polyketide synthases
used in this study.
MATERIAL S4 | Protein sequences of bacterial type III polyketide synthases that
are closely related to fungal sequences.
MATERIAL S5 | Curated protein alignments used to build phylogenetic trees.
MATERIAL S6 | Reconciliation analyses performed with DTL and DL
models using NOTUNG.
MATERIAL S7 | Paralogy in the fungal type III polyketide synthase
phylogenetic tree.
MATERIAL S8 | Description of fungal type III polyketide synthase loci. Color
blocks indicate conserved domains.
MATERIAL S9 | Sequence conservation within fungal, plant and bacterial type III
polyketide synthases (PKS) phylogenetic clades.
REFERENCES
Austin, M. B., and Noel, J. P. (2003). The chalcone synthase superfamily of
type III polyketide synthases. Nat. Prod. Rep. 20, 79–110. doi: 10.1039/b100
917f
Bai, C., Sen, P., Hofmann, K., Ma, L., Goebl, M., Harper, J. W., et al. (1996). SKP1
connects cell cycle regulators to the ubiquitin proteolysis machinery through
a novel motif, the F-box. Cell 86, 263–274. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80
098-7
Bertrand, R. L., Abdel-Hameed, M., and Sorensen, J. L. (2018). Lichen biosynthetic
gene clusters. Part I. Genome sequencing reveals a rich biosynthetic potential.
J. Nat. Prod. 81, 723–731. doi: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.7b00769
Blin, K., Wolf, T., Chevrette, M. G., Lu, X., Schwalen, C. J., Kautsar, S. A., et al.
(2017). antiSMASH 4.0-improvements in chemistry prediction and gene cluster
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
16
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 17]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
boundary identiﬁcation. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, W36–W41. doi: 10.1093/nar/
gkx319
Capella-Gutiérrez, S., Silla-Martínez, J. M., and Gabaldón, T. (2009). trimAl: a
tool for automated alignment trimming in large-scale phylogenetic analyses.
Bioinformatics 25, 1972–1973. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp348
Chen, R., Zhang, Q., Tan, B., Zheng, L., Li, H., Zhu, Y., et al. (2017). Genome
mining and activation of a silent PKS/NRPS gene cluster direct the production
of totopotensamides. Org. Lett. 19, 5697–5700. doi: 10.1021/acs.orglett.7b02878
Collemare, J., Billard, A., Böhnert, H. U., and Lebrun, M.-H. (2008). Biosynthesis
of secondary metabolites in the rice blast fungus Magnaporthe grisea: the role
of hybrid PKS-NRPS in pathogenicity. Mycol. Res. 112, 207–215. doi: 10.1016/j.
mycres.2007.08.003
Crooks, G. E., Hon, G., Chandonia, J. M., and Brenner, S. E. (2004). WebLogo: a
sequence logo generator. Genome Res. 14, 1188–1190. doi: 10.1101/gr.849004
Dasari, S., Ganjayi, M. S., Yellanurkonda, P., Basha, S., and Meriga, B. (2018).
Role of glutathione S-transferases in detoxiﬁcation of a polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon, methylcholanthrene. Chem. Biol. Interact. 294, 81–90. doi: 10.
1016/j.cbi.2018.08.023
Ebersberger, I., de Matos Simoes, R., Kupczok, A., Gube, M., Kothe, E., Voigt, K.,
et al. (2012). A consistent phylogenetic backbone for the fungi. Mol. Biol. Evol.
29, 1319–1334. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msr285
El-Gebali, S., Mistry, J., Bateman, A., Eddy, S. R., Luciani, A., Potter, S. C., et al.
(2019). The Pfam protein families database in 2019. Nucleic Acids Res. 47,
D427–D432. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky995
Ely, Z. A., Moon, J. M., Sliwoski, G. R., Sangha, A. K., Shen, X. X., Labella, A. L.,
et al. (2019). The impact of natural selection on the evolution and function of
placentally expressed galectins. Genome Biol. Evol. 11, 2574–2592. doi: 10.1093/
gbe/evz183
Ferrer, J. L., Jez, J. M., Bowman, M. E., Dixon, R. A., and Noel, J. P. (1999). Structure
of chalcone synthase and the molecular basis of plant polyketide biosynthesis.
Nat. Struct. Biol. 6, 775–784. doi: 10.1038/11553
Funa, N., Awakawa, T., and Horinouchi, S. (2007). Pentaketide resorcylic acid
synthesis by type III polyketide synthase from Neurospora crassa. J. Biol. Chem.
282, 14476–14481. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M701239200
Funa, N., Ohnishi, Y., Fujii, I., Shibuya, M., Ebizuka, Y., and Horinouchi, S.
(1999). A new pathway for polyketide synthesis in microorganisms. Nature 400,
897–899. doi: 10.1038/23748
Gabaldón,
T.,
and
Koonin,
E.
V.
(2013).
Functional
and
evolutionary
implications of gene orthology. Nat. Rev. Genet. 14, 360–366. doi: 10.1038/nrg
3456
Goyal, A., Saxena, P., Rahman, A., Singh, P. K., Kasbekar, D. P., Gokhale, R. S.,
et al. (2008). Structural insights into biosynthesis of resorcinolic lipids by a
type III polyketide synthase in Neurospora crassa. J. Struct. Biol. 162, 411–421.
doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2008.02.009
Griﬃths, S., Mesarich, C. H., Saccomanno, B., Vaisberg, A., De Wit, P. J., Cox, R.,
et al. (2016). Elucidation of cladofulvin biosynthesis reveals a cytochrome P450
monooxygenase required for anthraquinone dimerization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 113, 6851–6856. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1603528113
Grigoriev, I. V., Nikitin, R., Haridas, S., Kuo, A., Ohm, R., Otillar, R., et al. (2014).
MycoCosm portal: gearing up for 1000 fungal genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 42,
D699–D704. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1183
Gross, F., Luniak, N., Perlova, O., Gaitatzis, N., Jenke-Kodama, H., Gerth, K.,
et al. (2006). Bacterial type III polyketide synthases: phylogenetic analysis and
potential for the production of novel secondary metabolites by heterologous
expression in pseudomonads. Arch. Microbiol. 185, 28–38. doi: 10.1007/s00203-
005-0059-3
Hashimoto, M., Nonaka, T., and Fujii, I. (2014). Fungal type III polyketide
synthases. Nat. Prod. Rep. 31, 1306–1317. doi: 10.1039/c4np00096j
Hashimoto, M., Seshime, Y., Kitamoto, K., Uchiyama, N., Goda, Y., and Fujii,
I. (2013). Identiﬁcation of csypyrone B2 and B3 as the minor products of
Aspergillus oryzae type III polyketide synthase CsyB. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett.
23, 650–653. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.11.119
Herbst, D. A., Townsend, C. A., and Maier, T. (2018). The architectures of iterative
type I PKS and FAS. Nat. Prod. Rep. 35, 1046–1069. doi: 10.1039/c8np00039e
Hoang, D. T., Chernomor, O., von Haeseler, A., Minh, B. Q., and Vinh, L. S. (2018).
UFBoot2: improving the ultrafast bootstrap approximation. Mol. Biol. Evol. 35,
518–522. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msx281
Innan, H., and Kondrashov, F. (2010). The evolution of gene duplications:
classifying and distinguishing between models. Nat. Rev. Genet. 11, 97–108.
doi: 10.1038/nrg2689
Jeya, M., Kim, T. S., Tiwari, M. K., Li, J., Zhao, H., and Lee, J. K. (2012). The
Botrytis cinerea type III polyketide synthase shows unprecedented high catalytic
eﬃciency toward long chain acyl-CoAs. Mol. Biosyst. 8, 2864–2867. doi: 10.
1039/c2mb25282a
Kalyaanamoorthy, S., Minh, B. Q., Wong, T. K. F., von Haeseler, A., and Jermiin,
L. S. (2017). ModelFinder: fast model selection for accurate phylogenetic
estimates. Nat. Methods 14, 587–589. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.4285
Kaneko, A., Morishita, Y., Tsukada, K., Taniguchi, T., and Asai, T. (2019). Post-
genomic approach based discovery of alkylresorcinols from a cricket-associated
fungus, Penicillium soppi. Org. Biomol. Chem. 17, 5239–5243. doi: 10.1039/
c9ob00807a
Katoh, K., and Standley, D. M. (2013). MAFFT multiple sequence alignment
software version 7: improvements in performance and usability. Mol. Biol. Evol.
30, 772–780. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mst010
Keller, N. P. (2019). Fungal secondary metabolism: regulation, function and drug
discovery. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 17, 167–180. doi: 10.1038/s41579-018-0121-1
Kirimura, K., Watanabe, S., and Kobayashi, K. (2016). Heterologous gene
expression and functional analysis of a type III polyketide synthase from
Aspergillus niger NRRL 328. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 473, 1106–1110.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.04.023
Kjærbølling, I., Vesth, T., and Andersen, M. R. (2019). Resistance gene-directed
genome mining of 50 Aspergillus species. mSystems 4:e00085-19. doi: 10.1128/
MSYSTEMS.00085-19
Kondrashov, F. A., Rogozin, I. B., Wolf, Y. I., and Koonin, E. V. (2002). Selection
in the evolution of gene duplications. Genome Biol. 3:RESEARCH0008. doi:
10.1186/gb-2002-3-2-research0008
Kroken, S., Glass, N. L., Taylor, J. W., Yoder, O. C., and Turgeon, B. G. (2003).
Phylogenomic analysis of type I polyketide synthase genes in pathogenic and
saprobic ascomycetes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 15670–15675. doi: 10.
1073/pnas.2532165100
Lackner, G., Misiek, M., Braesel, J., and Hoﬀmeister, D. (2012). Genome mining
reveals the evolutionary origin and biosynthetic potential of basidiomycete
polyketide synthases. Fungal Genet. Biol. 49, 996–1003. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2012.
09.009
Lee, J. S. (2015). Recent advances in the synthesis of 2-pyrones. Mar. Drugs 13,
1581–1620. doi: 10.3390/md13031581
Letunic, I., and Bork, P. (2019). Interactive tree of life (iTOL) v4: recent updates
and new developments. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, W256–W259. doi: 10.1093/nar/
gkz239
Li, J., Luo, Y., Lee, J. K., and Zhao, H. (2011). Cloning and characterization of a
type III polyketide synthase from Aspergillus niger. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 21,
6085–6089. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2011.08.058
Lim, F. Y., Hou, Y., Chen, Y., Oh, J. H., Lee, I., Bugni, T. S., et al. (2012a). Genome-
based cluster deletion reveals an endocrocin biosynthetic pathway in Aspergillus
fumigatus. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78, 4117–4125. doi: 10.1128/AEM.077
10-11
Lim, F. Y., Hou, Y., Chen, Y., Oh, J.-H., Lee, I., Bugni, T. S., et al. (2012b).
Genome-based cluster deletion reveals an endocrocin biosynthetic pathway in
Aspergillus fumigatus. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78:6395. doi: 10.1128/AEM.019
26-12
Lim, Y. P., Go, M. K., and Yew, W. S. (2016). Exploiting the biosynthetic
potential of type III polyketide synthases. Molecules 21:E806. doi: 10.3390/
molecules21060806
Lind, A. L., Wisecaver, J. H., Lameiras, C., Wiemann, P., Palmer, J. M., Keller,
N. P., et al. (2017). Drivers of genetic diversity in secondary metabolic gene
clusters within a fungal species. PLoS Biol. 15:e2003583. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pbio.2003583
Lv, Y., Xiao, J., and Pan, L. (2014). Type III polyketide synthase is involved in
the biosynthesis of protocatechuic acid in Aspergillus niger. Biotechnol. Lett. 36,
2303–2310. doi: 10.1007/s10529-014-1609-z
Manoharan, G., Sairam, T., Thangamani, R., Ramakrishnan, D., Tiwari, M. K., Lee,
J.-K., et al. (2019). Identiﬁcation and characterization of type III polyketide
synthase genes from culturable endophytes of ethnomedicinal plants. Enzyme
Microb. Technol. 131:109396. doi: 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2019.109396
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
17
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018



[PDF physical page 18]
Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare
Fungal Type III PKS Evolution
Marcet-Houben, M., and Gabaldón, T. (2019). Evolutionary and functional
patterns of shared gene neighbourhood in fungi. Nat. Microbiol. 4, 2383–2392.
doi: 10.1038/s41564-019-0552-0
Medema, M. H., Kottmann, R., Yilmaz, P., Cummings, M., Biggins, J. B., Blin,
K., et al. (2015). Minimum information about a biosynthetic gene cluster. Nat.
Chem. Biol. 11, 625–631. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1890
Michaely, P., Tomchick, D. R., Machius, M., and Anderson, R. G. (2002). Crystal
structure of a 12 ANK repeat stack from human ankyrinR. EMBO J. 21,
6387–6396. doi: 10.1093/emboj/cdf651
Mori, T., Yang, D., Matsui, T., Hashimoto, M., Morita, H., Fujii, I., et al. (2015).
Structural basis for the formation of acylalkylpyrones from two β-ketoacyl units
by the fungal type III polyketide synthase CsyB. J. Biol. Chem. 290, 5214–5225.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.626416
Muggia, L., and Grube, M. (2010). Type III polyketide synthases in lichen
mycobionts. Fungal Biol. 114, 379–385. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2010.03.001
Naseeb, S., Ames, R. M., Delneri, D., and Lovell, S. C. (2017). Rapid functional
and evolutionary changes follow gene duplication in yeast. Proc. Biol. Sci.
284:20171393. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2017.1393
Navarro-Muñoz, J. C., Selem-Mojica, N., Mullowney, M. W., Kautsar, S., Tryon,
J. H., Parkinson, E. I., et al. (2019). A computational framework to explore large-
scale biosynthetic diversity. Nat. Chem. Biol. 16, 60–68. doi: 10.1038/s41589-
019-0400-9
Nguyen, L. T., Schmidt, H. A., von Haeseler, A., and Minh, B. Q. (2015). IQ-TREE:
a fast and eﬀective stochastic algorithm for estimating maximum-likelihood
phylogenies. Mol. Biol. Evol. 32, 268–274. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msu300
Price, M. N., Dehal, P. S., and Arkin, A. P. (2010). FastTree 2–approximately
maximum-likelihood trees for large alignments. PLoS One 5:e9490. doi: 10.
1371/journal.pone.0009490
Ramakrishnan, D., Tiwari, M. K., Manoharan, G., Sairam, T., Thangamani, R.,
Lee, J. K., et al. (2018). Molecular characterization of two alkylresorcylic acid
synthases from Sordariomycetes fungi. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 115, 16–22.
doi: 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2018.04.006
Robbertse, B., Reeves, J. B., Schoch, C. L., and Spatafora, J. W. (2006). A
phylogenomic analysis of the Ascomycota. Fungal Genet. Biol. 43, 715–725.
doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2006.05.001
Rubin-Pitel, S. B., Zhang, H., Vu, T., Brunzelle, J. S., Zhao, H., and Nair, S. K. (2008).
Distinct structural elements dictate the speciﬁcity of the type III pentaketide
synthase from Neurospora crassa. Chem. Biol. 15, 1079–1090. doi: 10.1016/j.
chembiol.2008.08.011
Rusman, Y., Held, B. W., Blanchette, R. A., He, Y., and Salomon, C. E. (2018).
Cadopherone and colomitide polyketides from Cadophora wood-rot fungi
associated with historic expedition huts in Antarctica. Phytochemistry 148,
1–10. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2017.12.019
Sayari, M., Steenkamp, E. T., van der Nest, M. A., and Wingﬁeld, B. D.
(2018). Diversity and evolution of polyketide biosynthesis gene clusters in the
Ceratocystidaceae. Fungal Biol. 122, 856–866. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2018.04.011
Seshime, Y., Juvvadi, P. R., Fujii, I., and Kitamoto, K. (2005). Discovery of a novel
superfamily of type III polyketide synthases in Aspergillus oryzae. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 331, 253–260. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.03.160
Seshime, Y., Juvvadi, P. R., Kitamoto, K., Ebizuka, Y., and Fujii, I. (2010a).
Identiﬁcation of csypyrone B1 as the novel product of Aspergillus oryzae type
III polyketide synthase CsyB. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 18, 4542–4546. doi: 10.1016/
j.bmc.2010.04.058
Seshime, Y., Juvvadi, P. R., Kitamoto, K., Ebizuka, Y., Nonaka, T., and Fujii, I.
(2010b). Aspergillus oryzae type III polyketide synthase CsyA is involved in
the biosynthesis of 3,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 20,
4785–4788. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.06.119
Shimizu, Y., Ogata, H., and Goto, S. (2017). Type III polyketide synthases:
functional classiﬁcation and phylogenomics. Chembiochem 18, 50–65. doi: 10.
1002/cbic.201600522
Sievers, F., and Higgins, D. G. (2018). Clustal Omega for making accurate
alignments of many protein sequences. Protein Sci. 27, 135–145. doi: 10.1002/
pro.3290
Spatafora, J. W., Aime, M. C., Grigoriev, I. V., Martin, F., Stajich, J. E., and
Blackwell, M. (2017). The fungal tree of life: from molecular systematics to
genome-scale phylogenies. Microbiol. Spectr. 5:FUNK-0053-2016. doi: 10.1128/
microbiolspec.FUNK-0053-2016
Stolzer, M., Lai, H., Xu, M., Sathaye, D., Vernot, B., and Durand, D.
(2012). Inferring duplications, losses, transfers and incomplete lineage sorting
with nonbinary species trees. Bioinformatics 28, i409–i415. doi: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/bts386
Sun, L., Wang, S., Zhang, S., Yu, D., Qin, Y., Huang, H., et al. (2016). Identiﬁcation
of a type III polyketide synthase involved in the biosynthesis of spirolaxine.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 100, 7103–7113. doi: 10.1007/s00253-016-7444-5
Villani, A., Proctor, R. H., Kim, H. S., Brown, D. W., Logrieco, A. F., Amatulli,
M. T., et al. (2019). Variation in secondary metabolite production potential
in the Fusarium incarnatum-equiseti species complex revealed by comparative
analysis of 13 genomes. BMC Genomics 20:314. doi: 10.1186/s12864-019-
5567-7
Wang, C., Hantke, V., Cox, R. J., and Skellam, E. (2019). Targeted gene inactivations
expose silent cytochalasans in Magnaporthe grisea NI980. Org. Lett. 21, 4163–
4167. doi: 10.1021/acs.orglett.9b01344
Wang, H., Xu, Z., Gao, L., and Hao, B. (2009). A fungal phylogeny based on 82
complete genomes using the composition vector method. BMC Evol. Biol. 9:195.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-9-195
Wapinski, I., Pfeﬀer, A., Friedman, N., and Regev, A. (2007). Natural history and
evolutionary principles of gene duplication in fungi. Nature 449, 54–61. doi:
10.1038/nature06107
Ward, T. J., Bielawski, J. P., Kistler, H. C., Sullivan, E., and O’Donnell, K.
(2002). Ancestral polymorphism and adaptive evolution in the trichothecene
mycotoxin gene cluster of phytopathogenic Fusarium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 99, 9278–9283. doi: 10.1073/pnas.142307199
Wisecaver, J. H., Slot, J. C., and Rokas, A. (2014). The evolution of fungal metabolic
pathways. PLoS Genet. 10:e1004816. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004816
Wisecaver, J. H., Slot, J. C., and Rokas, A. (2015). Correction: the evolution of
fungal metabolic pathways. PLoS One 11:e1005449. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.
1005449
Wolf, Y. I., Novichkov, P. S., Karev, G. P., Koonin, E. V., and Lipman, D. J.
(2009). The universal distribution of evolutionary rates of genes and distinct
characteristics of eukaryotic genes of diﬀerent apparent ages. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 106, 7273–7280. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0901808106
Xu, B., and Yang, Z. (2016). Challenges in species tree estimation under the
multispecies coalescent model. Genetics 204, 1353–1368. doi: 10.1534/genetics.
116.190173
Yan, H., Sun, L., Huang, J., Qiu, Y., Xu, F., Yan, R., et al. (2018). Identiﬁcation
and heterologous reconstitution of a 5-alk(en)ylresorcinol synthase from
endophytic fungus Shiraia sp. Slf14. J. Microbiol. 56, 805–812. doi: 10.1007/
s12275-018-8278-x
Yang, X., Feng, P., Yin, Y., Bushley, K., Spatafora, J. W., and Wang, C. (2018).
Cyclosporine biosynthesis in Tolypocladium inﬂatum beneﬁts fungal adaptation
to the environment. mBio 9:e01211-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01211-18
Yeh, H. H., Ahuja, M., Chiang, Y. M., Oakley, C. E., Moore, S., Yoon, O., et al.
(2016). Resistance gene-guided genome mining: serial promoter exchanges
in Aspergillus nidulans reveal the biosynthetic pathway for fellutamide B,
a proteasome inhibitor. ACS Chem. Biol. 11, 2275–2284. doi: 10.1021/
acschembio.6b00213
Yu, D., Xu, F., Zeng, J., and Zhan, J. (2012). Type III polyketide synthases
in natural product biosynthesis. IUBMB Life 64, 285–295. doi: 10.1002/iub.
1005
Yu, D., Zeng, J., Chen, D., and Zhan, J. (2010). Characterization and
reconstitution of a new fungal type III polyketide synthase from Aspergillus
oryzae. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 46, 575–580. doi: 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2010.
02.011
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Navarro-Muñoz and Collemare. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No
use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org
18
January 2020 | Volume 10 | Article 3018
