
[PDF physical page 1]
Article
Connecting chemical and protein sequence
space to predict biocatalytic reactions



https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09519-5   Alexandra E. Paton1, Daniil A. Boiko2, Jonathan C. Perkins1,3, Nicholas I. Cemalovic1,3,
                                         Thiago Reschützegger4, Gabe Gomes2,5,6,7 ✉ & Alison R. H. Narayan1,3 ✉Received: 21 October 2024
Accepted: 12 August 2025
                                  The application of biocatalysis in synthesis has the potential to offer streamlinedPublished online: 1 October 2025
                                        routes towards target molecules1, tunable catalyst-controlled selectivity2, as well
Open access                                         as processes with improved sustainability3. Despite these advantages, biocatalysis
   Check for updates                             is often a high-risk strategy to implement, as identifying an enzyme capable of
                                     performing chemistry on a specific intermediate required for a synthesis can be a
                                      roadblock that requires extensive screening of enzymes and protein engineering
                                        to overcome4. Strategies for predicting which enzyme and small molecule are
                                      compatible have been hindered by the lack of well-studied biocatalytic reaction
                                            datasets5. The underexploration of connections between chemical and protein
                                    sequence space constrains navigation between these two landscapes. Here we
                                        report a two-phase effort relying on high-throughput experimentation to populate
                                       connections between productive substrate and enzyme pairs and the subsequent
                                    development of a tool, CATNIP, for predicting compatible α-ketoglutarate (α-KG)/
                                         Fe(ii)-dependent enzymes for a given substrate or, conversely, for ranking potential
                                          substrates for a given α-KG/Fe(ii)-dependent enzyme sequence. We anticipate that
                                     our approach can be readily expanded to further enzyme and transformation classes
                                  and will derisk the investigation and application of biocatalytic methods.



The use of enzymes in small-molecule synthesis has transformed the   sequence space can lead to the desired reactivity. For example, towards
production of commodity chemicals and enabled the construction   the synthesis of GSK2330672, the known transformation of epichloro-
of complex molecules for decades6. Recent examples of biocatalytic   hydrin by an epoxide hydrolase was used as a starting point for local
routes to achieve the commercial production of pharmaceutical agents   chemical space exploration to extend this chemistry to a new epoxide10
underscore the potential of designing synthetic strategies that include   (Fig. 1a). As an alternative, we can explore local protein sequence space
key biocatalytic steps3. New enzyme-mediated process routes towards   through protein engineering11. Several notable examples of protein
drugs have decreased step counts by 33% and more than doubled overall   engineering have been applied in the synthesis of pharmaceutical
yield, on average, compared with the highest-performing chemical    agents7,12, including the engineering of a transaminase for the synthe-
syntheses7 (Supplementary Information, scheme 1). The potential    sis of sacubitril, a neprilysin inhibitor, which involved the substitution
to enable new routes towards target molecules through biocatalysis   of 26 amino-acid residues to achieve a 500,000-fold improvement in
exists in arenas outside process chemistry, as evidenced by a growing    activity13 (Fig. 1a). Thus, established strategies for applying biocatalysis
body of work from academic groups specializing in chemoenzymatic   rely heavily on known reactions and local exploration in chemical space
synthesis1 and the potential of enzymatic late-stage functionalization  and protein sequence space forward from these defined connections
in discovery chemistry2.                                                      (Fig. 1b). Unfortunately, the percentage of enzymes for which chemistry
  One common limitation of biocatalysis is the unpredictable sub-   has been experimentally characterized is extremely low, with less than
strate scope of individual enzymes, which can contribute to difficulty   0.3% of sequenced enzymes having a computationally annotated func-
in developing a biocatalytic method4. Even simple methyl, ethyl and   tion5. As such, most enzymes do not have known connections to sub-
propyl substituent series, which typically do not show notable reactivity   strate chemical space, contributing to the difficulty in tapping into the
differences for small-molecule catalysts, can reveal large differences in   potential that these catalysts could bring to the scientific community.
an enzymatic reaction8. Therefore, to plan an enzymatic reaction into    Machine learning methods can expedite the biocatalytic reaction
a synthetic route carries substantial risk if the exact reaction on the   discovery process14. For example, a contrastive learning model was
planned substrate is not already known. As a result, the application of   developed to predict the enzyme commission number of uncharacter-
biocatalysis is often constrained to known reactions discovered through   ized enzymes15. This provides a prediction for what type of reaction a
primary or secondary metabolism9. Once a starting point enzyme–sub-   given enzyme is capable of. However, it does not guide us towards the
strate pair is identified, local exploration of chemical space or protein   native substrate of an enzyme nor provide information on the substrate

1Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 2Department of Chemical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 3Department of Chemistry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 4Department of Chemical Engineering, Federal University of Santa Maria, Santa Maria, Brazil. 5Department of Chemistry, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 6Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 7Wilton E. Scott Institute for Energy Innovation, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA. ✉e-mail: gabegomes@cmu.edu; arhardin@umich.edu

108  |  Nature  |  Vol 646  |  2 October 2025


[PDF physical page 2]
a  Present approaches to discovering biocatalytic reactions
                                                  H                                               Ar
 O      Et       O                             H                                                     Me
                                                 R                         +        n-Bu                Cl
                                                                                O          CO2H
   Analogue          Substrate        EH                                                                                    Substrate            ATA-wt          ATA-r11
                Local chemical space                                               Biocatalytic reaction                                             Local sequence space



                                                                  Known
                                                                                           reaction





      Substrates                  Enzymes                    Substrates                     Enzymes                    Substrates                  Enzymes

b   Limitations of present methods                                      c  Our approach





                               Vast unexplored chemical                                                                  Discover diverse biocatalytic
                             and sequence space                                                                                   reactions

                                     Inefﬁcient biocatalytic
                                                                                                                        Create models to navigate                                      reaction discovery
                                                                                                               between landscapes





       Substrates                                             Enzymes                     Substrates                                             Enzymes

Fig. 1 | Present state of the art in biocatalytic reaction discovery.              biocatalytic reactivity is limited to local exploration of chemical and sequence
a, Established methods for new biocatalytic reaction discovery. Known          space, inhibiting larger, non-intuitive leaps between the landscapes.
connections between chemical and protein sequence space can be exploited     There remains a vast unexplored region of substrates and enzymes with
for new reaction discovery through local exploration. The known reaction      unknown biocatalytic reactivity, creating a higher risk for their incorporation
between epichlorohydrin and epoxide hydrolase (EH) was used to enable the      as key steps in chemical synthesis. There is at present no method to predict
reaction on the epoxide analogue towards the synthesis of GSK2330672        compatible enzymes or substrates in the NHI enzyme superfamily.
(ref. 10). Alternatively, local protein sequence space was explored through        c, Our approach to streamline biocatalytic reaction discovery. We examined
protein engineering to improve the transformation of the known substrate      diverse substrates and protein sequences for new biocatalytic reactions and
(Ar = p-biphenyl) with wild-type (wt) amino transaminase (ATA), resulting in     use these data to build machine learning models to predict compatible enzymes
ATA-r11 after 11 rounds of directed evolution (positions of mutations shown     and substrates.
in purple)13. b, Limitations of present methods. Expansion of characterized


scope. Computational tools can also predict other qualities of a protein   to a specific enzyme family underperform28, probably because of the
based on its sequence, such as EnzymeMiner, which predicts amenabil-   large differences in substrate selectivity observed across various pro-
ity to heterologous expression in Escherichia coli (E. coli)16. These tools   tein families29. The generation of models that rely on pre-existing data-
are useful for guiding initial selection of enzymes to explore experi-   sets30, which are largely taken from the biosynthetic and metabolism
mentally. However, it is well documented that enzyme annotation and   literature, create limitations, as the array of enzymes and substrates
predicted compatible substrates often do not align with experimental   have not been experimentally validated against each other, leading to
validation17, hindering their use in generating in silico datasets.        a risk of false negatives, poor annotations and inaccurate proposed
  Advances towards achieving predictability in biocatalysis have pro-   biocatalytic reactions that can lead to false positives17.
vided solutions for navigating locally in either chemical or sequence    Towards characterizing the chemistry possible across an enzyme
space. Reaction discovery campaigns, such as the profiling of a nitrilase   family and derisking the incorporation of biocatalytic steps into syn-
library against a small panel of highly similar substrates18 and the   thetic routes, we visualized a two-pronged approach involving high-
fluorogenic-guided investigation of the substrate scope of hydro­lases19,   throughput experimentation and machine learning. We anticipated
have revealed trends in enzyme promiscuity. There has also been work   that this would require conducting reactions that profile substrates
to curate datasets detailing the substrate scope of variants of a given  sampled across chemical space with enzymes that represent the
parent enzyme20, as exemplified by the profiling of P450 BM3 variants   sequence diversity encompassed by a protein family (Fig. 1c). Once a
against a panel of small molecules21. From these types of dataset, local   sufficient dataset was obtained, then machine learning models could
sequence space exploration can be aided by machine learning tools to  be built to navigate between these two landscapes and enable the dis-
identify variant enzymes with superior catalytic activity22, stereoselec-   covery of biocatalytic reactions in a substrate-oriented or enzyme-
tivity23, substrate scope24 and thermal stability25. These datasets explore   oriented fashion. Here we detail the first, to our knowledge, example
locally in sequence space, chemical space or both landscapes (Fig. 1b).   of this approach focused on C–H functionalization reactions mediated
Attempts to predict biocatalytic reactions have been carried out in  by α-KG non-haem iron(ii)-dependent (NHI) enzymes. Ultimately, this
several enzyme families26,27. However, established approaches have   experimental effort led to the discovery of more than 200 biocatalytic
limitations in applicability and accessibility. These constraints include   reactions and provided the data necessary to build a web-based toolkit
difficulty extrapolating beyond the training set28 and an absence of user-   to suggest compatible substrates and enzymes for an oxidative bio-
friendly tools26. Further, established approaches that are not restricted   catalytic transformation.

                                                                                                 Nature  |  Vol 646  |  2 October 2025  |  109


[PDF physical page 3]
Article

  In considering which protein family and reaction class to use as a   with a range of substrates, reactions were performed on the 50-μl scale
test case, we sought an enzyme class that has proved to be useful on   in 96-well plates and were analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass
the preparative scale31 and performs valuable reactions while argu-   spectrometry (LC-MS). Each reaction was investigated for masses cor-
ably still underdeveloped in synthetic chemistry32. On the basis of   responding to hydroxylation, chlorination, desaturation and rear-
this, we chose to focus on a subclass of NHI enzymes that use α-KG as  rangement products (Fig. 3a). Notably, each reaction was conducted
a co-substrate. From a reactivity standpoint, this class of enzymes is   in triplicate and compared with two negative controls: (1) cell pellet
appealing on the basis of their ability to access a range of chemistries   containing no overproduced NHI enzyme and (2) a no-substrate control.
from a conserved radical intermediate to afford C–H functionalization    More than a hundred compounds were assessed as substrates for
products and desaturation products and mediate skeletal rearrange-   each enzyme in aKGLib1, including a range of scaffolds from commer-
ments33,34 (Fig. 2a). Also, α-KG-dependent NHI enzymes have practical   cially available amino acids to drugs and other complex molecules
advantages over other types of enzymes that can mediate the cleavage   (Supplementary Table 5). Of the 111 substrates evaluated in reactions
of strong C–H bonds or perform oxidative transformations on several   with the entire enzyme library, 35 compounds were transformed by at
bonds. For example, other subclasses of NHI and cytochrome P450   least one enzyme in aKGLib1, a 32% success rate (Fig. 3a). Furthermore,
enzymes are fuelled by electrons that are often supplied by a partner   119 of 314 enzymes showed biocatalytic activity on at least one substrate
reductase35, whereas α-KG-dependent NHI enzymes rely on the oxida-   tested, including 74 with no previously reported activity (Supplemen-
tion of the small-molecule co-substrate α-KG to drive the formation of   tary Table 4). Notably, numerous enzymes for which a protein band was
the active oxidant species36 (Fig. 2a). This difference provides a more   not clearly seen by SDS-PAGE analysis showed biocatalytic activity. Most
uniform set of conditions for α-KG-dependent NHI reactions, which   of the observed reactions were hydroxylation, although desaturation
have proved to be scalable37.                                         reactions constituted about 20% of the reactions discovered (Fig. 3a).
  To design a library of α-KG-dependent NHI enzymes that represent   In total, 215 new biocatalytic reactions were observed (Supplemen-
the sequence diversity of this protein family, we gathered all sequences   tary Table 3). The collection of discovered reactions encompassed
annotated to have the facial triad of iron-coordinating residues that   substrates that varied substantially in structure, including natural
is conserved for hydroxylases38 (Fig. 2b). Using the Enzyme Function   products such as cannabidivarin (4), humulene (12) and harmaline (13),
Initiative–Enzyme Similarity Tool (EFI-EST), 265,632 unique sequences   chemical building blocks such as cinnamic acid analogue (1) and usnic
were associated with this class39. To reduce the number of sequences   acid (3), common reagents such as 1,8-diazabicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene
to a manageable amount, redundant orthologues (>90% similarity)   (DBU, 10) and pharmaceutical agents (for example, glyburide (5)). To
and clusters containing enzymes associated with primary metabolism   define the relationship between compounds, each substrate was quanti-
were removed, giving a resultant sequence similarity network (SSN)   fied with MORFEUS descriptors46 to generate 21 parameters including
consisting of 27,005 sequences (Fig. 2b). Work by Lewis and colleagues  measurements of sterics (for example, volume, solvent-accessible
demonstrated that SSN representations can reveal trends in sequence–   surface area), electronics (for example, HOMO and LUMO energies,
substrate relationships within the flavin-dependent halogenase family40   electrophilicity) and intermolecular interactions (for example, disper-
and subsequent studies have shown this correlation in further enzyme   sion descriptors, charge) (Supplementary Table 7). With these features
classes41–45. Therefore, we sampled several clusters as a strategy to   quantified, we carried out a principal component analysis to represent
achieve a protein library with a broad substrate scope. In total, 102   the compounds in chemical space (Fig. 3b). Notably, substrates trans-
sequences were selected from the most populated cluster, 125 unchar-  formed by enzymes in aKGLib1 are well dispersed in chemical space.
acterized sequences from poorly annotated clusters and 87 further   Ultimately, our experimental effort produced hundreds of new con-
sequences of enzymes with known or proposed function were selected   nections between chemical space and protein sequence space. Thus,
to arrive at a 314 enzyme library (aKGLib1; Supplementary Fig. 1).      the development of models that would allow for navigation between
  Of the enzymes selected, 94 (30%) have a known or suggested native   these landscapes was now within reach.
reaction including hydroxylation, desaturation, halogenation, epoxi-
dation, endoperoxidation, demethylation, C–C bond formation and
skeletal rearrangements (Fig. 2c and Supplementary Figs. 2 and 3). In  Translation from reaction data to machine learning
an attempt to extrapolate beyond known activity, we used the enzyme  models
commission machine learning model CLEAN (Contrastive Learning  With the goal of creating robust compatibility predictive models, we
enabled Enzyme ANnotation)15. CLEAN assigned enzymes in aKGLib1  sought to maximize the number of biocatalytic reactions available
as oxidoreductases, transferases, hydrolases, lyases and isomerases,   for model training. Therefore, the 215 reactions discovered were com-
of which 80% were annotated with low confidence (Supplementary   bined with previously reported biocatalytic reactions associated with
Table 1 and Supplementary Figs. 4 and 5). As anticipated, trends in  enzymes in aKGLib1 (Supplementary Information Section 12). Of the
substrate class are evident from the SSN generated at a more stringent   literature reactions, eight had been observed experimentally during
alignment score threshold (Fig. 2c). For example, at alignment score 75,   our reaction discovery efforts and the extra 139 reactions were added
enzymes characterized to be compatible with an indolizidine scaffold   to the dataset to create BioCatSet1 (Supplementary Table 3). To convert
are found within a cluster. All selected sequences showed an average   these substrate–enzyme pairs to inputs for machine learning mod-
sequence percent identity of 13.7%, indicating high library sequence    els, reaction partners were divided into their individual components,
diversity (Fig. 2c). DNA for the library was synthesized and cloned   comprising 119 substrates and 163 enzymes (Fig. 4a). Each substrate
into a pET-28b(+) expression vector. E. coli cells were transformed  was converted to a SMILES string using the main protonation state at
with plasmids encoding for each library member and overexpression   pH 7.5 (ref. 47), featurized using MORFEUS46 and mapped to chemical
was carried out in 96-well-plate format. Sodium dodecyl sulfate–   space. To quantify the relationship between enzymes, the alignment
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) analysis of crude cell   scores were extracted from the SSN and converted to a normalized
lysate showed clear protein bands at the expected molecular weight   value (AS%) to capture the relationships as a quantitative matrix input.
for 78% of enzymes (Supplementary Figs. 6–29).                     With these metrics defined, we took steps towards building pre-
                                                                   dictive models for navigating between chemical and sequence
                                                                  space. In a synthetic-chemistry-based endeavour, we constructed a
High-throughput biocatalytic reaction discovery         substrate-to-enzyme recommendation system to enable the identifi-
With aKGLib1 in hand, we next investigated the reactivity of each enzyme   cation of new biocatalytic reactions with a given substrate. To achieve
in a high-throughput fashion. To profile the reactivity of each enzyme    this, each substrate was mapped to chemical space and ten of its nearest

110  |  Nature  |  Vol 646  |  2 October 2025


[PDF physical page 4]
a  Diverse activity of α-KG-dependent enzymes
                          O                                                                                   Me   O
                                                                                     OH
                                       OH    His                                              O        Me            OH
                        HO          O
                                                                                                               Me                                                                HO        O    O        O                                                                   FeII                                                                                             O                                                                                                                         Me                                               R                                                                                                         H                                   O
                               O HO            OH                                                            His                                                                                                             O                                                                                                     H                                                                              OH              Me                            2 H2O                                                                                                      Me                                                                                                      O   OMe      O                                                    O2        H2O                                                                     OH  O
       α-KG                                                         CO2              Dihydrokaempferol                              Preaustinoid A2

                                                                                                                      Hydroxylation                     Desaturation
            OH    His               H           O          O     His                                                     .        HO
                         FeII                                 +            O   FeIV
                  R                                                R
        HO                                   HO
                   His                                                 Substrate                 O  His                                    Substrate-centred radical
                                                                                                                   Ring-contraction                         Chlorination
                                                                                 Me                         Me        Cl
          O                                                                                           CN
                          3 H2O                                                Me  N+                            HHO
            OH
                                    OH    His                                H                                   H                        O
   O                                                                                                              Me                                O    FeIII
     Succinate              HO                R                                         NH                    NH    Me
                                O  His                                                     Cycloclavine                             12-epi-ﬁscherindole G
b  Curation of diverse α-KG-dependent NHI enzyme library                           c  Trends in and efﬁcacy of library                              Efﬁciency and
                                                                                                        Selected enzymes SSN and known                                 diversity of
  Approach to building    NHI SSN                                                                                          scaffolds                                enzyme library
  NHI enzyme library
                                                                                      OH                      O
          OH2
      His        OH2                                                                                                            NH
                                                II                                                                                               N
           Fe
      His       OH2                                                                   HO                                                enzymes314selected
           Asp

   α-KG NHI enzyme                                                                    O
      sequences

    Identify α-KG NHI                                                                      NH                                         70%
  enzyme sequences                                                                                                                                                               of enzymes are
                                                                                                                                                                      uncharacterized


                                                                                        NH
                                                                                O
     Protein families
  ~265,000 sequences                                                                                                                         13.7%
                                                                                                                                                           average sequence
 Filter protein sequences                                                                                                                                            percent identity
  by percent similarity                                                                      OH



                                                                                                          Characterized
                                                                                        enzyme                 N                        78%
                                                                                                        Uncharacterized          H                                   of enzymes
       SSN                                                                            enzyme                                                  overexpressed
   ~27,000 sequences        Node (selected enzyme)    Node (not selected enzyme)     Edge
                                                                                        Edge

Fig. 2 | Rationale and curation of a diverse α-KG NHI enzyme library, aKGLib1.   were used as a seed for the generation of a SSN (e-value = 5, UniRef90),
a, Abbreviated catalytic cycle and enzymatic transformations with α-KG-        which, after filtering, resulted in the network shown containing 27,005
dependent C–H functionalization in natural product biosynthesis. In the active     protein sequences (alignment score = 50, organic full layout). 314 enzymes
site of α-KG-dependent enzymes, iron is complexed by two histidine residues       (purple) representing 1.16% of the total sequences (grey) were selected across
and either a carboxylate-containing residue (R = Asp/Glu) or an environmentally   160 clusters, to generate a diverse enzyme library. c, Trends in substrates
sourced halide (R = Ala/Gly). On α-KG binding and oxidation by atmospheric       within clusters of a SSN and efficacy of aKGLib1. The sequences in the SSN
oxygen, the active iron(iv)-oxo species can initiate hydrogen atom abstraction    at alignment score = 75 contain 94 enzymes that have previously been
from the substrate to yield the iron(iii)-hydroxy species and a radical            characterized (purple diamonds) and 220 sequences that are previously
intermediate. This intermediate can undergo structural rearrangements         uncharacterized (lavender circles, 70% of total library). In clusters containing
before being terminated by rebound hydroxylation, carbocation formation       several characterized proteins, the known compatible common scaffold
or halogenation (functionalization by α-KG NHI enzymes in natural product         is highlighted. On performing a multisequence percent identity matrix, it
biosynthesis shown in green) and generate succinate as a by-product.          was found that sequences only contained 13.7% shared identity, on average.
b, Workflow to curate a bioinformatics-guided α-KG-dependent NHI enzyme    On transformation and overexpression in E. coli, the presence of protein was
library (aKGLib1). The enzyme library was selected by collecting characterized    investigated through gel electrophoresis, in which 78% of aKGLib1 showed
of-interest enzyme sequences, which led to the inclusion of protein families       soluble protein overexpressed at the expected molecular weight.
IPR008775, IPR005123, IPR027443, IPR026992 and IPR044861. These families


neighbours within the BioCatSet1 database were identified (Fig. 4b). The    list, or subsets identified in decreasing order (k), were used to measure
compatible enzymes for each neighbouring substrate were retrieved   the precision@k, recall@k, enrichment@k and normalized discounted
and the ten most similar enzymes within aKGLib1 were used to populate   cumulative gain (nDCG)@k (Fig. 4b). precision@k measures the frac-
an output for the ranking model. The entirety of the output enzyme   tion of entries within the list that are known to be compatible with the

                                                                                                  Nature  |  Vol 646  |  2 October 2025  |  111


[PDF physical page 5]
Article

 a   Biocatalytic reactions examined
                                     OH                                Scope of substrates and enzymes screened in high-throughput experimentation

                   NHI whole-cell pellet,
                     α-KG (2 mM),
        H           NaAsc (1 mM),                                                                                                             215
                     FeSO4 (0.1 mM)         Hydroxylation             Desaturation                            +                                      discovered
                                                                                                                                                                            reactions
                TES buffer pH 7.5 (50 mM),                                     Cl
             5% DMSO, 10% toluene,
                    30 °C, 300 rpm, 4 h
  Substrate (1 mM)
                                                                                         111 substrates          314 enzymes            64% hydroxylation
                                    H                               32% were converted    38% showed activity          18% desaturation
                                            Rearrangement             Chlorination                                                    18% mixed

 b   Diversity of substrates with discovered NHI-mediated reactivity
                                                                                                                           Cl
                   OH                 O   Me        Me  HO   O
                      O
           HO                                OH            OH        HO               O  H                   H   N
                                                                                           N   NH          HO
                                                                                                   S
                   O              O     Me O    Me                      O   NH          O  O      MeO
                               Me
                                          OH          HO             Me
 MeO       OMe
                                                                                                               N
                              O                                   4                             5
          1                  OH     HO    Me                                                                                       6
                            2                     3
                                                                                       OH
     Observed reaction                                                                                      Ph
    No reaction found                                                                                      Ph                OH
     Not screened
                                                                                                               O

       15                                                                                                             OH
                                                                                                                                       7
       O                                                                                                          Me  Me
   H
   N
          OH

                                                                                                                                              8
                                                        12
                                                                           11                  10                  9                   N     H            14                       13              Me
                                         Me
                                                                                                   MeO           H                                  Me         O                 H                                                                        N               H   H                            N                                                                                               N             H       H
                                                             N
  HS        OH   MeO              N                                                                           N               H       MeO        N      O
        NH2                            Me            Me                                   N
                                                                                             H                O

Fig. 3 | High-throughput reaction discovery workflow and diversity of       enzymes in triplicate. 32% of substrates underwent biocatalytic transformations
biocatalytic reactions discovered. a, Biocatalytic reactions were investigated   and 38% of the enzymes showed activity with at least one substrate. This reaction
in 96-well plates, in which substrate (1 mM in DMSO) was added to a reaction      platform generated 215 new compatible enzyme and substrate pairs.
mixture containing α-KG-dependent NHI enzymes in whole-cell pellet format     Discovered reactions are represented as a sunburst diagram, including
(40% vol/vol of roughly 200 mg ml−1 50 mM TES pH 7.5 suspensions), α-KG        hydroxylation (dark green, 64%), desaturation (light green, 18%) and mixed
(2 mM in H2O), sodium ascorbate (NaAsc, 1 mM in H2O) and iron(ii) sulfate        reaction outcomes (medium green, 14% hydroxylation/desaturation
heptahydrate (FeSO4, 0.1 mM in H2O) and then treated with toluene (10% vol/      combination, 4% rearrangement). b, All substrates mapped in chemical space.
vol) to a final volume of 50 µl. Reactions were incubated at 30 °C while shaking     Substrates with activity (dark blue, n = 35), substrates without any observed
at 300 rpm (15-mm orbital radius) for 4 h. Reactions were quenched, pooled        activity (light blue, n = 76) and further substrates (grey, n = 335) are represented
and filtered to yield an analytical sample containing one enzyme with five        in chemical space. This was generated by using the charge/protonation states
substrates (0.100 µM) and all generated reaction products. Reactions were       of substrates at pH 7.5, calculating their MORFEUS descriptors, performing a
monitored by LC-MS using a 3-min reverse-phase method to identify unreacted    principal component analysis and representing the substrates as values of PC1
substrate, hydroxylation, desaturation, rearrangement and chlorination        and PC2. Part of the substrates with identified activity are shown in respect to
products by mass (functionalization shown in green). Using this high-throughput    their position in chemical space.
reaction platform, 111 unique substrates were scrutinized against 314 NHI

input and recall@k describes the fraction of entries compatible with   substrates for each similar enzyme are retrieved and their nearest
the input that were populated within the prediction list. enrichment@k   neighbours in chemical space are identified to generate a substrate
compares the precision with what would be achieved by randomly   rank list. In a similar fashion, precision@k, recall@k, enrichment@k
sampling BioCatSet1. nDCG@k reflects a weighted version of precision,  and nDCG@k are calculated for the generated substrate prediction list.
for which entries ranked higher have a greater contribution to the total     After generating the BioCatSet1 dataset, designing the machine
score. Ideally, at a low value of k, these metrics are high, signifying the   learning pipeline and establishing evaluation metrics, we trained an effi-
curation of a streamlined rank list.                                      cient model to navigate across substrate chemical and protein sequence
 We anticipated that this dataset and approach could also be used to   space. A key step in this process was determining the most appropriate
navigate from a given protein sequence to an area of chemical space to   data-splitting strategy. For a rank-list-based task, the possible division of
answer the question of which substrate a given enzyme might trans-   train–test data include substrate-oriented, enzyme-oriented or a simul-
form. Thus, we designed a complementary enzyme-to-substrate   taneous substrate/enzyme split (Fig. 4c). For the substrate-to-enzyme
model. In this approach, each enzyme is compared with the members   model, we implemented a 50/50 training/test split based on the sub-
of aKGLib1 to identify its most similar sequences. The compatible   strate data and likewise performed a 50/50 training/test split based

112  |  Nature  |  Vol 646  |  2 October 2025


[PDF physical page 6]
a   Machine learning data preparation



                                                           MORFEUS                                     Multidimension
                                                                                                                                          reduction

       215                     139                                                   119 substrates                              21 parameters                                Chemical space    discovered                      reported
      reactions        reactions


                                                                  Compare sequences                                Quantify similarity                                         Machine learning
           All known reactions                                                                                                                                                    model input




                                                    163 enzymes                             SSN                              Sequence similarity matrix

b   Machine learning design

      Substrate-oriented                 Chemical space                    Machine learning        Sequence space                          Enzyme-oriented                        Training metrics
     enzyme predictions                                                                  input                                                          substrate predictions
                                                                                                                                                                                    precision@k = sum hits@k
                                                                                                                                                                                                         k

                                                                                                                                                                                                  recall@k = sum hits@k



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          generation                                                                                                                                     generation                                                                                                                           sum hits                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1)                                                                                                                                  DCG@k = ∑i=1p  log2(ihit?+                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    list                                                     list

                                                                                                                                         DCG@k    In                                            Rank                                                Reaction                                                                            Rank                                 In            nDCG@k = IDCG@k
                                                                                   Substrate
                                                                                   Principal component analysis
                                                                       Sequence                                                                                enrichment@k = sum hits@k(lib)
                                                                Sequence similarity analysis                                                                                        k(sum hits)
                Out                                                                                                                    Out

                  Substrate in BioCatSet1          Neighbouring substrates      Enzyme in BioCatSet1       Neighbouring enzymes                Predicted reactions (hit)             Predicted reactions (no hit)

c   Building and optimizing the machine learning models
            Division of training and test set                                 Hyperparameter optimization                                          Comparing baseline and GBM performance
                                                                     5                                                                                              0.25                           15
                   50% data                                                                                 depth                                                  0.06                                 0.4        0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                       10  model                                                                                                                        tree 3                                                0.04                                          0.15
                                                                                                                                                                              0.10                                                                                                                                                                           0.2                                                                                                                                                                                       5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         recall@k    nDCG@k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        precision@k 0.02                                                                                                                                                                              0.05                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 enrichment@k                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Maximum 1                                                                                      models
                                                                                                                                                                                       0                                                                                                                  0                                                                                                                                                          0                                                                                                                                              0
        Substrates                          Enzymes                         25    50    75   100                     0   10   20   30   40   50               0   10   20   30   40   50     50% training                    100% training                      Number of trees                                   trained                Number of predictions, k                   Number of predictions, k        Substrate-oriented
                                                                                  0.050 0.025   0                  and
          Substrate (train)      Data (train)     Enzyme (train)                                                                                         precision@k      GBM        nDCG@10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 optimization              Change in nDCG@10          Substrate (test)      Data (test)     Enzyme (test)                                                                                                                                                                                         baseline                                  recall@k              Baseline        enrichment@k
                                                                                                                                      Model               0    –0.100  –0.200        of
                   50% data                                     6                                                    0.3                                 1.0        0.66                           15
                                                                                                                                                                           0.8                                                                                                                                                                              0.64  model                                                                                                                                                    depth                                                                                                                                                                                       10                                                                                                                                       0.2                                                                                                                                                                           0.6                                                                                                                                                                              0.62                                                                                                                             tree 4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Performance                                                                                                                                                                              0.60                                                                                                                                       0.1                                                                                                                                                                                       5                                                                                                                                                                           0.4   recall@k   nDCG@k                                                                    2                                                                                                                                                                                                                  precision@k                                     0.2        0.58                                                                                                                                                                            enrichment@k                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Maximum                                               0                           0          0.56                           0
         Substrates                                        Enzymes                                                                                                                        10   20                                                                                                                                  30   40                                                                                                                                            50               0                                                                                                                                                                 10   20                                                                                                                                                                          30   40                                                                                                                                                                                    50                                                                          25                                                                                50                                                                                      75   100                     0       Enzyme-oriented   100%                training                  50%                                                            training                                                                                                              Number                                                                                                                                                                 of predictions,                                                                                                                                                               k                                                                                                                                                    Number                                                                                                                                                                                                                    of predictions,                                                                                                                                                                                                              k                                                                      Number                                                                                                          of trees

Fig. 4 | Machine learning approach, model building and output. a, The 215      substrates at low k is represented. c, Division of train–test split in a substrate-
newly discovered reactions were combined with all reported reactions          to-enzyme (top) and enzyme-to-substrate (bottom) rank list task. For the
(147 total, 139 not experimentally validated) for enzyme sequences in aKGLib1.    substrate-oriented model, a substrate split was chosen to allow for the
119 substrates, from discovered and literature reactions, were parameterized     introduction of new substrates, without the high data cost of a dual split, and
with MORFEUS before undergoing principal component analysis of the 21         likewise in the enzyme-oriented model, an enzyme split was chosen. Training of
features. Enzyme sequences were used to generate a SSN at alignment          a substrate-oriented gradient-boosted model identifies the optimal number of
score = 5. Alignment scores were normalized as a fraction of the maximum        trees (50) and tree depth (2) and in the enzyme-oriented model, the optimal
percent identity to generate the alignment score percent (AS %). b, A machine    number of trees (100) and tree depth (6) were found. Machine learning models
learning model was designed to map a substrate (dark blue) or enzyme (dark      with the parameter optimization incorporated were evaluated against the
purple) of interest, identify its nearest neighbours (light blue or light purple,      baseline models to calculate precision, recall, nDCG and enrichment at various
respectively), identify their compatible enzyme sequences (dark purple) and     degrees of k. The GBM model is represented as a solid line and the baseline
substrates (dark blue) and populate a rank list with their nearest neighbours       linear model is indicated by a dashed line. Precision and nDCG are shown in
(light purple or light blue, respectively). Metrics to evaluate the rank lists are      dark green and recall and enrichment are shown in light green.
shown and optimization to populate the rank list with compatible enzymes and

on the enzyme data for the enzyme-to-substrate model. This unusual   than would be observed by randomly sampling aKGLib1 (Supplemen-
equal split between training and test sets was made to avoid potential   tary Table 8). To further minimize the experimental burden associated
biases caused by uneven dataset sizes.                              with enzyme screening, a model that rewards populating the enzyme
  As a baseline model, we built a simple substrate-to-enzyme predic-   prediction list with compatible enzymes at a low k was needed. After
tion ranking formula that weighed the distance in chemical space over   optimization, we found that distance over five dimensions of chemi-
two dimensions and the distance in protein sequence space linearly.   cal space provided a more robust calculation for chemical similar-
This model was able to enrich the predictions ranked in the top ten    ity. To further improve performance, we trained a gradient-boosted
positions with enzymes compatible with each substrate >4-fold better   decision tree ensemble model (GBM)48 with YetiRank loss function49.

                                                                                                 Nature  |  Vol 646  |  2 October 2025  |  113


[PDF physical page 7]
Article

This model offers an advantage with arbitrarily complex relationships  produced the greatest amount of product on the analytical scale was
and is relatively robust to overfitting when using proper hyperparam-  used for a 50-mg-scale reaction from which hydroxylated product 17
eters50. The number of trees and their depth were optimized using a  was isolated in 35% isolated yield.
grid search procedure50, yielding a model of 50 trees with a depth of 2     Similar success was achieved for more substrates tested in CATNIP.
(Fig. 4c).                                                       For example, matridine (18, train set), a synthetic precursor towards
  The performance of the substrate-to-enzyme GBM was compared   matrine natural products provided by Kerkovius et al.51, was hydroxy-
with the baseline linear model. The GBM has a higher nDCG than the   lated by seven of the top ten enzymes predicted. From a 50-mg-scale
baseline model at all values of k. Furthermore, the top ten predicted   reaction, (12S)-hydroxymatridine (19) was isolated in 50% yield (Sup-
enzymes are >7-fold more likely to be compatible with the input sub-   plementary Fig. 34). Also, seven of the top ten enzymes predicted to
strate than through random sampling of aKGLib1. At low values of k   transform 6-methyleneandrost-4-ene-3,17-dione (20, test set) led to
(k < 20), the GBM outperforms the baseline model in precision, indicat-   productive reactions. On the preparative scale, 20 was converted in a
ing that the GBM is most well suited for the curation of a focused enzyme  12% yield to the oxidative alkene cleavage product 21 (Supplementary
prediction list (Supplementary Table 8). Given this performance, we   Fig. 35). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first example of an
used a GBM to build the final workflow. Analysis of feature importance  α-KG NHI enzyme performing oxidative alkene cleavage of this type.
revealed that PC3, which mostly comprises two dipole moments and   Moreover, since the time that our machine learning models and predic-
nucleofugality, has the greatest weight on the model, followed by PC1   tive workflow were built, new reactions have been reported with this class
(most heavily comprising dispersion descriptors, solvent-accessible   of enzymes, providing extra test cases for CATNIP. For example, small
surface area and volume) and the alignment score percent (Supple-   molecules that Renata and colleagues experimentally determined as
mentary Figs. 30 and 31).                                          compatible substrates of enzymes within this library were in agreement
  Following this model development, we trained an enzyme-to-   with CATNIP substrate-to-enzyme outputs52 (Supplementary Fig. 36).
substrate prediction rank model. The baseline model was construc­    The enzyme-to-substrate model was tested in a similar fashion
ted using the distance in five dimensions of chemical space and nearest-   (Fig. 5b). Using NHI123 from Schizosaccharomyces pombe (test set)
neighbours calculations were extended to include the training set of   as an input sequence, Clustal Omega was used to identify the ten
sequence space and entirety of chemical space in the algorithm. The  most similar enzymes within aKGLib1. The substrates associated with
hyperparameters of a GBM approach were optimized on the basis of   these enzymes were retrieved, providing insight into the potential
nDCG at k = 10, yielding a model of 100 trees with a depth of 6. With   regions of chemical space compatible with these sequences. The ten
these optimizations, the precision, recall, nDCG and enrichment were   best-ranked substrates, largely made up of monocyclic and bicyclic
each measured at various rankings of k. Although minimal differences   oxygen-containing molecules, were tested as substrates in reactions
in these metrics were observed between the baseline and GBM models,   with NHI123. Four of these substrates were oxidized by NHI123. The top
these results highlight the generality of the GBM approach, even in   ranked prediction, substrate 22, was transformed by NHI123 to a single
challenging scenarios (Supplementary Tables 12 and 13).             product in 7% conversion (Supplementary Fig. 37). Similarly, the top
                                                             ranked substrate for NHI177 from Photorhabdus thracensis (test set),
                                                        humulene (12), was transformed by NHI177 to deliver a single oxidized
CATNIP: a web app for prediction of biocatalytic          product in 41% conversion (Supplementary Fig. 38). To test the accu-
reactions                                                       racy of this model beyond enzymes within BioCatSet1, we submitted
With two machine learning models constructed, we created an interface   TqaL from Streptomyces violaceusniger (external validation) to CATNIP
to allow others to access predictions between α-KG NHI enzymes and   to identify the region of chemical space proposed to be compatible
small-molecule substrates. We created CATNIP (https://catnip.cheme.   with the input enzyme sequence. The top 12 ranked substrates were
cmu.edu/), a web platform that allows scientists to interact directly   subjected to analytical-scale reactions with TqaL, of which four were
with the substrate-to-enzyme and enzyme-to-substrate models. In   oxidized, including the second ranked substrate (23), providing an
the substrate-oriented model, users can input a chemical structure   oxidized product in 42% conversion (Supplementary Fig. 39). Although
and receive a ranked list of aKGLib1 enzymes (and the corresponding   this enzyme has no characterized activity, it is a homologue of a char-
sequences) potentially capable of transforming the targeted substrate   acterized enzyme that operates on similar amino acid substrates53,
(Supplementary Information Tutorial 1). Furthermore, users can gain   reinforcing the performance of the model.
insight into potential small-molecule substrates for NHI enzymes, using
the enzyme-to-substrate model (Supplementary Information Tutorial
2). In this model, users can submit a protein sequence and receive a  Conclusion
ranked list of small molecules beyond the scope of the training and   Overall, the development of this toolkit advances our ability to navi-
test set that may be compatible. With the information provided by   gate between chemical and protein sequence space. Specifically, the
CATNIP, the user can execute a highly focused set of experiments to   curation of aKGLib1, a diverse NHI enzyme library comprising >300
identify new biocatalytic reactivity. This strategy effectively derisks   wild-type proteins with low sequence identity and profiling of the
the implementation of biocatalysis in target-oriented synthesis by   biocatalytic activity of these enzymes against >100 small-molecule
making use of machine learning.                                     substrates led to the discovery of 215 new reactions. This dataset was
  The CATNIP substrate-to-enzyme workflow was tested with a selec-  combined with literature-reported reactions to make BioCatSet1,
tion of substrates, starting with the commercially available plant alka-  which was used to train two GBMs, generating substrate-to-enzyme
loid sparteine (16, train set; Fig. 5a). Sparteine (16) was mapped to  and enzyme-to-substrate rank lists as outputs. With these models, we
chemical space and CATNIP determined the ten nearest substrates   created CATNIP, an open-access web interface that enables stream-
within BioCatSet1, which includes highly decorated nitrogen heterocy-   lined biocatalytic reaction discovery. The power of these tools was
cles, specifically a piperidine, a bicyclic amidine, five indolizidines and   demonstrated through expedited biocatalytic reaction discovery on
three tetracyclic diamines. These neighbour substrates fed the machine   substrates and enzymes outside the dataset. These reactions represent
learning model to generate a ranked list of enzymes, which contained  new connections between chemical and protein sequence space, creat-
four characterized enzyme sequences and six previously uncharacter-   ing opportunities for further exploration of the landscapes through
ized sequences, which were tested in reactions with sparteine (16).   substrate and protein engineering. We anticipate that this approach
Seven of the ten reactions conducted resulted in a hydroxylation prod-   can be broadly applied to further enzyme families and reaction classes,
uct as observed by LC-MS (Supplementary Fig. 33). The enzyme that   offering a method to navigate between chemical and protein sequence

114  |  Nature  |  Vol 646  |  2 October 2025


[PDF physical page 8]
 a   Substrate-oriented discovery of biocatalytic reactions using substrate-to-enzyme CATNIP

      Substrate of interest                      Substrate of interest         Top ranked enzymes                            Product 1                   Characterized product
                                             Nearest                                                    neighbours                                                                   Unranked enzymes                             Product 2                H      H                                              Substrates                                                                      in model             N                                               Control                                                       substrates                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 count                                     N
      N                                                                                                                          Ion                              N            OH             H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    enzyme                  H
        16, (–)-sparteine                                                                                                                    17 via NHI304
       Train set validation                                    123456789                                                                                                          10X                 35% yield                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               optimal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             screen                                                                                      CATNIP                                                                                                                                                                       with
       H   H                                                                                                H    H             N                      into                                                                                                                                                                                                                       reaction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 count                          HO             N         H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       reaction                 H
       N                                                                                                                         Ion                                  N

                                                                                                                 H           H                                                                                                                                               substrates                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             analytical
           18, matridine                                     123456789 X                   19 via NHI304
                                                                                                            50% yield       Train set validation                      Enter                                                                            10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Perform                                                                                                                     Me O              Me O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         preparative-scale

                                                                                                              Me   H
       Me   H                                                                                                                                                                                          count                                                                             Perform
                                                                                                                                       Ion                                   H   H          H   H
 O                                                                                              O
                                              12345678910X                   O
             20                                                                                                                         21 via NHI091
        Test set validation                     Chemical space             Sequence space                 Enzyme selection                   12% yield

 b  Enzyme-oriented identiﬁcation of compatible substrates using enzyme-to-substrate CATNIP
     Enzyme of interest                                                                                                                         Compatible substrate
                                      Top ranked enzymes          Nearest neighbours           50%     Product 1
                                        Unranked enzymes            Substrates in model                        Product 2                       Me
                                                                             Control substrates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Relative                           HO        OH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            conversion
                                                                                                         Me        COMe
                                                                                                                                             22          NHI123                                                         0% 123456789                                                                                                            10              7% conversion      Test set validation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             screen                                                                          50%                                Me
                                                                                                          Me                                                                                     CATNIP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  substrates                                                         into                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   substrate                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Relative                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          conversion                           Me            Me                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          compatible                                                                                                                  sequence                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      analytical   0%          NHI177                                                                                                                                             12                                               12345678910      Test set                validation                                                                                                           41% conversion                                                                       Enter                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Identify                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Perform   50%
                                                                                                       O
                                                                                                     MeO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Relative                                   H2N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         conversion

                                                                    0%
                                               123456789101112                    N
                                                                                                              H
     TqaL Streptomyces                                                                                                                        23
         violaceusniger                      Sequence space              Chemical space                     Reaction discovery                 42% conversion
       External validation

Fig. 5 | Use of the machine learning model for CATNIP. a, Demonstration        products were isolated and characterized for the three substrates of interest,
of substrate-to-enzyme CATNIP with sparteine (16), matridine (18) and          providing (4S)-hydroxysparteine (17), (12S)-hydroxymatridine (19) and androst-
6-methyleneandrost-4-ene-3,17-dione (20). In the chemical space map, the       4-ene-3,6,17-trione (21) in 35%, 50% and 12% isolated yields, respectively.
substrate of interest (open black circle), the nearest substrates over five          b, Demonstration of the enzyme-to-substrate CATNIP model with NHI123,
dimensions (dark blue circle), unchosen substrates in BioCatSet1 (light blue     NHI177 and TqaL. Each enzyme was mapped to sequence space, which shows
circle) and substrates without known biocatalytic activity (grey circle) are          all enzymes in the cluster (SSN at alignment score = 75), with the ten most similar
shown. The sequence space shows all enzymes in the cluster (SSN at alignment    enzymes shown in decreasing shades of purple. Enzymes not predicted in the
score = 75) with predicted compatible enzymes (k = 10), with rank shown in       top ten sequences are represented as grey nodes. The predicted compatible
decreasing shades of purple. Enzymes not predicted in the top ten sequences     substrates are identified (dark blue) and mapped to chemical space among all
are represented as grey nodes. The top ten predicted enzyme sequences were     substrates in BioCatSet1 (light blue) and substrates outside the dataset (grey).
prepared in whole-cell E. coli and examined for relative product formation in     The best-ranked substrates were tested with the enzyme of interest in triplicate
triplicate. The x-axis contains the enzyme prediction rank, for which X = no      and the relative product conversion was measured. The x-axis shows the rank of
enzyme control. The y-axis shows the average relative extracted ion count (n = 3).   the small molecule substrate in decreasing order. The y-axis shows the average
Several products are represented with various shades of green. The enzyme     normalized relative conversion, as compared with the empty vector control of
generating the most product was then produced (1 -l cultures in Terrific Broth)    each sample (n = 3). The structure for the best-ranked substrate for each enzyme
and used in 50-mg-scale biocatalytic reactions as clarified cell lysate. Oxidation    is shown as 22, 12 and 23, respectively.




                                                                                                 Nature  |  Vol 646  |  2 October 2025  |  115


[PDF physical page 9]
Article
space. Furthermore, this innovation effectively derisks the application    30.  Wang, X., Quinn, D., Moody, T. S. & Huang, M. ALDELE: all-purpose deep learning toolkits
                                                                                                              for predicting the biocatalytic activities of enzymes. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 64, 3123–3139
of biocatalysts in organic synthesis.                                                      (2024).
                                                                                                            31.  Busch, F., Brummund, J., Calderini, E., Schürmann, M. & Kourist, R. Cofactor generation
                                                                                      cascade for α-ketoglutarate and Fe(II)-dependent dioxygenases. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng.
Online content                                                                             8, 8604–8612 (2020).
                                                                                                32.  Zwick, C. R. & Renata, H. Harnessing the biocatalytic potential of iron- and α-ketoglutarate-
Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summa-        dependent dioxygenases in natural product total synthesis. Nat. Prod. Rep. 37, 1065–1079
ries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowl-         (2020).
                                                                                             33.  Gao, S. S., Naowarojna, N., Cheng, R., Liu, X. & Liu, P. Recent examples of α-ketoglutarate-
edgements, peer review information; details of author contributions       dependent mononuclear non-haem iron enzymes in natural product biosyntheses.
and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability         Nat. Prod. Rep. 35, 792–837 (2018).
are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09519-5.               34.  Hausinger, R. P. Fe(II)/α-ketoglutarate-dependent hydroxylases and related enzymes.
                                                                                                                         Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 39, 21–68 (2004).
                                                                                               35.  McLean, K. J., Luciakova, D., Belcher, J., Tee, K. L. & Munro, A. W. Biological diversity of
1.     Li, J., Amatuni, A. & Renata, H. Recent advances in the chemoenzymatic synthesis of            cytochrome P450 redox partner systems. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 851, 299–317 (2015).
     bioactive natural products. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 55, 111–118 (2020).                       36.  Schofield, C. J. & Zhang, Z. Structural and mechanistic studies on
2.   Romero, E. et al. Enzymatic late-stage modifications: better late than never. Angew. Chem.         2-oxoglutarate-dependent oxygenases and related enzymes. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 9,
       Int. Ed. 60, 16824–16855 (2021).                                                             722–731 (1999).
3.   Bayer, T., Wu, S., Snajdrova, R., Baldenius, K. & Bornscheuer, U. T. An update: enzymatic        37.  Seide, S. et al. From enzyme to preparative cascade reactions with immobilized enzymes:
     synthesis for industrial applications. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 64, e202505976 (2025).              tuning Fe(II)/α-ketoglutarate-dependent lysine hydroxylases for application in
4.   Marshall, J. R., Mangas-Sanchez, J. & Turner, N. J. Expanding the synthetic scope of             biotransformations. Catalysts 12, 354 (2022).
     biocatalysis by enzyme discovery and protein engineering. Tetrahedron 82, 131926        38.  Hegg, E. L. & Que, L. Jr The 2-His-1-carboxylate facial triad — an emerging structural motif
     (2021).                                                                                                   in mononuclear non-heme iron(II) enzymes. Eur. J. Biochem. 250, 625–629 (1997).
5.   Yang, J., Li, F.-Z. & Arnold, F. H. Opportunities and challenges for machine learning-assisted    39.  Zallot, R., Oberg, N. & Gerlt, J. A. The EFI web resource for genomic enzymology tools:
    enzyme engineering. ACS Cent. Sci. 10, 226–241 (2024).                                         leveraging protein, genome, and metagenome databases to discover novel enzymes and
6.    Bell, E. L. et al. Biocatalysis. Nat. Rev. Methods Primers 1, 46 (2021).                             metabolic pathways. Biochemistry 58, 4169–4182 (2019).
7.    Buller, R. et al. From nature to industry: harnessing enzymes for biocatalysis. Science 382,    40.  Fisher, B. F., Snodgrass, H. M., Jones, K. A., Andorfer, M. C. & Lewis, J. C. Site-selective C–H
    eadh8615 (2023).                                                                         halogenation using flavin-dependent halogenases identified via family-wide activity
8.   Garzón-Posse, F., Becerra-Figueroa, L., Hernández-Arias, J. & Gamba-Sánchez, D. Whole             profiling. ACS Cent. Sci. 5, 1844–1856 (2019).
      cells as biocatalysts in organic transformations. Molecules 23, 1265 (2018).                     41.  Atkinson, H. J., Morris, J. H., Ferrin, T. E. & Babbitt, P. C. Using sequence similarity networks
9.   Tibrewal, N. & Tang, Y. Biocatalysts for natural product biosynthesis. Annu. Rev. Chem.              for visualization of relationships across diverse protein superfamilies. PLoS One 4, e4345
     Biomol. Eng. 5, 347–366 (2014).                                                               (2009).
10.  Roiban, G.-D. et al. Development of an enzymatic process for the production of            42.  Copp, J. N., Akiva, E., Babbitt, P. C. & Tokuriki, N. Revealing unexplored sequence-function
     (R)-2-butyl-2-ethyloxirane. Org. Process Res. Dev. 21, 1302–1310 (2017).                      space using sequence similarity networks. Biochemistry 57, 4651–4662 (2018).
11.   Arnold, F. H. Directed evolution: bringing new chemistry to life. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 57,     43.  Pyser, J. B. et al. Stereodivergent, chemoenzymatic synthesis of azaphilone natural
    4143–4148 (2018).                                                                           products. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 18551–18559 (2019).
12.   Tobin, P. H., Richards, D. H., Callender, R. A. & Wilson, C. J. Protein engineering: a new        44.  Lima, S. T. et al. A widely distributed biosynthetic cassette is responsible for diverse plant
      frontier for biological therapeutics. Curr. Drug. Metab. 15, 743–756 (2014).                        side chain cross-linked cyclopeptides. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 62, e202218082 (2023).
13.  Novick, S. J. et al. Engineering an amine transaminase for the efficient production of a        45.  Ju, S. et al. A biocatalytic platform for asymmetric alkylation of α-keto acids by mining
      chiral sacubitril precursor. ACS Catal. 11, 3762–3770 (2021).                               and engineering of methyltransferases. Nat. Commun. 14, 5704 (2023).
14.  Lovelock, S. L. et al. The road to fully programmable protein catalysis. Nature 606, 49–58    46.  Jacot-Descombes, L., Turcani, L. & Jorner, K. morfeus (computer software). https://github.
     (2022).                                                                                      com/digital-chemistry-laboratory/morfeus (accessed 29 August 2025).
15.   Yu, T. et al. Enzyme function prediction using contrastive learning. Science 379, 1358–1363     47.  Ropp, P. J., Kaminsky, J. C., Yablonski, S. & Durrant, J. D. Dimorphite-DL: an open-source
     (2023).                                                                          program for enumerating the ionization states of drug-like small molecules. J. Cheminform.
16.  Hon, J. et al. EnzymeMiner: automated mining of soluble enzymes with diverse structures,            11, 14 (2019).
     catalytic properties and stabilities. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, W104–W109 (2020).               48.  Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R. & Friedman, J. in The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining,
17.  Schnoes, A. M., Brown, S. D., Dodevski, I. & Babbitt, P. C. Annotation error in public              Inference, and Prediction 605–624 (Springer, 2009).
     databases: misannotation of molecular function in enzyme superfamilies. PLoS Comput.     49.  Lyzhin, I., Ustimenko, A., Gulin, A. & Prokhorenkova, L. Which tricks are important
      Biol. 5, e1000605 (2009).                                                                            for learning to rank? Proc. 40th Intl Conf. Machine Learning (ICML 2023), PMLR 202,
18.  Robertson, D. E. et al. Exploring nitrilase sequence space for enantioselective catalysis.          23264–23278 (2023).
     Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70, 2429–2436 (2004).                                          50.  Bentéjac, C., Csörgő, A. & Martínez-Muñoz, G. A comparative analysis of gradient boosting
19.  Wahler, D., Badalassi, F., Crotti, P. & Reymond, J.-L. Enzyme fingerprints by fluorogenic             algorithms. Artif. Intell. Rev. 54, 1937–1967 (2021).
    and chromogenic substrate arrays. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 40, 4457–4460 (2001).              51.  Kerkovius, J. K. et al. A pyridine dearomatization approach to the matrine-type lupin
20.  Finnigan, W., Hepworth, L. J., Flitsch, S. L. & Turner, N. J. RetroBioCat as a computer-aided           alkaloids. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144, 15938–15943 (2022).
     synthesis planning tool for biocatalytic reactions and cascades. Nat. Catal. 4, 98–104      52.  Xu, H., Zhao, J. & Renata, H. Discovery, characterization and synthetic application of a
     (2021).                                                                             promiscuous nonheme iron biocatalyst with dual hydroxylase/desaturase activity. Angew.
21.  Fansher, D. J., Besna, J. N., Fendri, A. & Pelletier, J. N. Choose your own adventure: a          Chem. Int. Ed. 63, e202409143 (2024).
    comprehensive database of reactions catalyzed by cytochrome P450 BM3 variants.       53.  Bunno, R., Awakawa, T., Mori, T. & Abe, I. Aziridine formation by a FeII/α-ketoglutarate
    ACS Catal. 14, 5560–5592 (2024).                                                     dependent oxygenase and 2-aminoisobutyrate biosynthesis in fungi. Angew. Chem. Int.
22.  Ma, E. J. et al. Machine-directed evolution of an imine reductase for activity and                Ed. 60, 15827–15831 (2021).
     stereoselectivity. ACS Catal. 11, 12433–12445 (2021).
23.  Ao, Y.-F. et al. Structure- and data-driven protein engineering of transaminases for            Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
     improving activity and stereoselectivity. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 62, e202301660 (2023).      published maps and institutional affiliations.
24.  Supekar, S. et al. A machine learning-guided approach to navigate the substrate activity
    scope of galactose oxidase: application in the conversion of pharmaceutically relevant                Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
     bulky secondary alcohols. ACS Catal. 14, 17233–17243 (2024).                                          NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any
25.  King, B. R., Sumida, K. H., Caruso, J. L., Baker, D. & Zalatan, J. G. Computational stabilization                  non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
     of a non-heme iron enzyme enables efficient evolution of new function. Angew. Chem. Int.     format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide
     Ed. 64, e202414705 (2025).                                                       a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You
26.  Mou, Z. et al. Machine learning-based prediction of enzyme substrate scope: application    do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article
     to bacterial nitrilases. Proteins 89, 336–347 (2021).                                        or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s
27.  Yang, M. et al. Functional and informatics analysis enables glycosyltransferase activity       Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
     prediction. Nat. Chem. Biol. 14, 1109–1117 (2018).                                            material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
28.  Kroll, A., Ranjan, S., Engqvist, M. K. M. & Lercher, M. J. A general model to predict small       permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
    molecule substrates of enzymes based on machine and deep learning. Nat. Commun. 14,    permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
    2787 (2023).                                                                           creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
29.  Goldman, S., Das, R., Yang, K. K. & Coley, C. W. Machine learning modeling of family wide
     enzyme-substrate specificity screens. PLoS Comput. Biol. 18, e1009853 (2022).        © The Author(s) 2025





116  |  Nature  |  Vol 646  |  2 October 2025


[PDF physical page 10]
                                                                                       Wilmington) for their generous contribution of complex molecules and K. V. Brown (University
Data availability                                                                   of Michigan) and R. Snajdrova and E. Tassano (Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Inc.)
                                                                                                         for helpful discussions.
All of the experiments discussed are provided in the Supplementary
Information. The data are available at https://huggingface.co/gomes-   Author contributions A.R.H.N., J.C.P. and A.E.P. conceptualized the high-throughput
group/catnip.                                                                       generation of connections between chemical space and protein sequence space.                                                                                                                     J.C.P. performed bioinformatic investigations, designed the enzyme library and performed
                                                                            SDS-PAGE analysis. A.E.P. developed the experimental high-throughput reaction platform,
                                                                                  performed biocatalytic reactions, analysed LC-MS data, proposed the concept for chemical
Code availability                                                      and sequence space navigation, designed the baseline metric for enzyme ranking and
                                                                                    executed part of the preparative-scale biocatalytic chemistry. T.R. generated initial MORFEUS
All of the code is available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16779318    descriptors. G.G. and D.A.B. designed and implemented the machine learning pipeline,
(ref. 54).                                                                                  including chemical space analysis, candidate generation and reranking procedures, as well as
                                                                                  developed the CATNIP platform. N.I.C. assisted in high-throughput reaction discovery and
                                                                                  performed part of the preparative-scale biocatalytic chemistry. A.R.H.N. and G.G. secured
54.  Paton, A. E. et al. Connecting chemical and protein sequence space to predict biocatalytic                                                                                       funding and oversaw the project. A.E.P., D.A.B., G.G. and A.R.H.N. wrote the manuscript, with
     reactions (v0.1). Zenodo https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16779318 (2024).                                                                                              input from all authors.

Acknowledgements This research was supported by funds from the Life Sciences Institute      Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
and the Department of Chemistry at the University of Michigan. Part of the enzyme library was
built in collaboration with the Joint Genome Institute (JGI) DNA Synthesis Program. Efforts to      Additional information
profile the reactivity of the enzyme library were supported by the Novartis Global Scholars       Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at
Program. Aspects of the data science components of this project were supported by the          https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09519-5.
Camille Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar Award (TC-20-061) and the MBioFAR Program at the         Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Gabe Gomes or
University of Michigan (A.R.H.N.). This work is part of the National Science Foundation Center      Alison R. H. Narayan.
for Chemoenzymatic Synthesis (2221346, A.R.H.N. and G.G.). G.G. thanks Carnegie Mellon        Peer review information Nature thanks Uwe Bornscheuer and the other, anonymous,
University and the departments of chemistry and chemical engineering for the start-up         reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are
support. We thank S. Reisman (California Institute of Technology), K. Brummond (University of      available.
Pittsburgh), J. Schomaker (University of Wisconsin) and J. Morgan (University of North Carolina     Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.