
[PDF physical page 1]
Genomic Analysis of the Necrotrophic Fungal Pathogens
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum and Botrytis cinerea

Joelle Amselem1,2.*, Christina A. Cuomo3.*, Jan A. L. van Kan4.*, Muriel Viaud2.*, Ernesto P. Benito5,
Arnaud Couloux6, Pedro M. Coutinho7, Ronald P. de Vries8,9, Paul S. Dyer10, Sabine Fillinger2, Elisabeth
Fournier2,11, Lilian Gout2, Matthias Hahn12, Linda Kohn13, Nicolas Lapalu1, Kim M. Plummer14, Jean-Marc
Pradier2, Emmanuel Que´villon1,15, Amir Sharon16, Adeline Simon2, Arjen ten Have17, Bettina
Tudzynski18, Paul Tudzynski18, Patrick Wincker6, Marion Andrew13, Ve´ronique Anthouard6, Ross E.
Beever19{, Rolland Beffa15, Isabelle Benoit8, Ourdia Bouzid8, Baptiste Brault1,2, Zehua Chen3, Mathias
Choquer2,15, Je´rome Colle´mare4,15, Pascale Cotton15, Etienne G. Danchin20, Corinne Da Silva6, Ange´lique
Gautier2, Corinne Giraud2, Tatiana Giraud21, Celedonio Gonzalez22, Sandrine Grossetete15, Ulrich
Gu¨ ldener23, Bernard Henrissat7, Barbara J. Howlett24, Chinnappa Kodira3¤, Matthias Kretschmer12, Anne
Lappartient15, Michaela Leroch12, Caroline Levis2, Evan Mauceli3, Ce´cile Neuve´glise25, Birgitt Oeser18,
Matthew Pearson3, Julie Poulain6, Nathalie Poussereau15, Hadi Quesneville1, Christine Rascle15, Julia
Schumacher18, Be´atrice Se´gurens6, Adrienne Sexton24, Evelyn Silva26, Catherine Sirven15, Darren M.
Soanes27, Nicholas J. Talbot27, Matt Templeton28, Chandri Yandava3, Oded Yarden29, Qiandong Zeng3,
Jeffrey A. Rollins30", Marc-Henri Lebrun1,2,15", Marty Dickman31"

1 Unite´ de Recherche Ge´nomique – Info, UR1164, INRA, Versailles, France, 2 Biologie et Gestion des Risques en Agriculture – Champignons Pathoge`nes des Plantes,
UR1290, INRA, Grignon, France, 3 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America, 4 Laboratory of Phytopathology, Wageningen
University, Wageningen, The Netherlands, 5 Departamento de Microbiologı´a y Gene´tica, Centro Hispano-Luso de Investigaciones Agrarias, Universidad de Salamanca,
Salamanca, Spain, 6 GENOSCOPE, Centre National de Se´quenc¸age, Evry, France, 7 Architecture et Fonction des Macromole´cules Biologiques, UMR6098, CNRS – Universite´
de la Me´diterrane´e et Universite´ de Provence, Marseille, France, 8 Microbiology and Kluyver Centre for Genomics of Industrial Fermentations, Utrecht, The Netherlands,
9 CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 10 School of Biology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 11 Biologie et
Ge´ne´tique des Interactions Plante-Parasite, CIRAD – INRA – SupAgro, Montpellier, France, 12 Faculty of Biology, Kaiserslautern University, Kaiserslautern, Germany,
13 Biology Department, University of Toronto, Mississauga, Canada, 14 Botany Department, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia, 15 Laboratoire de Ge´nomique
Fonctionnelle des Champignons Pathoge`nes de Plantes, UMR5240, Universite´ de Lyon 1 – CNRS – BAYER S.A.S., Lyon, France, 16 Department of Molecular Biology and
Ecology of Plants, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 17 Instituto de Investigaciones Biologicas – CONICET, Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata, Mar del Plata, Argentina,
18 Molekularbiologie und Biotechnologie der Pilze, Institut fu¨r Biologie und Biotechnologie der Pflanzen, Mu¨nster, Germany, 19 Landcare Research, Auckland, New
Zealand, 20 Interactions Biotiques et Sante´ Plantes, UMR5240, INRA – Universite´ de Nice Sophia-Antipolis – CNRS, Sophia-Antipolis, France, 21 Laboratoire d’Ecologie,
Syste´matique et Evolution, Universite´ Paris-Sud – CNRS – AgroParisTech, Orsay, France, 22 Departamento de Bioquı´mica y Biologı´a Molecular, Universidad de La Laguna,
Tenerife, Spain, 23 Helmholtz Zentrum Mu¨nchen, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, Neuherberg,
Germany, 24 School of Botany, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 25 Biologie Inte´grative du Me´tabolisme Lipidique Microbien, UMR1319, INRA – Micalis –
AgroParisTech, Thiverval-Grignon, France, 26 Fundacion Ciencia para la Vida and Facultad de Ciencias Biologicas, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile, 27 School of
Biosciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, 28 Plant and Food Research, Mt. Albert Research Centre, Auckland, New Zealand, 29 Department of Plant
Pathology and Microbiology, Hebrew University Jerusalem, Rehovot, Israel, 30 Department of Plant Pathology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of
America, 31 Institute for Plant Genomics and Biotechnology, Borlaug Genomics and Bioinformatics Center, Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas, United States of America


   Abstract

     Sclerotinia sclerotiorum and Botrytis cinerea are closely related necrotrophic plant pathogenic fungi notable for their wide
    host ranges and environmental persistence. These attributes have made these species models for understanding the
    complexity of necrotrophic, broad host-range pathogenicity. Despite their similarities, the two species differ in mating
    behaviour and the ability to produce asexual spores. We have sequenced the genomes of one strain of S. sclerotiorum and
   two strains of B. cinerea. The comparative analysis of these genomes relative to one another and to other sequenced fungal
   genomes is provided here. Their 38–39 Mb genomes include 11,860–14,270 predicted genes, which share 83% amino acid
    identity on average between the two species. We have mapped the S. sclerotiorum assembly to 16 chromosomes and found
    large-scale co-linearity with the B. cinerea genomes. Seven percent of the S. sclerotiorum genome comprises transposable
    elements compared to ,1% of B. cinerea. The arsenal of genes associated with necrotrophic processes is similar between
    the species, including genes involved in plant cell wall degradation and oxalic acid production. Analysis of secondary
    metabolism gene clusters revealed an expansion in number and diversity of B. cinerea–specific secondary metabolites
     relative to S. sclerotiorum. The potential diversity in secondary metabolism might be involved in adaptation to specific
    ecological niches. Comparative genome analysis revealed the basis of differing sexual mating compatibility systems
   between S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea. The organization of the mating-type loci differs, and their structures provide
    evidence for the evolution of heterothallism from homothallism. These data shed light on the evolutionary and mechanistic
    bases of the genetically complex traits of necrotrophic pathogenicity and sexual mating. This resource should facilitate the
    functional studies designed to better understand what makes these fungi such successful and persistent pathogens of
   agronomic crops.




      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      1                     August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 2]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



   Citation: Amselem J, Cuomo CA, van Kan JAL, Viaud M, Benito EP, et al. (2011) Genomic Analysis of the Necrotrophic Fungal Pathogens Sclerotinia sclerotiorum
  and Botrytis cinerea. PLoS Genet 7(8): e1002230. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002230

   Editor: Paul M. Richardson, Progentech, United States of America

  Received March 14, 2011; Accepted June 22, 2011; Published August 18, 2011

  Copyright:   2011 Amselem et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits
   unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.

  Funding: The Sclerotinia sclerotiorum genome project was supported by the USDA Cooperative State Research, Education and Extension Service (USDA-NRI
   2004). Sclerotinia sclerotiorum ESTs were funded by a grant to JA Rollins from USDA specific cooperative agreement 58-5442-4-281. The genome sequence of
   Botrytis cinerea strain T4 was funded by Genoscope, CEA, France. M Viaud was funded by the ‘‘Projet INRA Jeune-Equipe’’. PM Coutinho and B Henrissat were
  funded by the ANR to project E-Tricel (grant ANR-07-BIOE-006). The CAZy database is funded in part by GIS-IBiSA. DM Soanes and NJ Talbot were partly funded by
   the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council. KM Plummer was partially funded by the New Zealand Bio-Protection Research Centre, http://
   bioprotection.org.nz/. BJ Howlett and A Sexton were partially funded by the Australian Grains Research and Development Corporation, www.grdc.com.au. L Kohn
  was partially funded by NSERC Discovery Grant (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada)  - Grant number 458078. M Dickman was
   supported by the NSF grant MCB-092391 and BARD grant US-4041-07C. O Yarden was supported by BARD grant US-4041-07C. EG Danchin obtained financial
   support from the European Commission (STREP FungWall grant, contract: LSHB - CT- 2004 - 511952). A Botrytis Genome Workshop (Kaiserslautern, Germany) was
   supported by a grant from the German Science Foundation (DFG; HA1486) to M Hahn. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis,
   decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

  Competing Interests: I have read the journal’s policy and have the following conflicts: author Chinnappa Kodira currently works at 454 Life Sciences, Roche. All
   of the work reported in this manuscript was completed when he was in residence at the Broad Institute. None of the other authors have declared any competing
   interests.

   * E-mail: joelle.amselem@versailles.inra.fr (J Amselem); cuomo@broadinstitute.org (CA Cuomo); jan.vankan@wur.nl (JAL van Kan); viaud@versailles.inra.fr (M Viaud)

  ¤ Current address: 454 Life Sciences, Branford, Connecticut, United States of America

  . These authors contributed equally to this work.

  " These authors were joint senior authors on this work.

  { Deceased.


Introduction                                                                 critical virulence determinants have been identified by candidate
                                                             gene approaches [9].
  Phytopathogenic fungi have evolved a wide range of strategies                                                                 Their ability to infect different plant species and tissues under a
to  infect and  colonize  plants through both  convergent and    wide range of environmental conditions, as well as their ability to
divergent  adaptations. This  is  reflected  in the occurrence  of    produce sclerotia that survive in the soil for many years, contribute
species within common evolutionary branches with widely diverse     to  the  persistent and widespread  nature  of  these pathogens
pathogenic  lifestyles, ranging from obligate biotrophs to necro-     (Figure 1). The melanized sclerotium plays a central role in the
trophs, and from host-specific to broad host range pathogens.      lifecycle of both fungi by germinating either vegetatively for local
Operationally, necrotrophs have been defined as pathogens that     colonization or carpogenically to initiate the sexual cycle including
derive nutrients from killed host cells, biotrophs as pathogens that     the production of apothecia from which ascospores are released
derive  nutrients  from  living  tissues  and  hemibiotrophs  as     (Figure  1). Although  S.  sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea share many
pathogens that derive nutrients from a combination of feeding    developmental and physiological features, important differences
from living and killed host cells, respectively. The mechanisms that      exist in their regulation and potential for sporulation. Dispersal of
drive these adaptations remain largely enigmatic.                   both  species  is  via air-borne  spores.  S.  sclerotiorum  exclusively
  Among  the  few  pathogens  considered  to  be  exemplary    produces ascospores and not conidia (asexual spores). In contrast,
necrotrophs are the white mold fungus Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (Lib.)     B. cinerea, although capable of producing ascospores, is dispersed
de Bary and the taxonomically closely related grey mold fungus    predominantly via conidia. Furthermore the regulation of sexual
Botrytis cinerea Pers. Fr. [teleomorph Botryotinia fuckeliana (de Bary)     sporulation is quite different, S. sclerotiorum being homothallic (self–
Whetzel]. Both  fungi have  considerably broader  host ranges      fertile) [1] and B. cinerea heterothallic (requiring a sexual partner of
(.400 and .200 species, respectively) than most plant pathogens     opposite mating type) [2]. These differences in mitotic and meiotic
and  each  causes  multi-millions  of US  dollars  in  pre- and     sporulation impact not only the life histories of these fungi but also
postharvest crop losses world wide [1,2]. Necrotrophs secrete an     their epidemiology and the disease control methods employed
array of cell wall-degrading enzymes and toxins, which led to their    towards each.
reputation as relatively less adapted as compared to biotrophic     The characteristics of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea pathogenicity
fungi, which manipulate host physiology to obtain their nutrients    and  development  stand  in  stark  contrast  to  their  fellow
from living tissues. Biotrophs are widely accepted to intimately    Leotiomycete  powdery  mildew  fungi  (e.g.  Blumeria,  Erisyphe,
interact and co-evolve with  their  hosts. Recent  studies have,     Podosphaera) which are obligate biotrophs often restricted at the
however, revealed that interactions between necrotrophs and their     species level to a single host genus. The recent description of
host  plants  are  considerably more complex and  subtle than    genome sequences of two powdery mildew species [10] and two
previously appreciated. Some necrotrophs secrete effector proteins     phylogenetically distant, restricted host range necrotrophs (Phaeo-
which are internalised by host cells and interact with the host in a      sphaeria nodorum [11], Pyrenophora  teres  f.  teres [12]) provides the
gene-for-gene relationship to initiate disease, albeit in an inverse     opportunity to assess whether genomic features can be identified
manner compared to biotrophs [3]. In the case of S. sclerotiorum and     that are common to broad host range necrotrophs such as B.cinerea
B. cinerea, the active modulation of the host redox status and the    and S. sclerotiorum, yet distinct from other plant pathogenic fungi.
subversion  of host (programmed)  cell death pathways by the    Here we describe and compare the genome sequence assemblies
pathogen appear to be crucial for disease to develop [4–8]. The    and annotations for S. sclerotiorum and for two strains of B. cinerea.
availability  of molecular  tools has considerably advanced our    The comparative genome analyses of these two phytopathogenic
understanding of the infection strategies and pathogenic develop-     fungi to each other, to a closely related powdery mildew and to
ment of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea, yet only very few absolutely     distantly related necrotrophs  offer insight into common genes



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      2                     August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 3]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



                                                                                 Sclerotium  cepivorum, an  important pathogen  of  Allium, and a  Author Summary
                                                                       representative of the genus Dumontinia associated with wild plants
   Sclerotinia sclerotiorum and Botrytis cinerea are notorious       such as Anemone (Ranunculaceae). Wang et al. [13] suggest that the
  plant pathogenic fungi with very wide host ranges. They       ancestors of the lineages representing the Sclerotiniaceae and
  cause vast economic damage during crop cultivation as       Rutstroemiaceae  were  associated  with  conifers,  inferring  a
  well as  in harvested produce. These fungi are  typical       radiation of the Sclerotiniaceae and Rutstroemiaceae in associa-
  examples of necrotrophs: they first kill host plant cells and                                                                         tion with the emergence and diversification of angiosperms. Co-
  then colonize the dead tissue. The genome sequences of                                                                     evolution of Botrytis with host species has been investigated but
  the two fungi were determined  in order to examine
                                                                  evidence  is inconclusive  [18]; evidence would be concordant
  commonalities in structure and content and in order to
                                                                   phylogenies between symbiont/pathogen species and host species,
  find unique features that may distinguish them from other
                                                                        as demonstrated in Monilinia [19]. Estimates of divergence times in  pathogenic  fungi  and  from  saprotrophic  fungi.  The
                                                                    the phylogeny would require a molecular clock model that could  genomes show high sequence  identity and a  similar
  arrangement of genes. S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea differ      be violated if some lineages have undergone accelerated evolution,
   in their regulation of sexual reproduction, and the genetic       as in a radiation event. Such estimates are inexact, especially when
  basis and  its evolution could be explained from the       not calibrated, e.g., by fossil evidence.
  genome sequence. The genome sequence revealed a
   striking  difference  in  the  number  and  diversity  of     Genome organization
  secondary  metabolism gene  clusters,  which may be                                                          General genome features.  The genomes of S.  sclerotiorum
  involved in the adaptation to different ecological niches.
                                                                             strain 1980 and B. cinerea strains T4 and B05.10 were sequenced
  Altogether, there were no unique features in the genomes
                                                                     using  Sanger  technology.  High  coverage  (9.1X  and 10X  of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea that could be identified as
                                                                             respectively) was generated for S. sclerotiorum 1980 and B. cinerea   ‘‘silver bullets,’’ which distinguish these aggressive path-
                                                           T4, and a lower coverage (4.5X) for B. cinerea B05.10 (Table 1). All  ogens from other pathogenic and non-pathogenic fungi.
  These  findings  reinforce  the  quantitative,  multigenic       sequences were assembled using Arachne [20]  to generate a
  nature of necrotrophic pathogenesis.                           consensus for each genome. The three genomes are similar in size,
                                                                  ranging from 37.9 Mb to 38.8 Mb (Table 1). The slightly larger
                                                      genome size for B. cinerea B05.10 (38.8 Mb) is likely inflated due to
underlying development and pathogenesis in S. sclerotiorum and B.     the lower sequence coverage, as small scaffolds may fall into larger
cinerea, as well as genes that condition specific features of their     scaffold gaps. To assess the accuracy and completeness of the S.
pathogenic success.                                                               sclerotiorum assembly, we generated an optical map, and aligned the
                                                         34 largest of the 36 assembly scaffolds to the optical map based on
Results/Discussion                                           shared restriction sites (Figure S1). The map consists of 16 linkage
                                                                groups which likely correspond to the estimation of 16 chromo-
Phylogenetic relationship between S. sclerotiorum and B.     fsomes from pulsed-field gels of S. sclerotiorum chromosomes [21].
cinerea                                                      Microscopy in several  Botrytis  species, including B.  cinerea, has
   S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea are now the only fully sequenced     estimated 16 chromosomes [22]. The total S. sclerotiorum optical map
species in the order Helotiales and with the obligate biotroph,      size is estimated at 39.6 Mb. Since 38.0 Mb is covered by scaffolds,
Blumeria graminis, in the class Leotiomycetes of the Pezizomycotina,     approximately 1.6 Mb of sequence is missing from the assembly of
the  largest subphylum  of Ascomycota  [10,13,14]. Within the      S. sclerotiorum. Most of the uncovered regions of the map are located
Pezizomycotina, Leotiomycetes are most closely related to the     in  the  middle  of  chromosomes,  which may  correspond  to
sister lineage Sordariomycetes, and more distantly to the Euro-     centromeres (Figure S1). In many filamentous fungi, centromeres
fotiomycetes and the Dothideomycetes [14–16]. A phylogeny     consist of highly repetitive sequences which can be refractory to
based on 82 completed fungal genomes anchors a well-supported     cloning  and  therefore  sequencing  [23].  By  contrast,  most
and highly divergent Helotiales lineage including S. sclerotiorum and    chromosomes are fully covered at their telomeric ends, with 28 of
B.  cinerea  [17]. The  order   is,  however,  far  too  large and    32 chromosome ends being linked to telomeric  repeats. One
heterogeneous to be characterized by S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea    chromosome (chrR) ends in ribosomal DNA tandem repeats. The
alone. Additional species are needed to increase the phylogenetic     assembly of B. cinerea T4 was verified by generating a genetic map
resolution.                                                          containing 134 polymorphic microsatellite markers and 62 SNPs,
 We constructed a five-locus phylogeny rooted with Blumeria     using 68 progeny from a cross (Text S1). The total length of scaffolds
graminis, that includes two loci not previously used for this taxon     appearing  in the  genetic map (Table S1) covered 31.8 Mbp,
sample, G3PDH and HSP60. This analysis confirms that the     representing 80% of the T4 sequence assembly. Two scaffolds were
Sclerotiniaceae,  Sclerotinia and  Botrytis  are  closely  related but     in conflict with the genetic map.
distinct,  monophyletic  evolutionary  lineages  (Figure  2).  This     The average GC contents of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea genome
analysis also confirms that ‘‘Sclerotinia’’ homoeocarpa, an important     sequences (41.8–43.2%) are comparable to Blumeria graminis (44%;
pathogen of turf with morphology and etiology quite distinct from      [10]), but significantly lower than those from related fungi (50–
that of Sclerotinia, is not a Sclerotinia and should be reassigned to a    52%, Pezizomycotina, Figure S2). Exon sequences in S. sclerotiorum
genus in the family Rutstroemiaceae pending a reassessment of    and B. cinerea are 6% higher in GC content than introns (Table 1).
related species and generic limits. The Sclerotiniaceae includes   GC% does not vary along contigs or chromosomes, and shows no
obligate and facultative biotrophs, such as Myriosclerotinia species,     evidence of AT-rich isochores, such as observed in Saccharomyces
as well as necrotrophs, as exemplified by Sclerotinia and Botrytis.      cerevisiae [24] or  Leptosphaeria maculans [25], nor  is  it due to a
Botrytis is divided in two sub-lineages as previously described [18];    bimodal distribution as observed in Neurospora crassa (Figure S2).
one lineage is associated with both eudicots and monocots and the    The evenly distributed low GC content of Leotiomycetes, which
other with eudicots only. The strongly supported lineage with     distinguishes them from most other Pezizomycetes, may influence
species of Sclerotinia on one branch, also includes the asexual    chromosome organization and steady state transcript levels [26].



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      3                     August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 4]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis





Figure 1. Lifecycle of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea, with different stages of sexual and asexual development.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002230.g001


  The number of genes predicted in S. sclerotiorum strain 1980    between genomes, we used DAGchainer [27] to identify blocks of
(14,522 genes) and B. cinerea (16,448 and 16,360 genes for strains     four or more orthologous BDBH gene pairs. Syntenic regions
B05.10 and T4, respectively) is larger than those of related fungi     include 7,752 S. sclerotiorum genes with orthologs in B. cinerea; these
(average 11,154 genes, Table S2). This discrepancy is mainly due     regions also cover 3,618 unpaired genes from S. sclerotiorum that are
to the large number (S. sclerotiorum: 3,461; B. cinerea B05.10: 3,975;     enriched for dubious genes (2-fold more than the full genomes).
B.  cinerea T4: 4,229) of small predicted proteins  less than 100     Across all syntenic regions, the S. sclerotiorum genome shares 27.7 Mb
amino acids in length. Based on these observations, we revised the     with the B. cinerea T4 genome (Figure 3, Figure S5) and a similar
annotation process to  flag small proteins without evidence as    amount with the B05.10 genome. Syntenic regions are distributed
dubious. In order to be annotated, small proteins were required to     evenly across S. sclerotiorum chromosomes, including subtelomeric
show  evidence  of  expression (ESTs and microarray  signals),     regions; some synteny breakpoints are marked by an increased
function (containing known domains) or evolutionary conservation     density of repetitive elements in S. sclerotiorum (Figure 3). Further
(existence of orthologs or paralogs) (Figure S3). This resulted in a     larger scale analysis of synteny requires anchoring the B. cinerea
number  of high confidence predicted  proteins  (S.  sclerotiorum:    sequence onto chromosomes, using a genetic or physical map.
11,860;  B.   cinerea  B05.10:  13,664;  B.   cinerea  T4:  14,270),    We also examined each of the genomes for segmental duplication
comparable to that of other fungal genomes (Figure S4 and Table     blocks. The S.  sclerotiorum genome contains 8 duplicated blocks
S2).                                                              ranging from 4 to 12 paired syntenic genes; only 2 duplicated blocks
  Large synteny blocks are shared by S. sclerotiorum and    were identified in the B. cinerea B05.10 genome, and none in the B.
B. cinerea.  The gene sets of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea are highly      cinerea T4 genome (Table S3). Of the 8 blocks in S. sclerotiorum, 4
similar with a  total  of 8,609  Bidirectional Best BLAST Hits     contain  genes encoding  proteins  similar  to  the  heterokaryon
(BDBHs) between S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea B05.10 and 8,601     incompatibility proteins HET-E-1 of Podospora anserina [28]. Most
between S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea T4. The protein sequences    HET-E-1 homologs in S. sclerotiorum fall into a single gene family; in
deduced from these pairs of BDBH genes have a median identity of      this family S.  sclerotiorum has twice as many HET-E-1 domain
84.0%. A total of 19% of the S. sclerotiorum genome can be aligned at     containing genes as that of P. anserina, and three fold more than
the nucleotide level to both B. cinerea genomes and 46% at the     other fungi including B. cinerea. While duplicated blocks in B05.10
protein level. By contrast, nearly all of the two B. cinerea genomes can     did not contain HET-like proteins, a different family of proteins
be aligned to each other, and these genomes share an average of     with a HET domain (PF06985) is expanded in B. cinerea, with a total
99.2% identity at the nucleotide level. To build syntenic regions    number of 65 or 79 in B05.10 or T4, respectively, compared to 41 in



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      4                     August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 5]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis





Figure 2. Phylogeny of the Sclerotiniaceae (Ascomycota, Leotiomycetes, Helotiales), the sister group Rutstroemiaceae (represented
by Lambertella species and ‘‘Sclerotinia’’ homoeocarpa), and the outgroup, Blumeria graminis (Leotiomycetes, Erysiphales). The topology
was estimated using Bayesian inference based on the combined sequence data of five genes. The tree was rooted using B. graminis. Bolded branches
represent well-supported nodes with .90% support from 1000 maximum likelihood bootstrapped pseudoreplicates and .0.95 posterior
probabilities. Support values for each node are listed in Table S29. Topologies recovered from single genes phylogenetic analyses were congruent
with the concatenated gene tree topology. Top row Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, photos by H Lyon (left), LM Kohn (right). Left is apothecium emergent
from sclerotium developed in vitro; right are apothecia associated with wild host, Ranunculus ficaria. Bottom row photos by AS Walker. Left is
Botryotinia fuckeliana, sexual apothecia emergent from sclerotium developed in vitro; right, conidiophores bearing conidia produced by Botrytis
cinerea on grapes.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002230.g002


S. sclerotiorum. The recent expansion of two HET-domain containing    found in plants [29]. Using the REPET pipeline [30,31] and
families in both fungi suggests that these may have been involved in     extensive manual annotation, transposable elements (TEs) were
speciation.                                                                  identified in S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea genomes, grouped into
  Expansion of transposons in the S. sclerotiorum geno-     families and annotated as either class I (LTR, LINE), class II
fome.  Repetitive sequences were first identified by self-alignment    (MITE, TIR) or unknown TEs (Table S6). They occupy 7% of the
of each genome using cross match, revealing 7.7% of the  S.      S. sclerotiorum genome and 0.6 to 0.9% of the B. cinerea genomes (T4,
sclerotiorum genome as repeats, as compared to 4.4% for B. cinerea     B05.10) respectively (Figure 4). Therefore, S. sclerotiorum has a 10-
B05.10 and 3.3% for B. cinerea T4 (Tables S4,S5). This de novo search     fold higher TE content than B. cinerea that is associated with an
identified 500 evenly distributed copies of a 300 bp element derived     increase in the number of TE families (4-fold, N: 41) and the total
from the IGS region of the rDNA specific to S. sclerotiorum. rDNA    number of TE copies (12-fold, N: 4143, Table S6). Moreover, S.
derived repeats (.150 copies) have recently been described in the L.      sclerotiorum  contains  five  families  of high copy number LINE
maculans genome [25], however such elements are more frequently     elements, which are not present in B. cinerea genomes (Table S6).



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      5                     August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 6]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



                                                                     Despite the higher TE content of S. sclerotiorum, its genome size is Table 1. Assembly and gene statistics.
                                                                          similar to that of B. cinerea. This strongly contrasts with the related
                                                               Leotiomycete B. graminis, which has a genome size of 130 Mb and
                                    S. sclerotiorum  B. cinerea           a TE content of 64% [10]. We hypothesize that S. sclerotiorum has
                                                          mechanisms to reduce the effects of TE expansion on genome
                              1980         T4        B05.10     organization. One such mechanism involves a reduction in TE
  Coverage                            9.1X            10X        4.5X        length, as observed for  S.  sclerotiorum Gypsy and Copia retro-
  Assembly size (Mb)                    38.3              39.5        42.3       elements (Table S7) that are mainly composed of solo-LTRs (N:
                                                                2209; average ratio solo-LTRs/full-length copies: 42) scattered in
  Total contig length (Mb)              38.0              37.9        38.8
                                                                    the genome. Similar TEs  in B.  cinerea have a 20-fold lower
  Scaffolds                         36              118       588
                                                                  proportion of solo-LTRs/full-length copies (average ratio 2; Table
  Scaffold N50 (kb)                     1,630           562       257         S7). Solo-LTRs  result from recombination between LTRs  of
  Contigs                          679              2,281       4,534       ancestral TE copies [32]. Since they represent only 1/10th of the
  Contig N50 (kb)                    123             35          16.4        length of intact retro-elements (average 5000 bp), the reduction in
 $Q40 (%)                             98.7              98.7        98.0         size from  full-length retro-elements  to solo-LTRs could have
                                                                 prevented an increase in genome size of 12 Mb (30% of the actual
 GC (%)                                41.8              43.2        43.1
                                                      genome size), which would be expected if the S. sclerotiorum genome
  Predicted protein-coding genes       14,522           16,360      16,448      included 2,209 additional full-length retro-elements. The potential
  Dubious genes                       2,662             2,090       2,784       deleterious effect on the genome of such a large number of TEs
  High-confidence genes               11,860           14,270      13,664      appears  to have been  limited by  truncating the majority  of
  Median coding sequence length (nt)  813             807       744        elements in the expanded retroelement families.
  Median exon length (nt)            182             208       190        TEs in S. sclerotiorum are less diverse than those in B. cinerea. This
                                                                                                  is illustrated by the Mariner ScTIR1 family, which has a lower
  Median intron length               78              62        74
                                                                       genetic diversity  (h: 0.12) including a subset of quasi-identical
  Median intergenic length (nt)        973             778       958         copies, as compared to the BcTIR1 family (h: 0.24). Furthermore,
 GC Exonic (%)                         45.7              46.2        46.2      ScTIR1 has 5 subfamilies  consisting  of 3  to 15 copies with
 GC Intronic (%)                        39.9              40.0        40.9         identical sequences that are dispersed in the genome. Phylogenetic
  tRNAs                            191             200       195         analysis suggests that a significant proportion of S. sclerotiorum TEs
                                                                               result from recent transposition events (Figure S6). These analyses  Transposable elements           7%             0.7%       0.9%
                                                                        highlight that the S. sclerotiorum genome experienced a profound,
  doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002230.t001                                     recent remodeling associated with a dramatic expansion of TEs.
                                                               This recent evolution of the S. sclerotiorum genome is responsible for
                                                                important differences in genome organization compared to B.





Figure 3. Genome organization of S. sclerotiorum. For each putative chromosome of the optical map, alignment of supercontigs is shown in
alternating color blocks of black and grey. Syntenic regions with B. cinerea T4 are shown in red. Frequency of repetitive sequences is shown in blue.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002230.g003



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      6                     August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 7]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis





Figure 4. Transposable element content of the genomes of S. sclerotiorum and B.cinerea. Distribution of transposable elements in the
genomes of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea (T4 and B05.10 isolates) according to the major clades: LTR retro-transposons, Line retro-transposons, TIR
DNA transposons, MITE. UNK refers to unclassified transposable elements.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002230.g004


cinerea. Indeed,  loss  of synteny between  the two genomes  is     enriched for domains of several enzymes, including a putative
frequently associated with the presence of repeats at synteny break     amidoligase enzyme, a GMC oxidoreductase, and a GDP_fucose
points (Figure 3). The TE expansion in S. sclerotiorum might also     protein O-fucosyltransferase. The other Leotiomycete included in
impact  on   its  genome  organization  and  functioning  (gene     these comparisons, B. graminis, does not contain similar expansions,
inactivation, modification or regulation of expression).             and calculating enrichment for  all Leotiomycetes identified no
                                                                       additional domains. As B. graminis contains only 5,495 predicted
Gene content                                                          proteins, other  less reduced Leotiomycetes may provide better
  Gene  conservation  and  evolution. We  compared   S.     points of comparison when sequenced. Extending the comparison
sclerotiorum and B. cinerea to a set of seven other genomes which     to search for domains enriched in all necrotrophic fungi (including
include a biotrophic Leotiomycete (B. graminis), two non-related     P. nodorum and P.  teres) identified only one additional enriched
necrotrophs (Phaeosphaeria nodorum and P. teres), two hemi-biotrophic    domain, that for the Heterokaryon incompatibility protein. By
model plant pathogens (Magnaporthe oryzae and Gibberella zeae) and     contrast, conserved genes depleted in S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea
two saprobes (N. crassa and Aspergillus  niger). About 8,200 genes     include a larger and more diverse set than the enriched. These
from S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea have homologs in other fungi, of     include  several  families  addressed  further  in  this  paper,  the
which about 3,500 are conserved in all compared fungal genomes     glycosyl hydrolases GH2 and GH43, the subtilase family (which is
(Table  S8). Both  S.  sclerotiorum and  B.  cinerea  harbor  fewer    most prominent in M. oryzae and N. crassa), zinc finger domains
multigene families as compared to G. zeae, A. niger or P. nodorum     associated with  transcription  factors, and a terpene  synthase
but similar numbers as M. oryzae (Figure S7). Around 10% of the S.    domain (Table S11).
sclerotiorum and B. cinerea genes (1,454–1,600) are clade-specific, i.e.     Genes in primary metabolism.  Conserved primary meta-
they are shared exclusively among the two species and have no     bolism genes  for amino acid synthesis and  for mitochondrial
orthologs in other fungi (Table S8). Nearly 90% of these clade-     function are present in both genomes, few features deviate from
specific genes encode proteins without known PFAM domains; the     other fungi. S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea contain five genes encoding
subset of genes with functional domains is enriched in GO terms     alternative type II NADH dehydrogenases, while two or three
associated with transcription factors and cytochrome P450s (Table    such genes are found in most fungi, and four in N. crassa [33].
S9). After excluding dubious genes, the number of species-specific    Components of the oxidative phosphorylation system are thus
(either to S. sclerotiorum or to B. cinerea) genes was comparable to     present in S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea in a higher number than in
that in other fungal genomes (approximately 2,600). Many of these    most fungi. These genes may contribute to plasticity, as suggested
genes encode small proteins without functional domains. The     for N. crassa [34], increasing fungal versatility in modulating energy
species-specific genes harboring functional domains are enriched     production and the  cellular redox status in response to envi-
in genes encoding cytochrome P450s, transcription factors, and    ronmental stimuli. This may be relevant for S. sclerotiorum and B.
proteins with domains involved in chromatin remodeling (Table      cinerea in view of their capacity of redox modulation by production
S9).                                                                      of oxalic acid and the induction of ROS during infection (see
  To more closely examine patterns of gain and loss of larger     section: ROS generation and tolerance).
functional classes in S.  sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea, we examined     Genes involved in signaling pathways.   All types of genes
PFAM domain content across these ten genomes. Two families of     that are involved in signalling pathways in filamentous fungi (G
glycosyl hydrolase, GH71 and GH28, were the most enriched in S.     protein-coupled receptors, MAP kinases, heterotrimeric G proteins,
sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea (Table S10). These genomes are also   cAMP  signalling components and  Ca2+-related  signalling) are



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      7                     August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 8]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



found in S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea (Table S12). Few differences     trimerization motif and a mitochondrial localization  signal.  S.
with other fungi were observed. One GPCR gene in S. sclerotiorum      cerevisiae Nma111p has none of these features except for two short
(SS1G_07511) and B. cinerea (BofuT4_P129750.1, BC1G_05052) is   PDZ domains. The S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea homologs are highly
absent in N. crassa, but present in Aspergillus nidulans (GprC) and M.     similar to each other and show greater sequence similarity to the S.
oryzae (MGG_08803). S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea each contain two      cerevisiae than to the human protein. However, alike the human
phospholipase C genes [35], while in M. oryzae and N. crassa there    Omi/HtrA2, they have an IAP binding domain and a short, single
are four. S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea each have two calmodulin genes   PDZ domain [47]. This and similar findings are typical of the
while in M. oryzae and N. crassa there is only one. Moreover, S.     situation  in many  filamentous  ascomycetes,  suggesting  that
sclerotiorum and B. cinerea contain an additional calmodulin-like gene     apoptotic  networks  in  filamentous  fungi might  represent an
(SS1G_05131, BofuT4_P159960.1, BC1G_11227), similar to those     evolutionary intermediate between budding yeasts and higher
in plants, but which is not present in other fungal genomes. Another     eukaryotes.
exception that stands out to the high degree of conservation is that of     The  phylogeny  of  apoptotic  genes  in  fungi  reveals  close
the S. sclerotiorum low MW Tyr phosphatase (SS1G_04959.1), which     relatedness  to  higher  eukaryotes,  however  some  important
is highly similar to other LMW phosphatases, however it lacks the    components of the animal apoptosis network are absent in fungi.
conserved C(X)5R(S/T) motif considered to be a cross-kingdom     In particular there are no homologs of Bcl-2 or death receptors,
consensus for this class of phosphatases. The B. cinerea homolog    both crucial apoptosis regulatory proteins in animals. A third
(BC1G_14690.1) does contain the consensus motif. Whether this    important group are the ‘Inhibitor of Apoptosis Proteins’ (IAPs).
unique  S.  sclerotiorum phosphatase  is  functional has  yet  to be    There are eight IAP members in human, all of which contain 1 to
determined.                                                3 BIR (Baculovirus IAP Repeat) domains that are necessary for
  The group of genes encoding sensor histidine kinases (HKs)     their  anti-apoptotic  activity. A  single  protein  with two BIR
shows a high diversity in the number of members and domain    domains is found in S. cerevisiae (Bir1p) and homologs of Bir1p are
structures. In general, filamentous fungi have a larger complement    found in most fungi (Figure S8), including S. sclerotiorum and B.
of HKs than yeast (S. cerevisiae has one, Schizosaccharomyces pombe has      cinerea. Cross-kingdom analysis shows that BIR-domain containing
three). N.  crassa has eleven HK-encoding genes while both  S.     proteins are only present in fungi and metazoans (not shown),
sclerotiorum and  B.  cinerea  possess twenty HK-encoding  genes.     suggesting  that  this domain  first appeared  in  their common
Similar numbers of HK-encoding genes are found in Cochliobolus     ancestor. The B. cinerea homolog (BcBir1; BC1G_14521.1) is anti-
heterostrophus (21) and Gibberella moniliformis (16) [36]. Interestingly,     apoptotic, and  its activity requires the two BIR domains [48].
group VIII of fungal HKs has been expanded in S. sclerotiorum and    Recent studies indicate that the BcBir1-mediated anti-apoptotic
B. cinerea; it has only one representative in A. nidulans and M. oryzae,     response is important for virulence of B. cinerea [49]. Functional
two in N. crassa but three (PHY1–PHY3) in S. sclerotiorum and B.     analysis of candidate apoptosis-associated genes in S. sclerotiorum
cinerea. Members of this group contain domains common to plant    and B. cinerea genomes will elucidate their role in pathogenesis.
phytochromes and represent putative red/far-red light sensors.      B. cinerea is heterogeneous for the presence of mobile
Whether PHY1–PHY3 have a role in the life cycle of S. sclerotiorum     intein elements.   Inteins (internal proteins) are in-frame protein
and B. cinerea remains to be studied.                                     insertions embedded within other proteins, which are transcribed
  Even though the components of different signal transduction    and translated with their host gene [50]. They are excised from
pathways are conserved among  fungi,  their  activation by an     protein  precursors  in a  post-translational  autocatalytic  event,
external  stimulus,  their interconnections with other  signalling    which forms a de novo peptide bond between the flanking extein
components and their outputs vary significantly. For instance, the     (external  protein)  sequences.  In  addition  to  protein  splicing
cAMP  cascade  regulates  penetration  and  pathogenicity  in    domains, most  inteins have a homing endonuclease domain
appressoria-forming  fungi  [37].  In  S.  sclerotiorum,  the cAMP    (HEG), which  facilitates their specific ‘homing’ into intein-less
cascade regulates infection cushion development and is essential    homologs by gene conversion. PRP8 inteins do not frequently
for pathogenicity [38], while the same pathway plays a minor role    occur in fungal genomes, but have been identified in various
in virulence of B.  cinerea [39,40]. Besides the cAMP cascade,     orders, i.e. Eurotiales, Onygenales, Sordariales, Chytridiales and
MAPK  modules,  small  GTPases  and  the  Ca2+-calmodulin    Mucorales [50]. The genome sequence of B. cinerea strain B05.10
pathway have been studied in B. cinerea to obtain insight in their     contains  an  intein  element  incorporated  in  the  Prp8  gene
role in pathogenicity (reviewed by [9]).                          (BC1G_06754/06755). The BciPRP8 intein element is 2,514 bp
  Genes  involved  in programmed  cell  death  in  the     in length and encodes the N- and C-terminal splicing domains and
pathogen.  Programmed cell death (PCD), often referred to as     the HEG domain. There is no intein in the Prp8 gene of B. cinerea
apoptosis, is an important cellular process in eukaryotic organisms     strain T4, and the ‘empty’ Prp8 allele of T4 is identical to ‘empty’
[41]. PCD  in plants  is important  in conferring  resistance  to      alleles of other B. cinerea isolates. Heterogeneity for the presence or
biotrophic plant pathogens during a hypersensitive response [42].    absence of an intein within a species is unique in filamentous fungi
Conversely, the ability of necrotrophic pathogens to induce PCD    and was exploited to show the occurrence of gene conversion
in plants is crucial for their ability to infect their host [4,43,44].     (‘homing’) at 100% efficiency, during meiosis in crosses between B.
However, the occurrence of PCD in fungal pathogens may also be      cinerea isolates carrying an intein and isolates with an empty Prp8
important for their ability to infect plants, as demonstrated in M.      allele [51]. S. sclerotiorum (strain 1980 and 14 other strains) does not
oryzae [45,46]. We explored the genomes of S. sclerotiorum and B.     contain  inteins, however analysis of the intein-extein junction
cinerea  for  genes  involved  in  the  execution  or  regulation  of     region  revealed  that  the  ancestral  S.  sclerotiorum  Prp8  gene
apoptosis. Both fungi contain homologs of apoptosis-associated     contained an intein which was lost by precise deletion, leaving a
genes (Table S13), and the encoded proteins share features with     footprint of previous occupation (Bokor et al., in preparation).
proteins in S. cerevisiae. However, in several cases they also share
domains with human orthologs, which are not always present in   Genes involved in development
the yeast counterpart. For example, S.  cerevisiae Nma111p  is a     Genes involved in mating and fruiting body develop-
homolog of the human pro-apoptotic protein Omi/HrtA2, which    ment.  Genome sequencing of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea offers
contains an  IAP-binding domain, a  single PDZ domain, a     opportunities to gain insights into novel aspects of fungal mating



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      8                     August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 9]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



and  multicellular development  (Figure  1). In  particular, both     single HMG gene [55,56]. Meanwhile, the genomes of the two
species produce macroscopic, stipitate apothecia (sexual fruiting    sequenced B. cinerea strains show the typical MAT organization of
bodies), which arise from within the tissues of melanized, sclerotial     heterothallic  Pezizomycotina,  with  the  presence  of  dissimilar
stroma. This form of fungal sexual development has not previously     ‘idiomorphs’ at a single MAT locus [54]. Isolate B05.10 (mating
been subjected to genome analysis. Also, sexual behaviour differs     type MAT1-1)  contains  a MAT1-1  idiomorph  including  a
fundamentally between  the  species. Whereas  S.  sclerotiorum  is     characteristic MAT1-1-1 alpha-domain gene  (Bc1G_15148.1),
homothallic (self fertile) and only occasionally outcrosses [52], B.    whereas isolate T4 (mating type MAT1-2) contains a MAT1-2
cinerea  is considered a heterothallic (obligate outcrossing) species    idiomorph including a characteristic MAT1-2-1 HMG-domain
with two mating types, MAT1-1 and MAT1-2 [53]. Genome    gene (BofuT4_P160320.1).
analysis might explain the basis of such sexual differences.            However, the S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea MAT loci were also
  Previous investigations of Pezizomycete fungi have established    found  to have unusual  features.  First, two novel ORFs not
that differences in breeding systems are normally determined by     previously reported from other fungi were detected. The  first,
the presence of different arrangements of mating-type (MAT) genes     designated MAT1-1-5 [54], is present in the MAT1-1 idiomorph of
at one or more MAT loci [54]. MAT genes encode transcription     B.  cinerea B05.10 (Bc1G_15147.1) with a homolog  in the  S.
factors required  for sexual development [54]. Analysis of the      sclerotiorum MAT locus (SS1G_04003.1), but  is absent from the
present genomes indeed revealed differences in configuration of   MAT1-2 idiomorph of B. cinerea T4 (Figure 5). The second ORF,
MAT loci between the two species (Figure 5). S. sclerotiorum has an    named MAT1-2-4,  is present in the MAT1-2 idiomorph of B.
organization typical of homothallic Pezizomycotina, with a single      cinerea T4 (BofuT4_P160330.1) with a homolog in the S. sclerotiorum
MAT  locus containing both alpha- and high mobility group   MAT locus (SS1G_04005.1), but  is absent from the MAT1-1
(HMG)-domain  encoding MAT  genes  (SS1G_04004.1  and    idiomorph of B. cinerea B05.10 (Figure 5). Novel genes have also
SS1G_04006.1). Only one HMG-type gene is present, supporting    been reported in MAT loci of other ascomycete fungi [57–60].
the hypothesis that the ancestral fungal MAT locus contained a   MAT regions were sequenced from seven additional S. sclerotiorum





Figure 5. Configuration of the MAT loci in S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea (strains B05.10 and T4). S. sclerotiorum is homothallic whereas B.
cinerea strains are heterothallic. Strain B05.10 is of MAT1-1 identity whereas strain T4 is of MAT1-2 identity. Orthologous genes are displayed in the
same colour and pattern. The entire MAT locus is contained between the genes APN2 (on the left, green) and SLA2 (on the right, yellow stippled). The
MAT locus of S. sclerotiorum is displayed on the top line, whereas the MAT loci of both B. cinerea strains are displayed on the bottom line. The
truncated fragments of the MAT1-1-2 gene in the MAT1-1 isolate and of the MAT1-1-1 gene in the MAT1-2 isolate are highlighted with a dotted circle.
Possible ancestral loci are displayed in the middle. Gene names are indicated above the gene model, the presence of a conserved alpha domain or
HMG domain is indicated below the gene model. Two hypothetical inversions are shown, which might convert one configuration into the other. Two
separate deletions are shown which may have resulted in the evolution of the MAT1-1 or MAT1-2 locus in B. cinerea.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002230.g005



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      9                     August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 10]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis


and two B. cinerea isolates to confirm these results were typical. S.     Genes  involved   in   sclerotial  development.  Genes
sclerotiorum strain 1980 originates from a population with  little     associated  with  sclerotial  development  have  been  described
evidence of genetic recombination. Sequencing of the MAT region     previously  [68],  including  genes encoding  the pH-responsive
from the additional S. sclerotiorum isolates, drawn from populations     transcription factor Pac1, Ras, protein phosphatases, the MAP
showing evidence of recombination, revealed the same MAT genes    Kinases Smk1 and Bmp1 and adenylate cyclases Sac1 and Bac1.
to be present, although with minor sequence differences (2–4     All  of  these  proteins  are components  of  signal  transduction
haplotypes for each gene). MAT region sequences from B. cinerea    pathways and have pleiotropic effects on growth and development.
tester strains SAS56 (MAT1-1) and SAS405 (MAT1-2) [53] were    Genes that are associated exclusively with sclerotial development
very similar to B05.10 and T4, respectively.                   may lend greater insight into the makeup, regulation and evolution
 A second unusual feature concerned the B. cinerea MAT loci.     of sclerotia. One such protein (Ssp1) was described originally as a
Fragments  of MAT1-2-1 and MAT1-1-1 genes bordered  the     sclerotium-specific protein [69] and accumulates to the highest
idiomorphs of B05.10 (MAT1-1) and T4 (MAT1-2), respectively    abundance of any soluble protein in sclerotia, comprising nearly
(Figure 5). Both fragments appear non-functional, lacking start   50% of total soluble protein in a mature sclerotium. The ssp1 gene
codons and a MAT domain. In typical heterothallic ascomycetes    (SS1G_14065.1) was cloned [70] and characterized by deletion
the MAT regions contain either MAT1-1 or MAT1-2 sequence, but     mutagenesis [71]. ssp1 transcripts accumulate only in sclerotial
not fragments of the MAT gene(s) of the opposite mating type. In      tissues making this a valuable gene for studying the regulation of
some exceptional cases a complementary MAT fragment was     sclerotium-specific gene expression. The search for related genes
present in solely one mating type (e.g. [61,62]). B. cinerea is unique     in  other  fungi  outside  the  Sclerotiniaceae  has  revealed  ssp1
in having redundant fragments bordering both idiomorphs. This    homologs only in Aspergillus flavus and A. oryzae, distantly-related
configuration is consistent with B. cinerea having evolved from a    Eurotiomycetes that share with S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea, the
homothallic ancestor containing complete MAT1-1-1 and MAT1-      ability to produce sclerotia. Using Reciprocal Smallest Distance
2-1 genes at the same locus, with MAT1-1 and MAT1-2 mating     analysis [72], 245 orthologous gene pairs shared by S. sclerotiorum,
types  arising from the  loss  of core HMG and alpha-domain     B. cinerea, A. oryzae and A. flavus but absent from the non-sclerotia-
sequences, respectively, leaving only the disabled gene fragments    producing A. nidulans and A. fumigatus have been identified (Table
seen in the current MAT loci (Figure 5). Indeed, the configurations     S15). This list includes ssp1 and may be enriched in sclerotium-
of the B. cinerea MAT loci can be explained by the occurrence of     specific  genes  offering  a  potential  foothold  into  a  broader
two simple inversion and deletion events from a S. sclerotiorum-like     understanding of sclerotium development and evolution.
homothallic ancestor (Figure 5). Such rearrangements have been     Genes involved in conidiation. A developmental feature
observed  in other MAT  loci  [57]. There are  reports  of the     that distinguishes B. cinerea from S. sclerotiorum is conidiation. Both
evolution of homothallism from heterothallism in nature based on     species produce spermatia (microconidia) from phialides arising
rearrangements  at  the MAT  locus  [63,64];  the  current data     singly or in clusters directly from basal hyphae. B. cinerea and other
provides the first clear evidence for the opposite transition from      Botrytis  species, however, have the  ability  to produce macro-
homothallism to heterothallism.                                     conidia from sterigmata on the swollen tips of aerial, branching
   Finally, B. cinerea is unusual among pezizomycete fungi in that     conidiophores. Sclerotinia spp. do not produce structures resembling
some isolates are capable of ‘dual mating’. Whereas most isolates     conidiophores or macroconidia. Genes dictating spatial patterning
act in a standard heterothallic fashion, occasionally isolates are     of sporulation might be present in B. cinerea but absent from S.
detected that can mate with both MAT1-1 and MAT1-2 tester      sclerotiorum. Conidiophore pattern and cell-identity regulators in A.
strains [53,54,65]. The organization of MAT loci in dual-mater      nidulans include medusa (medA), stunted (stuA), abacus (abaA) and bristle
strains of B. cinerea was investigated (Text S2). Four dual-mater      (brlA). Orthologs of medA, stuA, and abaA are present in B. cinerea
isolates exhibited a MAT1-2  like  locus, and one contained a    and S. sclerotiorum whereas an unambiguous ortholog of brlA is not
MAT1-1 like locus. Neither PCR analysis nor Southern hybrid-     present in either genome (Table S16), as is also the case in N. crassa
ization revealed any sequence homologous to the opposite MAT     [73]. However,  genes known  to  function  upstream  of  brlA
locus. We conclude that dual mating in B. cinerea is not due to the     including fadA, fluG, flbC, and flbD are  all present in both B.
possession of both MAT1-1 and MAT1-2 sequence in the same      cinerea and S.  sclerotiorum (Table S16). Neither B.  cinerea nor S.
genome. Instead this phenomenon arises by changes elsewhere in      sclerotiorum  contains an  ortholog  to  the  N.  crassa  fluffy gene
the genome  -  it  is unknown whether this form of mating-type    (NCU08726.3). Thus, comparative genomics  fails  to reveal a
switching has a monogenic or polygenic basis.                       simple explanation for asexual sporulation in B.  cinerea and  its
  Mating-type, and a series of other ‘sex-related’, genes have been    absence in S. sclerotiorum. However, there is no evidence that the B.
identified as being involved in various stages of mating and fruiting      cinerea orthologs of Aspergillus sporulation genes also function in
body production in the Pezizomycotina but these genes have been     sporulation in B. cinerea. The orthologs in S. sclerotiorum may have
identified  primarily from  studies  concerning development  of     evolved to perhaps regulate the microconidiation pathway (shared
cleistothecia or perithecia [54,66] rather than the apothecia seen    between  S.  sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea) or  to  regulate  different
in the Leotiomycotina. Screening of the genomes of S. sclerotiorum     processes. Functional analyses will be required to determine the
and B. cinerea with genes with known roles in mating and fruiting      role(s) of these genes in S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea biology.
body development [66,67] revealed orthologs for every gene tested     Genes involved in infection structure development.  In
(Table S14). This indicates that mating processes (e.g. pheromone     addition to structures involved in sexual and asexual development
signalling) and physiological factors governing asexual and sexual     unrelated to pathogenesis, B. cinerea and S. sclerotiorum both produce
development (e.g. oxylipin signalling) are largely conserved within     dedicated infection structures in order to invade plants. Both fungi
the  Pezizomycotina.  Given  that  the  Leotiomycetes  are  a    demonstrate plasticity in the complexity of these structures used to
phylogenetic sister group of the Sordariomycetes, availability of    breach the host cuticle. The structures range from simple swellings
genome sequence now makes it possible to compare how genes are     of germ tube tips and dome-shaped appressoria lacking melanin in
spatially and temporally regulated and what novel genes give rise     their  cell walls, to multi-lobed compound appressoria and the
to  tissue  patterns  distinctive  of  cleistothecia,  perithecia and    more complex infection cushions. Many of the genes that affect
apothecia.                                                      appressorium development in M. oryzae and other plant pathogenic



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      10                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 11]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



fungi are components of the highly conserved MAP kinase and     How can fungi trigger oxidative processes in a plant and at the
cAMP-dependent signal transduction pathways. Orthologs of all    same time cope with an aggressive oxidative environment? There
these genes are present in both S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea, as well       is  little information as to how oxidants and antioxidants are
as in non-pathogenic fungi (Table S12). The tetraspanin-encoding    balanced in time and space to provide the specificity required to
gene (pls1) that is required for appressorium function in both M.     regulate diverse cellular processes. ROS regulation is complex as
oryzae and B. cinerea [74], is also present in S. sclerotiorum (Table     there are numerous (enzymatic and non-enzymatic) participants,
S17). Among appressorium-associated genes (Table S17) are also    superimposed in a  cellular context that also includes reactive
members of the mas1-related gene family, which play a role in M.     nitrogen species (e.g. nitric oxide; [83]). For example, deletion of
oryzae appressorium function [75]. Two members of the mas1     the B.cinerea bap1 gene, which encodes a transcription factor that
family from S. sclerotiorum were over-represented in EST sequences     controls enzymes required for oxidative stress responses (catalases,
from  an  infection  cushion cDNA  library  [76].  mas1/mas2     peroxidases, GSA,GRX,TRx)  results  in  high  sensitivity  to
homologs in B. cinerea are upregulated during germination and     oxidative stress  in  vitro, but there was no impact on virulence
appressorium  formation, but  the genes  are not  essential  for     [84]. Antioxidant genes controlled by Bap1 were not induced in
infection [77]. Identifying  specific genes that are  essential for     early  stages  of  infection, during which  the  host mounts an
appressorium development as well as other developmental stages     oxidative burst. Thus B. cinerea does not sense oxidative stress.
such  as  sclerotia  and  apothecia  could  provide  targets  for    There must be alternative protection systems and we suggest this
controlling disease spread through lifecycle interference.              provides an explanation, at least in part, as to why S. sclerotiorum
                                                         and B. cinerea do not possess a larger suite of such genes.
Insights into infection strategies shared by S. sclerotiorum      Biosynthesis of oxalic acid.   S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea are
                                                          renowned for the ability to acidify their environment through the
and B. cinerea
                                                                         secretion of organic acids. In particular, the production by  S.
 ROS generation and tolerance.  The generation of reactive
                                                                                      sclerotiorum  of  oxalic acid and  its association with white mold
oxygen  species (ROS) has long been associated with defense
                                                       symptom development has been studied for over a century [85–88].
responses in plant-fungus interactions. The ‘oxidative’ burst is an
                                                    The physiological roles of oxalic acid in pathogenesis are numerous.
early and universal plant response following pathogen challenge.
                                                                Oxalic acid enhances the activity of polygalacturonases to promote
Plants  resist  invading  pathogenic  fungi,  often  biotrophs, by
                                                                                      cell  wall  degradation  [89],  inhibits  plant–protection enzymes
induction  of  the  hypersensitive  response, a programmed  cell
                                                                         [90,91], suppresses the plant oxidative burst  [92], deregulates
death that  results from pathogen recognition and  is generally
                                                                    stomatal guard  cell closure [93], mediates pH signalling [94],
associated with the induction of ROS. ROS are detected in the
                                                                   induces apoptosis-like cell death [5] and alters the cellular redox-
host plant during infection by S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea, and likely                                                                              status in the plant [8]. Each of these activities separately may
other  necrotrophs.  Disease  development   is  impeded  when                                                                                     facilitate infection [1,95]. Oxaloacetate acetyl hydrolase (OAH)
pathogen-generated ROS   is  inhibited  [78]. Whereas ROS-                                                                                activity is associated with oxalic acid accumulation in S. sclerotiorum
mediated plant  cell death  is detrimental for biotrophic fungal                                                                     [96] and B. cinerea [97]. Genes encoding OAH activity have been
pathogens,  generation  of ROS  seems  advantageous  for  a                                                                             identified in the  S.  sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea genomes (SS1G_
necrotrophic pathogen. However, this raises questions as to how                                                                  08218.1, BC1G_03473.1, BofuT4_132860.1). Deletion mutants in
S.   sclerotiorum  and  B.   cinerea  thrive  in  a  highly  oxidative                                                         SS1G_08218.1 and BC1G_03473.1 are deficient in oxalic acid
environment.                                                                         biosynthesis [97, Rollins et  al, unpublished]. This observation,
 We examined the two genomes for genes that are involved in                                                               however,  does  not  establish  whether  the  primary  source  of
ROS generation and tolerance to oxidative stress. Remarkably,                                                                     oxaloacetate is the TCA cycle, the glyoxalate cycle or both. The
both fungi have gene repertoires for ROS-generating enzymes and                                                          dynamic role of oxalic acid in S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea physiology
antioxidants  that  are  very  similar  to  those  in  other  plant       is further exemplified by the identification of genes encoding oxalate
pathogenic fungi or in saprophytic fungi (not shown). Regulation     decarboxylase, which converts oxalate into formate and carbon
of ROS and redox homeostasis is a versatile means for cells to     dioxide. Such activity was previously reported from S. sclerotiorum
respond to developmental cues. The importance of the ROS/     [98]. The biological functions of oxalic acid rely on a dynamic
redox  ‘‘climate’’  in  fungal  growth  and  differentiation  was     balance of production and breakdown and not simply on a system of
suggested by Hansberg and Aguirre [79] who proposed that    maximal synthesis and accumulation. The acidic environment
hyperoxidant  states  are  a  primary  driving  force  leading  to     created by oxalate secretion facilitates the optimal activity of certain
differentiated  states  in  fungi. The importance  of  antioxidant      sets of cell wall degrading enzymes and peptidases (following two
enzymatic systems for effective cellular homeostasis and appro-      sections).
priate development was recently demonstrated in several fungi.      B. cinerea and S. sclerotiorum genomes are especially
The  S.  sclerotiorum and  B.  cinerea genomes each contain two    suited for pectin decomposition.  The  ability  to degrade
NADPH oxidase encoding genes (Ssnox1, Ssnox2, BcnoxA, BcnoxB).    complex plant carbohydrates  is an important aspect of fungal
Mutants in either of these genes were unable to develop sclerotia.      lifestyle. Plant cell wall carbohydrates form a complex network of
S. sclerotiorum mutants in the Ssnox1 or Ssnox2 genes differed in     different polysaccharides that are subdivided in three categories:
virulence: Ssnox1 mutants were weakly pathogenic while Ssnox2      cellulose, hemicellulose (including xylan, xyloglucan, glucogalacto-
mutants were fully pathogenic (Veluchamy  et  al., unpublished).    mannan,  galactan,  and  respective  side  chains),  and  pectin
The B. cinerea mutants were both impaired in virulence but to    (composed of galacturonan, rhamnogalacturonan, and respective
different extents: BcnoxB  is important for penetration, whereas     side chains). This network  is the target of carbohydrate-active
BcnoxA is involved in lesion expansion. A double mutant is almost    enzymes and auxiliary proteins (jointly referred to as CAZymes)
avirulent, as is a BcnoxR mutant lacking the regulatory subunit of    needed to access internal plant tissues and to degrade plant cell
the Nox complex  [80].  Since NADPH  oxidases  are  highly     wall components to simple monomers serving as carbon sources.
conserved and they are involved in differentiation in various fungi    The genomes of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea contain respectively
[81,82], their role in S. sclerotiorum or B. cinerea could primarily be in    346 and 367 genes encoding putative CAZymes (Table S18)
the differentiation of infection structures.                             including  at  least  118  and  106 CAZymes  unambiguously



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      11                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 12]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



associated with plant  cell wall degradation (Tables S19, S20),     content of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea genomes shows similarities
although many other CAZymes likely contribute to this activity.     with that of the saprotroph A. niger. In particular, the cellulolytic,
The CAZyme content in the genomes of S. sclerotiorum and B.     hemicellulolytic and pectin degrading capacities of B. cinerea and A.
cinerea was compared to other ascomycetes (Table S18) including      niger are strikingly similar. These two unrelated fungi are not only
plant pathogens (namely B. graminis, P. nodorum, P. teres f. teres, M.     similar in the number of enzymes in  all pectin-related CAZY
oryzae, G. zeae) and two saprobes (N. crassa, A. niger) to examine     categories, but also in the ratio of pectin-degrading lyases versus
whether the lifestyle of these fungi correlates with their CAZyme     hydrolases. Such observations suggest a common preference for
content and distribution (Table 2 and Table S18). The CAZyme      soft  plant  tissue  (such  as  flowers or  fruit), which  is  rich  in
content in S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea genomes is smaller than in     pectin.There are also differences between B. cinerea and A. niger,
the other plant pathogens analysed except for B. graminis, but     particularly in the number of cellulose-binding modules (CBMs,
equivalent in size to the saprotroph A.  niger, renowned for  its    Table S20). These categories are larger in S. sclerotiorum and B.
versatility  in  degrading  plant  carbohydrates. The CAZyme      cinerea, indicative of a stronger preference for vegetative plant
content in S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea is, however, larger than in      tissues.
N. crassa, and in the powdery mildew B. graminis, suggesting that     Among the unusual features of the S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea
the evolution of these species has led to  different degrees of    genomes is the presence of a large set of enzymes likely involved in
reduction  in  their carbohydrate degrading  capabilities. In B.     a-1,3-glucan degradation (family GH71). Many of the GH71
graminis, the reduction in genes encoding plant cell wall (PCW)     catalytic modules are attached to CBM24 modules, with up to four
degrading enzymes is extreme (Table S19) [10].              CBM24 modules  linked  to one GH71 module  in a  single
  Besides  the  quantitative  differences,  the CAZymes  of  S.     polypeptide. Whether S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea use such enzymes
sclerotiorum and B. cinerea display qualitative differences to those of     for the degradation of their own cell walls, the walls of antagonistic
the other plant pathogens analysed (Table  2, Table S19).  S.     fungi,  or  for  plant  polysaccharides   is  presently  unknown.
sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea have a noticeably lower number  of     Interestingly, a  significant number  of CBM18  (chitin-binding)
enzymes putatively involved in degradation of hemicellulose (H,    modules is also present in both genomes, although the number of
Table 2, Table S19). The pectin degrading capacity is larger for B.   CAZymes involved in degrading  chitin in the genomes of  S.
cinerea than for S. sclerotiorum (44 vs. 33 putative pectin-specific      sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea  is low. Since several of the CBM18
CAZymes, respectively). Their potential pectin degrading capacity    modules are attached to CE4 chitin deacetylase modules,  it  is
is comparable to that of P. nodorum and M. oryzae, but significantly     possible that these polypeptides contribute to reducing the release
smaller than in Fusarium oxysporum and Nectria haematococca (73 and     of chitooligosaccharides, which is known to lead to responses by
74 pectin-specific CAZymes, respectively; data not shown). By     host plants. Similar expansion of the CBM18 family is observed in
contrast, the number of cellulose and hemicellulose degrading      all pathogenic fungi analysed (Table S20).
enzymes encoded in S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea genomes is smaller        S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea and five other ascomycetes were
than in all the other PCW-degrading pathogens. Different PCW-    grown on monosaccharides and on plant-derived polysaccharides
degrading pathogens likely use different approaches to decompose     to establish correlations with their CAZyme content (Figure S9).
plant tissues. Even  if the cellulose degrading capacity  is similar     Best growth for both S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea was observed on
between  pathogens,  their  ability  to  cope  with  soft  tissue     pectin, while both grew poorly on xylan and cellulose. By contrast,
components, e.g. hemicellulose and pectin, is likely to vary. Many     fungi with a high number of genes encoding xylan- or cellulose-
saprotrophs degrade plant cell wall material in a manner totally    degrading enzymes grew better on these substrates while those
different from  S.  sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea. For  instance, the     containing a lower number of genes encoding pectin-degrading
CAZyme content in the genomes of N. crassa (Table S19), as well as    enzymes (M. oryzae, N. crassa) grew poorly on pectin. The CAZyme
Hypocrea  jecorina and  Podospora  anserina  (not shown)  suggests a     annotation and carbon growth profile suggest a specialization of S.
preference of these fungi for cellulose and hemicellulose rather      sclerotiorum and B. cinerea towards degrading the pectin fraction of
than  for  pectin.  Interestingly,  the  pectin-degrading CAZyme     the plant  cell wall. Their poor growth on xylan  is due to a


 Table 2. Comparison of the plant cell wall (PCW) degrading potential from CAZome analysis between S. sclerotiorum and B.
  cinerea and other Ascomycetes.


  Fungal species                    Lifestyle                    CAZymes per PCW component

                                                   C       H       HP        P          Total       %P

  Sclerotinia sclerotiorum              Necrotrophic pathogen              20         40         13          33         106            31

  Botrytis cinerea T4                   Necrotrophic pathogen              18         41         15          44         118            37

  Blumeria graminis                    Biotrophic pathogen                1          7          1           1          10             10

  Phaeosphaeria nodorum             Necrotrophic pathogen              47         66         28          32         173            18

  Pyrenophora teres f. teres            Necrotrophic pathogen              38         55         27          25         145            17

  Gibberella zeae                      Hemi-biotrophic pathogen           24         53         27          47         151            31

  Magnaporthe oryzae                 Hemi-biotrophic pathogen           37         68         32          19         156            12

  Neurospora crassa                  Saprotroph                        26         31         13          8          78             10

  Aspergillus niger                    Saprotroph                        16         38         20          45         119            38


  The values reflect the total number of members in the families strictly associated with each PCW component. Substrates: C - cellulose; H - hemicellulose; HP -
  hemicellulose and pectin side chains; P -pectin; %P - percentage of PCW-degrading enzymes using pectin as substrate.
  doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002230.t002



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      12                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 13]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis


combination of a reduced xylanolytic system and the inability to      Secreted peptidases.  Pathogenic  as  well  as saprotrophic
use xylose, the main component of xylan, as carbon source. It is     fungi secrete peptidases to degrade a variety of (poly)peptides in
likely that the remaining ability to degrade hemicelluloses is not     their environment. This degradation  is potentially beneficial in
used for the release of nutrients, but rather for decomposition of     eliminating the activity of antifungal host proteins and in providing
plant cell walls to enable infection.                                      nutrients. The genomes  of  S.  sclerotiorum and  B.  cinerea were
  Transcriptome analysis identified 43 B. cinerea (11.1%) and 40 S.     analysed for genes encoding proteins with predicted proteolytic
sclerotiorum (11.2%) CAZyme-encoding genes whose expression was      activity, with emphasis on the secreted peptidases (Table 3). S.
significantly upregulated during colonization of sunflower cotyle-      sclerotiorum and B. cinerea have a variety of peptidases comparable to
dons as compared to in vitro grown mycelium, whereas 6 B. cinerea     the  Eurotiomycetes and  Sordariomycetes. The number and
(1.5%) and 10 S. sclerotiorum (2.8%) CAZyme-encoding genes were     variety  of  peptidases encoded by  the  B.  graminis genome  is
significantly  downregulated  (Table  S21).  While  no  pair  of     strongly reduced. S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea possess more secreted
orthologs was downregulated  in  the two  fungi, 17  pairs  of     sedolisins (S53, acidic optimum) than G. zeae and M. oryzae, which
orthologs were significantly upregulated in planta in both B. cinerea     in turn have many more  subtilisins (S8A, alkaline optimum).
and S. sclerotiorum. Sunflower cell walls consist largely of cellulose,     Sedolisins and subtilisins belong to the same clan (SB) and share
glucuronoxylans and pectin and to a lesser extent of mannans and     the same ancestral peptidase [100]. S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea also
xyloglucans  [99]. Among  the  B.  cinerea  genes  significantly    have two genes encoding glutamic peptidase (G01), an enzyme
upregulated in planta, 12 encode cellulose degrading enzymes, 3     that is active at pH 2 [101]. Altogether S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea
xylan degrading enzymes, 6 pectin degrading enzymes and 2     possess a large number of genes encoding peptidases with an acidic
mannan degrading enzymes (Table S21). This suggests that rather   pH optimum and a small number of genes encoding peptidases
than focusing on specific components, B. cinerea produces a broad     with a basic pH optimum. These data suggest an adaptation of the
range of enzymes that is able to degrade both major and minor     peptidase gene content in S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea, to perform
components of the sunflower  cell wall. A similar pattern was     well in a low pH environment generated by the production of
observed for S. sclerotiorum during infection with upregulation of     oxalic acid (see section: Biosynthesis of oxalic acid). A notable
genes encoding enzymes involved in the degradation of cellulose     difference between  S.  sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea  is that the  S.
(6), xylan (8), pectin (11) and mannan (2).                                   sclerotiorum genome contains only 9 aspartic proteinase (A01A)-

 Table 3. Secreted peptidases in S. sclerotiorum, B. cinerea, and other ascomycetes.



                                                                                                                                      Eurotio-
  Clan   Family   Name                 pH     Leotiomycetes          Dothideomycetes   Sordariomycetes         mycetes

                                                       Ss      Bc      Bg    Pn       Pt      Gz     Mo    Nc    An

 AA   A01A      Aspartic Proteinase         A         8(1)      13(1)*     4        8(3)        7(1)        15(1)      14        13(1)     6(2)

 CA   C13      Legumain                A        1**      1         1      1         1         1         1       1       1

 GA   G01       Glutamic peptidase         A       2         2(1)       1      1         1         1         1         0(1)       3(1)

 MA   M12       Astacin/adamalysin        N         0(1)       1(1)       0      3         3         1           1(1)       0(1)       1(1)

      M35       Deuterolysin                A-N       1(1)       1(1)       0      2         1         1           4(5)     2       0

 MC   M14      Carboxypeptidase A          N-B     1         1(1)       0      4         4         4         6       1       1

 ME   M16        Pitrilysin                                     0(4)       2(2)        0(1)     0(4)        0(3)        3(3)        0(3)       0(3)       0(5)

 MJ   M19     Membrane dipeptidase                    0(1)     1         0        0(1)        0(1)        0(1)        0(2)       0(1)       0(1)

 MH   M20      Carboxypeptidase Ss       A         2(4)       2(4)       0      4           2(3)        5(1)        1(5)       0(3)       2(7)

      M28      Aminopeptidase Y         N         3(1)       1(2)       0      11          8(3)        9(1)        13(2)     3(1)       4(1)

 PA   S01A      Chymotrypsin            N       1       1         0      2         1         1         1       0       0

       S01B      Glutamyl peptidase                        0(1)     0         1        0(1)        0(1)        0(2)        0(1)       0(1)     0

       S01X     S1 unassigned peptidase             0       0         0      0         0         0         1       0       0

 SB    S08A       Subtilisin                   B       3         2(1)       2        6(1)       5           14(5)      21      5         2(1)

       S08B      Kexin                  N       1       1         1      1         1         1         1       1       1

       S53        Sedolisin                 A       7         7(1)       1        3(1)        1(2)       3         3       1       7

 SC    S10       Carboxypeptidase Y         A-N       8(1)       8(1)        4(1)     5(1)        8(1)       8           5(1)     4       9

       S28       Pro-X Carboxypeptidase     B         1(1)       2(1)       2      0         3         2         4       2         2(1)

 SE    S12        Ala-Ala Carboxypeptidase    N-B       0(4)     1         0        1(6)        0(2)        2(10)       1(3)       2(4)       1(9)

 SF    S26        Signal peptidase I                    1         1(1)        1(2)     1(2)       1           0(2)        1(1)       0(1)       0(3)

  SJ    S16       Lon-A peptidase                            0(1)       1(1)        0(2)     1(1)        0(2)        0(1)       1         0(2)       0(2)


  The number of peptidases detected within each genome that are predicted to be directed to the secretory pathway. In parentheses the number of non-secreted
  peptidases. Not shown are the peptidases of which the activity is restricted to autocatalytic activation of a precursor protein, or peptidases with problematic function
  inference (e.g. S9 and S33 proteases). pH indicates at which pH a certain family is generally most active (A = Acidic optimum; N = Neutral optimum; B = Basic optimum).
  Species are abbreviated as: Ss: S. sclerotiorum; Bc: B. cinerea; Bg: B. graminis; Pn: P. nodorum.; Pt: P. teres f. teres; Gz: G. zeae; Mo: M. oryzae; Nc: N. crassa; An: A. niger.
  *Based on corrected gene models [102].
  **Based on corrected gene models (unpublished).
  doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002230.t003



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      13                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 14]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



encoding genes while B. cinerea has 14 such genes [102], however,       it appears that B. cinerea exhibits a two-fold higher number of in
the functional consequences of this observation are unknown.          planta upregulated genes than S. sclerotiorum. This suggests that B.
  Secreted effector proteins.  Secreted effector proteins that      cinerea and  S.  sclerotiorum may  have  adopted  species-specific
are transferred into plant host cells have been recently shown to be     strategies  for  infection.  In  addition  to  the  genes  that  are
essential for pathogenesis in many plant pathogenic microorga-      differentially  expressed  between  the   in   vitro  and   in  planta
nisms, for example in the biotrophic powdery mildews [10], smuts     conditions, the expression analysis provided a  list of genes that
[103], and rusts [104] and in the hemibiotroph M. oryzae [105]. In     are most highly expressed during  infection, including  several
the necrotrophic fungi P. nodorum and Pyrenophora tritici-repentis, host-     peptidases and other secreted proteins. Details of experiments, raw
specific proteinaceous toxins have been demonstrated to serve as     values and  lists of differentially expressed genes with associated
effectors  that enhance virulence [106,107]. Up  to now,  little    normalized values are available at http://urgi.versailles.inra.fr/
experimental evidence for the existence of similar effector proteins    Data/Transcriptome.
is available for B. cinerea and S. sclerotiorum. One exception is the      Secondary metabolism.  One of the crucial weapons that
recent identification of a xylanase in B.  cinerea that acts as a     necrotrophic, polyphageous pathogens possess is the production of
virulence factor, promoting necrosis in the host plant independent     (non-specific) phytotoxic compounds to kill cells of a range of plant
of its enzymatic activity [108]. From genes encoding proteins with     species. Two groups of phytotoxic metabolites produced by B.
N-terminal leader peptides (based on SignalP prediction), genes for      cinerea have been characterized i.e. the sesquiterpene botrydial and
CAZymes and peptidases were eliminated, resulting in 879 and     related compounds [109] and botcinic acid and  its derivatives
603 genes encoding secreted proteins, respectively, in the genomes     [110]. To identify the pathways involved in the production of
of B. cinerea and S. sclerotiorum. The larger size of the B. cinerea     other secondary metabolites in S. sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea, we
secretome was also evident for the small secreted proteins: 521 in     searched the genomes  for genes encoding key enzymes such
B. cinerea and 363 in S. sclerotiorum were smaller than 300 amino     as NRPS (non-ribosomal peptide synthetase), PKS (polyketide
acids, and 333 in B. cinerea and 193 in S. sclerotiorum were smaller     synthase), TS  (terpene  synthase) and DMATS  (dimethylallyl
than  150  amino  acids.  Experimental  support  (microarray    tryptophane synthase), which are essential for the biosynthesis of
expression data, ESTs and OrthoMCL analysis) was obtained     peptides, polyketides, terpenes and alkaloids, respectively [111].
for approximately half of the gene models encoding small secreted    Both genomes contain a significant number of genes encoding key
proteins  (respectively 49–51%  for ,150aa, and 63–65%  for    secondary metabolism (SM) enzymes (28 in S. sclerotiorum, 43 in B.
,300aa). Comparative expression analysis during in planta and in      cinerea; main classes in Figure 6A, complete list in Table S23). S.
vitro growth suggested a role in pathogenesis only for CAZymes, as      sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea have the potential to produce appro-
described above (see section: B. cinerea and S. sclerotiorum genomes     ximately 26 and 40 main secondary metabolites, respectively, as
are especially suited for pectin decomposition). For the remaining    some SM pathways have more than one key enzyme. The
secretome, the number of genes upregulated  in planta was not    numbers of key enzyme genes are similar to the average found in
significantly higher than the average of all genes (Table S22). On    ascomycetes  (Table  4) and  significantly  higher  than  in  the
the contrary, both in S.  sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea, more genes    Leotiomycete B. graminis, which has undergone massive gene loss
encoding secreted proteins were downregulated than upregulated    probably due to its exclusively biotrophic life-style [10]. Among
in planta.                                                            the ascomycetes, B. cinerea has the highest number of TS from the
                                            STC (sesquiterpene cyclase) sub-family, although similar numbers
Differences in infection strategies between S.                   of STC genes were identified in basidiomycetes [112]. Most S.
sclerotiorum and B. cinerea                                                sclerotiorum and B. cinerea key SM genes (90%) belong to clusters of
  Comparative infection transcriptomics.  At least 69% of     genes that encode other biosynthesis enzymes, regulators and/or
predicted genes in  S.  sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea appears to be     transporters. Generally in fungi, all genes from a SM cluster are
expressed, as concluded from their representation in at least one of     involved in the same metabolic pathway and are co-regulated
the cDNA  libraries tested (Figure S10) or from hybridization     [111,113,114]. In S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea, about one third of
signals  in custom  oligoarrays.  Transcripts were found  to be     the clusters contain a gene encoding a Zn(II)2Cys6 transcription
differentially expressed in equal proportions in both fungi, when     factor, that could control the expression of genes within its own
comparing   sunflower-inoculated   cotyledons   (48 hpi)   and      cluster. Also, 40% of the SM clusters contain a gene encoding an
mycelium grown  in  vitro: 192 S.  sclerotiorum (1.8%) and 253 B.   ABC or MFS  transporter  that could export  the  metabolites
cinerea (1.75%) predicted genes are upregulated in leaves while 173    produced by the enzymes encoded by the gene cluster. SM clusters
S.  sclerotiorum  (1.65%) and 247  B.  cinerea  (1.7%)  genes  are     are randomly distributed in the genome of S. sclerotiorum (Figure
downregulated.  When  considering  B.   cinerea/S.   sclerotiorum     S11), and there was no enrichment in the location of clusters in
orthologs,   it  appears  that 50%  of  the  genes  significantly     sub-telomeric regions. By contrast, SM gene clusters in Aspergillus
upregulated during sunflower colonization in one species have a      spp. and G. zeae are frequently (50%) located in sub-telomeric
similar expression pattern  in the  other. This proportion was     regions [67,115].
smaller (20%)  for  the  genes  that  are downregulated  during       B.  cinerea has a higher number of genes encoding key SM
sunflower  colonization. The common  set  of  genes  that  are    enzymes (43) compared to S.  sclerotiorum (28, Figure 6A). This
upregulated in planta suggests that the two species share at least     difference is even more striking when considering orthologs and
some  mechanisms  to  colonize  plant   tissues.  The   lists  of     paralogs  (Figure  6A,  Table  S23). Only 19  key SM  genes
upregulated  S.  sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea genes are enriched in    correspond to orthologous pairs in both genomes, while 24 genes
CAZyme-encoding genes relative to the whole gene complement     are only found in B. cinerea and 9 only in S. sclerotiorum. The 19
(9-fold for both species), with 40–43 genes in each species (approx.     shared key SM genes belong to 17 clusters that have a comparable
11% of the CAZy genes in each of the genomes) (see section: see     organization between the two genomes (microsynteny), with one
section: B. cinerea and S. sclerotiorum genomes are especially suited     exception.  B.  cinerea genes BcPKS6 and BcPKS9 are  jointly
for pectin decomposition). There is also an enrichment in P-type     responsible for production of the phytotoxin botcinic acid. In B.
ATPases, MFS-type sugar transporters and peptidase-encoding      cinerea these PKS genes are in different genomic locations while
genes. Of the genes that are only present in one of the two species,     their orthologs in S. sclerotiorum are part of the same cluster. This



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      14                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 15]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis





Figure 6. Number of genes encoding secondary metabolism key enzymes, membrane transporters, and transcription factors in the
genomes of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea. S. sclerotiorum/B. cinerea orthologs were determined by BDBH. Secondary metabolism key enzymes (A),
membrane transporters (B), and transcription factors (C). In panel C, the numbers in brackets indicate the number of genes lacking orthologs in other
fungi.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002230.g006


suggests that a major genomic rearrangement, either a fusion or      sclerotiorum or B. cinerea key SM genes found in only one of the two
fission, has occurred in one of the species [116]. Among the other    genomes, were called ‘‘specific’’, although most have orthologs in
clusters shared by the two species (detailed in Text S3) are those     at least one other fungal genome. The 9 S. sclerotiorum ‘‘specific’’
that  are conserved among ascomycetes and  are  involved  in    key SM genes encode PKS (6 genes) and PKS-NRPS hybrids (2
biosynthesis of melanin (PKS13), coprogen (NRPS6) and intra-     genes). S. sclerotiorum also has one specific TS corresponding to a
cellular siderophores (NRPS2, NRPS3).                                non-classical DTC (diterpene cyclase) with an additional GGPP
  For nearly all key SM genes present in both S. sclerotiorum and B.     synthase domain (Table S23). This bifunctional terpene synthase is
cinerea, orthologs were found in other fungal genomes. The S.     orthologous  to  the  fusicoccin  synthase (FUS) from  Phomopsis



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      15                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 16]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



                                                                probable hypothesis is that the SM clusters were present in the Table 4. Secondary metabolism key enzyme-encoding genes
                                                common ancestor of the Sclerotiniaceae and that many of them  in fungal genomes.
                                                            were lost in S. sclerotiorum as exemplified for the DTC3 gene cluster.
                                                                        Overall, 42 and 65% of B. cinerea and S. sclerotiorum SM clusters,
  Fungal                  PKS–                                        respectively, are orthologous. Most of the shared  clusters are
  species     PKS1  NRPS2  NRPS3  CHS4  DMATS5  STC6  DTC7     conserved among ascomycetes and involved in elementary cellular
                                                                      processes including cell protection (melanin) and iron scavenging
  Sclerotinia     15     6       3        1      1         0      1
  sclerotiorum                                                              (siderophores). On the other hand, the capacity for producing SMs
                                                                    considerably differs between these two related species, despite their
  Botrytis       16     9       5        1      1         6      3
  cinerea                                                                   similar behaviour as plant pathogens. More than half of the B.
                                                                                       cinerea SMs cannot be produced by S. sclerotiorum. Two of the B.  Blumeria      1      1       0        1      0         0      0
  graminis                                                                         cinerea-specific SM  clusters are involved  in production  of the
                                                                  phytotoxin botrydial [118] and the phytohormone abscisic acid  Phaeosphaeria 19     8       1        2      0         2      1
  nodorum                                                              [120]. In addition, B. cinerea-specific SM genes are highly expressed
                                                                 during sunflower cotyledon colonization (see 6.1) which suggests  Pyrenophora   18     27      2        1      1         1      1
  teres f. teres                                                        they may be involved in the production of metabolites important
                                                                            for infection.  Gibberella     11     19      2        1      0         3      0
  zeae                                                         Transporters.  Plant  pathogens  must  protect  themselves,
  Magnaporthe  22     8       10       2      3         1      2          especially during infection where they are  likely to encounter
  oryzae                                                               host defense mechanisms. Membrane transporters play a role in
  Neurospora    5      3       1        1      1         0      1         counteracting  the  physiological  impact  of  antimicrobial  host
  crassa                                                             defense compounds. For example, the B. cinerea ABC transporter
  Aspergillus     15     12      5        1      0         2      2        AtrB has been shown to be required for tolerance to the Arabidopsis
  niger                                                              phytoalexin camalexin [121]. Mutations leading to overexpression
                                                                          of AtrB and a MFS-type drug efflux transporter are responsible for
  Data from this study and from [10–12,157,158].                             the appearance of B. cinerea field strains with increased tolerance to
  1PKS: PolyKetide Synthase.
                                                                    unrelated fungicides (multidrug resistance) in French and German  2NRPS: Non-Ribosomal Peptide Synthetase.
  3PKS-NRPS: PolyKetide Synthase - Non-Ribosomal Peptide Synthase hybrid.       vineyards [122]. The genomes of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea were
  4CHS: CHalcone Synthase.                                             analysed for genes encoding nutrient transporters, mitochondrial
  5DMATS: DiMethyl Allyl Tryptophan Synthase.                                    carriers, aquaporins and efflux pumps. ABC-transporters utilizing
  6STC: SesquiTerpene Cyclase.
                                            ATP hydrolysis to provide energy for transport [123] have a  7DTC: DiTerpene Cyclase.
  doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002230.t004                                  conserved architecture of one nucleotide binding fold (NBF) and
                                                                                 six transmembrane-spanning helices (TMD) in different arrange-
                                                            ments (Table 5). The major facilitator superfamily (MFS) proteins
amygdali [117] although the cluster is only partially conserved with                                                                   use proton-motive  force  for  substrate  translocation. The  dif-
P.  amygdali  suggesting  that  S.  sclerotiorum  might  produce  a                                                                              ferential regulation  of 17 MFS-type hexose transporter genes
metabolite different from fusicoccin. The 24 B. cinerea ‘‘specific’’                                                                 during colonization of sunflower cotyledons provided support for
key SM genes encode TS (10 genes), PKS (7 genes), NRPS (3                                                                             their involvement in sugar uptake during pathogenesis [124].
genes)  and PKS-NRPS  hybrids  (4  genes).  Remarkably,  S.     Analyses  of  fungal genomes  for  the  content  of membrane
sclerotiorum does not contain STC genes, while B. cinerea has 6,     transporter-encoding  genes  did  not  reveal  major  differences
including the STC1 (also named BcBOT2) gene which is part of    between saprotrophs and pathogens [125,126]. Comparison of
the cluster required for synthesis of the phytotoxin botrydial [118].     the numbers of transporter genes in the genome of S. sclerotiorum
B. cinerea also contains a TS encoding gene (PAX1) orthologous to     with the two B. cinerea strains revealed a bias towards larger sizes of
the Penicillium  paxilli PaxC gene, involved in biosynthesis of the     certain families in B. cinerea (Table 5; Figure 6B). While 42 and 40
indole-diterpene paxillin [119] (Table S23).                ABC transporter genes were identified in B. cinerea B05.10 and T4,
  The genomic regions located upstream and downstream of the     respectively, only 33 were identified in S. sclerotiorum. Similarly, B.
B. cinerea-specific SM clusters were detected in the S. sclerotiorum      cinerea contains 30% more MFS transporter genes (282–286) as
genome. Genes from the surrounding regions have the same    compared to S. sclerotiorum (218). Differences in gene numbers were
physical organization in both species, demonstrating that these      less evident or not observed for P-type ATPases, amino acid
regions were syntenic, except for the presence or absence of a     transporters, mitochondrial carriers and aquaporins (Figure 6B).
given SM cluster. As discussed above, loss of synteny between both    The majority of B. cinerea genes that were absent in S. sclerotiorum
genomes is frequently associated with the occurrence of TE-rich     did not have  orthologs  in  other  fungi,  indicating  that gene
regions in the S. sclerotiorum genome. In several cases, the loss of    expansion in B. cinerea rather than gene loss in S. sclerotiorum has
synteny  at a locus with a  species-specific SM  cluster indeed      likely  been  the  driving  force  for  the  observed  differences.
appears to be associated with the presence of TEs in one of the    Approximately  half  of  the  transporter  genes  were  highly
genomes. For example, the B. cinerea-specific DTC3 gene cluster     expressed both in mycelium and during infection (Table S24).
corresponds to a locus in the S. sclerotiorum genome where a reverse    Members of the MFS transporter gene families showed higher
transcriptase is detected, as well as a relic of the DTC3 ortholog.     expression levels during growth in planta as compared to growth in
This observation suggests that a deletion in  S.  sclerotiorum has       vitro. By contrast, the majority of MDR-related MFS transporters
removed  most  of  the  original DTC3  cluster. The  striking    were repressed during infection. Several P-type ATPases were
difference in the content of SM clusters between S. sclerotiorum     upregulated in planta in B. cinerea but not in S. sclerotiorum.
and B. cinerea might reflect a recent gain of clusters in B. cinerea, or      Transcription  factors.  Transcription   factors  (TFs)  are
the loss of clusters in S. sclerotiorum. As most of the SM key enzyme      essential players in regulatory networks. Thirty-seven TF families
genes found in B. cinerea have orthologs in other fungi, the most    have been identified in fungi (http://supfam.org/SUPERFAMILY)



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      16                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 17]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis


 Table 5. Frequency of occurrence of predicted genes          Conclusions
 encoding membrane transporters.                              Comparative genomics  of  S.  sclerotiorum and  B.  cinerea has
                                                                    revealed an expected  high  degree  of sequence  identity and
                                                                      synteny, however, we observed several striking differences in gene
                                                          B. cinerea     content between these plant pathogens. The first difference was in
  Category                  S. sclerotiorum  B. cinerea T4   B05.10       the content of transposable elements. The data suggest a recent
 ABC transporters         33            40          42            burst of transposition in the S. sclerotiorum genome relative to B.
                                                                                          cinerea. The  two  species  differ  in  the  regulation  of  sexual
    [(TMD6)-NBF)]2            18              21            23
                                                                  reproduction and this  is fully explained from the sequence and
    [(NBF-(TMD6)])2            8               12            12            organization of the MAT  loci. Features of these  loci provide
    NBF-(TMD6)               3               3             3            evidence for an evolution of heterothallism from homothallism.
    (TMD6–10)-NBF            4               4             4         The failure of S. sclerotiorum to produce conidiospores could not be
 MATE transporters       2             2           2            explained from the gene content, as  all key conidiation genes
                                                          seemed to be present and potentially functional. The genome  P-type ATPases          17            20          20
                                                                 sequences further revealed a striking difference in the amount and
 MFS transporters        218           286         282
                                                                      types  of  potential secondary metabolites. The botrydial toxin
    sugar transporters         51              68            68            biosynthetic cluster and the phytohormone abscisic acid biosyn-
    MDR-related transporters   85              109           107            thetic genes were unique to B. cinerea. The precise chemical nature
    other MFS transporters     78              107           105         and biological function of most of these metabolites remains to be
 Amino acid transporters   49            48          48          determined  to  understand  whether  they  contribute  to  the
                                                                   adaptation of the two species to different ecological niches. The
  Mitochondrial carriers    37            37          37
                                                                   content of CAZyme-encoding genes revealed a preference of S.
  Aquaporins             10            11          11              sclerotiorum and B. cinerea for pectin as nutrient source. This is in
  ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporters are subdivided into different structural    agreement with the observation that S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea are
  types, according to the arrangement of transmembrane domains (TMD) and      pathogens of dicots and preferentially grow on aerial plant tissues
  nucleotide binding folds (NBF). Not included are proteins containing NBF but      that are rich in pectin. With respect to pathogenicity determinants,
  no TMD. MATE: Multidrug and Toxic Compound Extrusion. MFS: Major facilitator     there are no unique features that could be identified as ‘silver
  superfamily. MDR: Multidrug resistance.
  doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002230.t005                                             bullets’, which distinguish these aggressive pathogens from other
                                                                 pathogenic and non-pathogenic fungi. Comparison with two other
                                                                   necrotrophic fungi revealed only few (if any) genes shared among
among which six are specific to the fungal kingdom [127]. Despite the
                                                                  necrotrophs and absent in fungi with other trophic lifestyles (i.e
close phylogenetic relatedness between S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea,
                                                                   saprotrophs  or  hemi-biotrophs). These  findings  point  to  the
there are striking differences in the number of TFs between both                                                                       multigenic,  variable, and sophisticated nature  of necrotrophic
species. 330 TF-encoding genes were identified in S. sclerotiorum, and                                                                     pathogenicity whose nuance may  only be  revealed  through
392–410 in B. cinerea (Table S25). The difference between the two                                                                      systematic functional analysis of candidate activities and regula-
fungi also extends to the distribution among families,  i.e. a large                                                                                  tors. We suggest that the specific regulation of networks of the
number of TFs are from the Zn(II)2Cys6 binuclear cluster family (S.                                                                         available  suite  of genes  is key  to pathogenic  success  for  S.
sclerotiorum 155 and B.  cinerea 222, Figure 6C) and the  Zn(II)-                                                                                     sclerotiorum and B. cinerea.
coordinating C2H2 (S. sclerotiorum 98 and B. cinerea 116). The total
number of TFs shared (i.e. encoded by orthologous genes) between S.
                                                    Materials and Methods
sclerotiorum and B. cinerea is 323. Among them, 54 (17%) have no
ortholog  in  other  sequenced  fungal  genomes  (Figure  6C).    Materials and methods for phylogenetic analysis
Additionally, B. cinerea has 96 TFs that are absent in S. sclerotiorum,       Isolate sampling.  The isolates included in the sample were 9
while only 12 S. sclerotiorum TFs are absent in B. cinerea. These three     species  in the genus  Botryotinia  (including the genome  strains
categories of TFs mostly (86%) belong to Zn(II)2Cys6 binuclear    B05.10 and T4), 4 species in the genus Sclerotinia (including the
cluster and C2H2 zinc finger families. Indeed, S. sclerotiorum and B.    sequenced  strain  1980),  4 members  of  the  Sclerotiniaceae
cinerea share 153 Zn(II)2Cys6 binuclear cluster TFs (Figure 6C), while     (Monilinia fructicola, Myriosclerotinia scirpicola, Sclerotium cepivorum and
an additional set of 69 of these TFs are found only in B. cinerea. For the     Dumontinia tuberosa), 3 members of the Rutstroemiaceae (Lambertella
C2H2 zinc finger family, S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea share 93 TFs,      langei, Lambertella subrenispora and  Sclerotinia homoeocarpa) with the
while an additional set of 23 C2H2 TFs are found only in B. cinerea.    powdery mildew  Blumeria  graminis  as the presumed outgroup.
Among the 69 B. cinerea-specificZn(II)2Cys6 binuclear cluster TFs     Details of the isolates are provided in Table S26.
lacking in S. sclerotiorum, 9 are located in secondary metabolism gene      Fungal cultures and DNA extraction.   All  isolates were
clusters that are not present in S. sclerotiorum.                      grown on potato dextrose agar (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI)
  Overall, among the B. cinerea TFs that have no counterpart in S.     for 3–5 days, and were then transferred to standing culture potato
sclerotiorum, 57 out of 96 (60%) are encoded by genes that have     dextrose broth (Difco Laboratories) for 1–2 days. On both solid
orthologs in other fungal genomes, while 39 are B. cinerea-specific.    and liquid media, cultures were grown in the dark at ambient
This distribution suggests that 57 TFs conserved among fungi have    room temperature (20–22uC).  Cultures were  filtered through
been lost in S. sclerotiorum. The cellular processes controlled by     Miracloth  (Calbiochem, EMD  Chemicals  Inc.,  Darmstadt,
these TFs are possibly altered in S. sclerotiorum. It would be of    Germany) and lyophilized. DNA was extracted from 10–15 mg
interest to characterise the regulatory networks that, in other fungi,     of lyophilized mycelium using a DNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen,
are controlled by these conserved TFs. Such studies might provide     Mississauga, ON). Quantity  of DNA was estimated on 1.0%
clues about the cellular deficiencies occurring in S. sclerotiorum (e.g.    ethidium bromide-stained agarose gels, with known quantities of
the inability of asexual sporulation). Additionally, the function of     bacteriophage  lambda DNA  as  standards  against  which
the 39 B. cinerea–specific TFs remains to be investigated.            comparisons of band intensity could be made. DNA extractions



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      17                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 18]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



were diluted to 10–20 ng/mL in elution buffer (10 mM Tris-Cl,     The resultant tree topology is shown in Figure 2, with bolded
0.5 mM EDTA; pH 9.0) for use in PCR.                          branches indicating well-supported nodes (ML bootstrap values
 PCR and sequencing.  An approximately 500 bp segment of   .90% and Bayesian posterior probabilities .0.95; Table S29).
the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region, and portions of genes    The  concatenated  tree  was  rooted  with  members  of  the
encoding  actin  (ACT),  calmodulin  (CAL),  glyceraldehyde-3-     Rutstroemiaceae, previously shown to be an outgroup to the
phosphate dehydrogenase (G3PDH), and heat shock protein 60     Sclerotiniaceae [13,14,132].
(HSP60) were amplified using the primer sets listed in Table S27.
Polymerase chain reactions were performed using GoTaq Colourless    Sequencing, assembly, and physical mapping
Master mix (Promega  Corporation, Madison, WI)  containing:     The sequenced strain of S. sclerotiorum ‘1980’ is available from
GoTaqDNA Polymerase in 16 Colorless GoTaqReaction Buffer     the Fungal Genetics Stock Center (http://www.fgsc.net/). Plasmid
(pH 8.5), 200 mM dNTPs, and 1.5 mM MgCl2; 0.2 mM of each     (4-kb and 10-kb inserts) and Fosmid (40-kb inserts) libraries were
primer; 10–20 ng of DNA template in the total volume of 50 mL per     generated with randomly sheared and size-selected DNA. Plasmid
reaction. PCR was performed under the following conditions in a    and Fosmid inserts were sequenced from both ends to generate
GeneAmp PCR System 9700 programmable thermal cycler (Applied     paired reads. Sequence reads (total of 507,621) were filtered for
Biosystems, Foster City, CA): denaturing at 95uC for 2 min followed     quality, vector and other contamination, and the resulting 476,001
by 35  cycles  of 30 s  denaturing  at 95uC, 30 s  annealing  at     reads were  assembled  with  the Arachne  assembler  [20]. A
corresponding temperatures for each primer set (Table S27), and     consensus sequence was determined from an average of approx-
1 min elongation at 72uC, followed by a final extension step at 72uC     imately 9.1-fold sequence depth (7.8 depth in Q20 bases). The
for 5 min. PCR fragments were visualized by electrophoresis on a    assembly (GenBank accession AAGT01000000) totals 38.3 Mb
1.0% ethidium-bromide stained agarose gel, using a 100 bp ladder    and consists of 36 scaffolds with an N50 of 1.6 Mb. The scaffolds
(BioShop Canada Inc., Burlington, ON) to estimate the size of the     consist of 679 sequence contigs with a N50 of 123 kb; at least half
fragments. All PCR products were purified and sequenced using     of all bases in the assembly fall within at least the size of the N50
37306l DNA Analyzer systems (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA)     scaffold or contig. The contigs total 38.0 Mb, so only 0.8% of the
at the McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre.     assembly  is represented by contig gaps. This assembly contains
  Phylogenetic analyses.  Sequences were aligned in Clustal    98.7% of bases with Q40 quality or greater.
X  v.  1.81  [128]  and  further  edited  manually. Maximum     The sequence of B.  cinerea strain B05.10 was generated by
parsimony (MP) and maximum likelihood (ML) analyses were    Syngenta AG using four size selected shotgun libraries. Sequence
performed  in PAUP* 4.0b10  [129]  with  heuristic  searches.     reads were filtered for quality, vector and other contamination,
Characters were treated as unordered and gaps as missing data.    and the resulting 291,603 reads were assembled using the Arachne
Bootstrap support for internal branches was estimated from 1000     assembler. A consensus sequence was generated from an average
pseudoreplicates  for both MP and ML  analyses. Models  of     of approximately 4.5 fold sequence depth (3.9-fold depth in Q20
sequence evolution were estimated for each locus with ModelTest     bases). The assembly (GenBank accession AAID00000000) totals
3.7 [130,131], and the phylogenetic parameters are shown in     42.3 Mb and consists of 4,534 contigs with a N50 of 16.4 kb,
Table S28.                                                  which are ordered and oriented by paired end clone reads within
  Bayesian analyses were performed for each genetic locus in Mr.    588 scaffolds, with a N50 of 257 kb.
Bayes v.3.0b4 [132] to estimate the posterior probabilities of tree     The sequence  of  B.  cinerea  strain T4 (Genbank  accessions
topology with Metropolis-coupled Markov chain Monte Carlo    FQ790245  to FQ790362) was determined and assembled by
(MCMCMC) searches. All analyses employed one cold chain and    Genoscope, Evry, France. The genome was sequenced using a
three incrementally heated chains, where the heat of the ith chain    whole genome shotgun (WGS) strategy, by generating plasmid
is b = 1/[1+(I21)T] and t = 0.2; when I = 1, B = 1, corresponding     (3 kb and 10 kb  inserts) and BAC (,50 kb  inserts)  libraries.
to the cold chain. Independent analyses of each of the four loci    Clones from these libraries were end-sequenced to generate paired
were conducted with 2,000,000 generations each, with a sampling     reads. Sequence reads from plasmid inserts (573,705, representing
frequency of 1 tree every 100 generations. The average standard    10.56 coverage) were assembled with Arachne [20], resulting in
deviation of split frequencies stabilized (to a difference of less than    3,054 contigs. Contigs were ordered and oriented into scaffolds
one  percent)  after  10,000  generations  in  all  our  analyses.     using paired sequences from BACs (35,668 reads). The gap lengths
Therefore the  initial 10,000 generations from each run were    were estimated using linked clones. 118 scaffolds larger than 20 kb
discarded as burn-in when summarizing  tree parameters and     with gap sizes lower than 10%, were used for annotation. These
topology. Flat Dirichlet probability densities were used as priors    118 scaffolds (39.5 Mb, N50 of 562 kb, Table 1) contain 2,281
for the substitution rate parameters and stationary nucleotide     contigs (37.9 Mb, N50 of 35 kb). This assembly contains 98.7% of
frequencies and uniform priors were used  for the shape and     bases with Q40 quality or greater.
topology parameters and an exponential unconstrained prior was     An optical map, a type of physical map, was created for S.
used for the branchlengths parameter.                                       sclerotiorum strain 1980 by OpGen. The restriction enzyme BsiWI
  Analyses of the combined (concatenated) dataset were per-    was used to create ordered fragments and the resulting map
formed using ML and Bayesian inference. A partitioned dataset     contained 16 optical contigs. These likely correspond to complete
with each partition corresponding to each genetic locus with a    chromosomes,  in agreement  with an  estimated chromosome
unique evolutionary model for each partition (Table S28) was used    number of 16 using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis [21]. The
for the Bayesian analysis. The heuristic ML approach employed a    assembly was compared to the optical map using an in silico digest
combined data set with the following single, overall model of     of  the  assembly  (http://www.broadinstitute.org/annotation/
evolution  re-estimated from ModelTest  3.7:  a  general  time     genome/sclerotinia_sclerotiorum/maps/index.html).  This com-
reversible model with gamma distribution with invariant  sites     parison suggested that supercontig 4 contained an unsupported
(base frequencies = [0.2580, 0.2512, 0.2277, 0.2631]; rate ma-     join in the assembly, between contigs 132 and 133; the assembly
trix = [1.3214, 4.0315, 1.3851, 0.8728, 7.8478]; shape parameter    was updated to break scaffold 4 between these contigs, and a
for gamma distribution = 0.9427; proportion of invariant sites =     revised version of the assembly was submitted to Genbank. No
0.3866).                                                            other major disagreements were found. A  total map  size  of



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      18                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 19]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



approximately 38.5 Mb was estimated by calculating the ratio     The accuracy of the gene set was evaluated by comparing to
between the assembly fragments and map units. The assembly   EST sequences. For S. sclerotiorum, a set of 75,468 ESTs that were
supercontigs cover 99.4% of the optical map (contigs cover 98.6%)    sequenced as part of this project or available in Genbank, were
(Figure S1). Only two supercontigs, 35 and 36, were not anchored     aligned  to  the genome  using BLAT. EST  alignments were
to the  optical map; these supercontigs are 39 kb and 16 kb     clustered by combining  all  overlapping ESTs. Each  of  the
respectively, and do  not  contain any BsiWI  restriction  site.     resulting 7,400 EST clusters was compared to any overlapping
Supercontig 35 consists of arrayed ribosomal DNA repeats. The     predicted genes. In cases where multiple overlapping ESTs suggest
optical contigs appear to correspond to complete chromosomes, as     different gene structures, the EST that most closely matched the
they end with a flush set of DNA molecules (data not shown).    gene structure was used. Roughly one-third of genes (5,192) have
Additionally,  reads  containing  telomeric  repeat  arrays  of    some overlap with an EST cluster; of these, 75% show no splice
(TTAGGG) are linked to the ends of 26 of the 32 chromosome      site disagreements. A small number of predicted genes appear
ends, and are present at the end of two additional scaffolds (Figure     partial in S. sclerotiorum: 4 are missing a start codon, 6 are missing a
S1). At least two scaffolds are mapped to each optical contig,     stop codon, and 98 span contigs. Possible missed annotations
suggesting that centromeres could lie in these unassembled gaps.     include ESTs with no overlapping gene; a total of 559 clusters are
                                                                            at least 200 bases from an annotated gene, and of these 88 contain
Genetic linkage map of B. cinerea                              canonical  splice  signals.  After the automated annotation was
                                                                  complete, ESTs from additional  libraries were generated and  68 individual progeny from a cross between strains T4 (isolated
                                                                     aligned to the genome. In  total, we sequenced ESTs from 8from tomato) and 32  (isolated from  Vitis  vinifera) were kindly
                                                                                  libraries, generating 96,700 quality filtered sequences (Table S30).provided by Caroline Kunz (Universite´ Pierre et Marie Curie,
                                                           These ESTs align to 7,942 genes.Paris). Around 400 microsatellite markers were designed from the
                                                               For B. cinerea (B05.10), a set of 9,207 ESTs were aligned to thegenomic sequences of the B05.10 and T4 strains by using the
                                                      genome  using BLAT. EST  alignments  were  clustered  by‘‘GRAMENE’’ software [133]. In addition, a set of 144 SNP
                                                            combining  all overlapping ESTs  into a  cluster. Each  of the(Single  Nucleotide  Polymorphism)  markers  were  identified
                                                                           resulting  2,349 EST  clusters was compared  to  overlappingthrough the comparison of the B05.10 and T4 genome sequences
                                                                     predicted genes. In cases where multiple overlapping ESTs suggestand genotyped in the progeny using the SNPlex genotyping assay
                                                                             different gene structures, the EST that most closely matched the
(Applied Biosystems). The segregation  of markers among the
                                                             gene structure was used. Roughly one-eighth of genes (2,012) have
progeny was analysed using MAPMAKER software [134] set at
                                                       some overlap with an EST cluster; of these, 82% show no splice
min LOD3 and max Distance at 37.
                                                                                       site disagreements. A small number of predicted genes appear
                                                                             partial in B. cinerea (B05.10): 67 are missing a start codon, 153 are
Gene prediction                                                                    missing a stop codon, and 444 span contigs. Possible missed
  For S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea B05.10, gene structures were                                                                   annotations include ESTs with no overlapping gene; a total of 132
predicted using a combination of FGENESH and GENEID. The                                                                              clusters are at least 200 bases from an annotated gene, and of these
version of GENEID used for these calls was 1.2a. FGENESH is                                                                  only 4 contain canonical splice signals.
unversioned. As FGENESH  uses a  statistical model  of gene                                                                                    S.  sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea (B05.10) gene  calls were further
structure that requires training on each organism for accurate                                                                   evaluated to remove transposable elements and other dubious
prediction,  Softberry  trained FGENESH  on  S.   sclerotiorum                                                                                        calls. Genes with at least 100 bases of overlap with repeats called
sequences. GENEID is an ab initio gene caller and was run with                                                           by RepeatMasker or BLAST  similarity against a transposon-
the default parameters after being trained on a set of 542 S.                                                                         related protein database, or containing a PFAM repeat domain
sclerotiorum genes that were manually curated based on EST and     but not a PFAM non-repeat domain, were flagged as dubious gene
protein alignments.These S. sclerotiorum trained gene models were      calls. Also, genes that have 5 or more BLAST hits at $95%
also used for B. cinerea B05.10 without additional training.             identity to the same genome and have no supporting ESTs,
  The results from these two gene callers were combined in the   BLAST  hits or non-repeat PFAM domains, were flagged  as
following manner. Both FGENESH and GENEID were run on     dubious. To identify poorly supported gene calls, two additional
the  entire genomic sequences  of  S.  sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea    gene  predictors, GeneMark and SNAP, were run on  both
(B05.10) to provide an initial set of predicted genes. This resulted    genomes. Genes  less than 100 amino  acids  that were  only
in a set containing 12,961 FGENESH predictions and 14,711    supported by a  single gene  predictor (comparing GENEID,
GENEID predictions for S. sclerotiorum, and 13,864 FGENESH   FGENESH, GeneMark, and SNAP) and without EST, BLAST,
predictions and 16,907 GENEID predictions for B. cinerea. Next,     or PFAM domain  support  were  flagged  as  dubious  genes.
gene predictions less than 30aa (90 nt) were removed, and any     Additionally, genes with two predictions that do not share the
gene prediction less than 50aa (150 nt) was removed, unless it was    same reading frame were flagged. In  total,  all these methods
overlapped by a prediction from a different program, BLAST     flagged 2,662 S. sclerotiorum genes and 2,784 B. cinerea (B05.10)
evidence, a HMMER PFAM domain, or an EST alignment.     genes as dubious. All predicted genes were used to query the
Applying these criteria removed 2,166 S. sclerotiorum and 2,373 B.   PFAM set of hidden Markov models using HMMER (http://
cinerea genes from consideration. We manually annotated 1,141 S.     hmmer.janelia.org)  and  the  public  protein  databases  using
sclerotiorum and 751 B.  cinerea genes. FGENESH and GENEID    BLASTP. Transfer RNAs were identified using the tRNAScan-
predictions were clustered based on overlapping exons, requiring   SE program.
strand consistency. For each locus, a gene structure was chosen      For B. cinerea T4, the automated gene prediction was performed
based on BLAST similarity to other proteins (requiring $60%     using the URGI genomic annotation platform including pipelines,
average identity and $80% query coverage), and selecting the     databases  and  interfaces,  developed  for  fungi  (http://urgi.
gene prediction from the program with best overall agreement to      versailles.inra.fr/). Gene prediction was performed using Eugene
EST splice sites (GENEID performed better than FGENESH by     pipeline version 3 [135]. The gene models predicted by EuGene
this metric). The initial gene sets contained 14,522 genes for S.     rely on a combination of several in silico evidences (ab initio and
sclerotiorum and 16,448 genes for B. cinerea.                                 similarity). Ab  initio gene prediction softwares are Eugene_IMM



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      19                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 20]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis


[136] (probabilistic models discriminating coding from non coding    Transposable elements detection and annotation
sequences), SpliceMachine [137] (prediction of CDS start sites and       Transposable Elements (TEs) were detected and annotated
intron  splicing  sites) and FGENESH  (http://linux1.softberry.     using the REPET pipeline [30,31] http://urgi.versailles.inra.fr/
com/berry.phtml)  (ab  initio gene  predictor).  Several  similarity    Tools/REPET) for detection (TEdenovo) and annotation (TEan-
methods were used to identify genes such as BLASTN and Sim4     not)  of  transposons  in  eukaryotic genomes. The TEdenovo
against B. cinerea ESTs, as well as BLASTX against Uniprot and     pipeline detects TE copies, groups them into families and defines
fungal  protein  databases. The  different  results were used by     the consensus sequence for each family containing at  least 3
Eugene to predict final gene models. The three ab  initio gene     copies. The TEannot pipeline annotates TEs using the consensus
prediction  softwares  were  trained  using  a  set  of  manually    sequences library. Manual annotation of the consensus sequences
annotated genes from  B.  cinerea. FGENESH was  trained by    allowed their grouping in TE super-families corresponding to a
Softberry (Boston, USA), while EuGene-IMM and SpliceMachine                                                                 transposon with a defined full-length copy (with both LTRs or
were trained at URGI using a set of 305 genomic/full-coding                                                      ITRs and full ORFs when available) and classified as classI or
cDNA pairs. One third of the set was used for training ab initio                                                                               classII TE. In addition, the genome of B. cinerea T4 was searched
softwares, one third to optimize the parameters of EuGene and the                                                                   using TBLASTN for sequences similar to either the transposase
last third to calculate the accuracy of EuGene. We finally obtained                                                                          of  B.  cinerea mariner  element  Flipper  [140]  or  the  reverse
for exons and genes, a sensitivity of 97.8 and 92.1 and a specificity                                                                        transcriptase from Boty1 [141]. Sequences with similarities to
of 97.5 and 92.1, respectively. Genes with a size smaller than 100                                                         TE-encoded proteins were grouped and aligned to identify or
nucleotides were automatically filtered out by EuGene. EuGene                                                                      reconstruct the corresponding full-length TE. Manually identified
finally predicted 16360 genes in the B.  cinerea T4 genome. In                                                    TEs were compared to the consensus sequences obtained from
addition, 434 tRNA genes were predicted by tRNAscan-SE [138].                                                 REPET.

Genome alignment and synteny
                                                          Functional annotation of predicted genes
  Genome assemblies were aligned using MUMmer [139]. The B.
                                                         Automated functional annotation of  S.  sclerotiorum and B.cinerea genomes were aligned with nucmer,  selecting only 1:1
                                                                                   cinerea proteins was performed using protein sequences deducedmatches (2mum), and alignments were processed with delta-filter
                                                         from all gene models automatically predicted. The pipeline usesto select 1:1 local mapping of the reference to query. A total of
                                                                   protein domain identifier InterProScan [142] which runs a set35.5 Mb of each could be aligned, or 94% of the B. cinerea T4
                                                                         of methods including pattern matching and motif recognition.genome and 91% of the B. cinerea B05.10 genome. A total of
                                                               In addition, we used an automated assignment against protein98,744  insertion/deletion  positions and  175,009 SNPs  were
                                                         domains databases such as CDD [143], KEG [144] and KOG
identified from  the nucmer  alignments  using  the  show-snps
                                                                    [145]. Sub-cellular targeting signals as well as transmembrane
program. This suggests that the overall rate of difference between
                                                         domains were predicted using SignalP, TargetP and TMHMM
the two genomes in aligned regions is 1 SNP every 203 bases and 1
                                                                    [146]. Orthologs in S. sclerotiorum were determined based on
insertion/deletion every 360 bases. S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea are
                                                                      best bi-directional BLAST hits. Overall, 72% of B. cinerea T4
too distant to align well at the nucleotide level globally; only a total
                                                                  predicted genes (11767 of 16360) encode proteins having either
of 7.4 Mb can be aligned at 85.0% identity. Therefore the B.
                                                                    functional information and/or an ortholog in  S.  sclerotiorum.
cinerea genomes were  aligned  to  S.  sclerotiorum  using promer,
                                                             This percentage increases to 82% taking into account only
selecting  only  1:1  matches  (2mum),  and  alignments  were
                                                                          reliable genes.
processed with  delta-filter to  select 1:1  local mapping  of the
reference to query. The promer alignments cover 17.4 Mb sharing
74.3% identity for S. sclerotiorum-B. cinerea T4 and 17.2 Mb sharing    Analysis of support for the predicted genes from the
74.6% identity for S. sclerotiorum-B. cinerea B05.10.                 three genomes
  To identify larger syntenic regions between genomes, we first      Four types of evidence were used to support gene calls, based
identified orthologs using BLASTP as well as OrthoMCL. Using    on bioinformatics or experimental criteria (Figure S3). The first
BLASTP (1e-5, softmasked), S. sclerotiorum shares 8,609 best bi-     criterium was based on identification of functional domains (e.g.
directional (bbd) BLAST hits with B. cinerea B05.10 or 8,601 with     InterProScan, CDD) or topology/targeting domains  (e.g. Sig-
B. cinerea T4; 8,088 S. sclerotiorum proteins have matches in both     nalP, TargetP, TMHMM) (see M7). Genes with at least one
genomes. About 1,300 additional proteins in S. sclerotiorum have     positive  hit  (functional  or  topology/targeting  domain)  were
BLAST matches that are not best bidirectional. Using OrthoMCL     considered as supported by protein domain evidence. The second
to cluster the three genomes, which uses BLASTP similarity for     criterium was based on identification of orthology to genes in
clustering, there are a total of 12,095 protein families, of which     other fungi using OrthoMCL (see M9). The third criterium relied
8,079 are in all three genomes and nearly all of these (7,677) are    on expression data using ESTs (existence of at least one EST for a
single copy. Either raw BLAST data or ortholog sets were then     gene) (see M10). The fourth criterium relied on expression data
used to find syntenic regions  of  at  least four genes between     using hybridization signals on a whole-genome oligonucleotide
genomes using DAGchainer [27], and parsed using accessory perl    Nimblegen microarray (see M11). Among the 16,360 predicted
scripts. Syntenic regions between the two B.  cinerea genomes    genes in B. cinerea T4, 13,555 (83%) genes are supported by at
include 11,422 paired genes and cover 36.9 Mb in 249 regions      least 1 type of evidence and 6,462 (39.5%) genes are supported by
(average size 148 kb). Syntenic regions between S. sclerotiorum and      all 4 types of evidence. Among the 16,448 predicted genes in B.
B. cinerea T4 include 7,752 paired genes and cover 27.7 Mb in 571      cinerea B05.10, 13,922 (85%) genes are supported by at least 1
regions  (average  size  49 kb).  Syntenic  regions  between  S.     type of evidence and 6,319 (38.5%) genes are supported by all 4
sclerotiorum and B. cinerea B05.10 include 7,702 paired genes and     types  of evidence. Among the 14,522 predicted genes  in  S.
cover 27.9 Mb in 602 regions (average size 46 kb). Segmental      sclerotiorum, 12,283 (85%) genes are supported by at least 1 type of
duplication blocks were identified by comparing each genome     evidence and 4,121 (28%) genes are supported by all 4 types of
against itself, using DAGchainer [27].                               evidence.



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      20                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 21]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis


Conservation of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea predicted     (Table S31), 78,755 bacterial clones were obtained and sequenced
genes relative to other ascomycetes                        once or twice (59 end; 39 end), leading to 83,117 ESTs (1 or 2
  Orthologs between S. sclerotiorum, B. cinerea, and other ascomy-    ESTs per clone).
cete fungi were identified using OrthoMCL version 1.4 [147]. The       Eighty six percent of ESTs, (71,238 ESTs, 67,625 clones, Figure
Ascomycete genomes included in the analysis were B. graminis    S10) were successfully clustered on the B. cinerea T4 genome and
(22_02_11;  blugen.org),  P.  nodorum (20110506 from Richard    assembled using Phrap [http://www.phrap.org/] to finally obtain
Oliver; Broad Institute), P. teres  f. teres (PRJNA50389; Genbank),    9,667 EST contigs. As some genes were lying in different contigs,
G. zeae (FG3; Broad Institute), M. oryzae (MG8; Broad Institute), N.     the 9,667 contigs were assembled in 9,004 unisequences. In order
crassa (NC10; Broad Institute), and A. niger (AspGD). Each set of     to get an estimate of the expression of genes corresponding to the
proteins was blasted against itself and other proteomes with an e     unisequences, we calculated the raw_clone_nr sum (clone number
value of 1e-5. An inflation parameter of 1.5 was used for Markov     in all libraries), the raw_clone_nr (clone number in the current
Clustering with MCL. 12,120 B. cinerea (T4) proteins, 12,260 B.      library), the percent_clone (100* raw_clone_nr/clone_nr in the
cinerea (B05.10) proteins, and 9,930 S. sclerotiorum proteins were     current library), and the norm_percent (percent_clone normalized
identified as members of gene families; of these about 1,500 were    by the percent_clones in  all  libraries = 100 * (percent_clone)/
conserved only in the two species (Table S8). OrthoMCL families     sum(percent_clone) in  all  libraries). Eighteen percent of unise-
enriched in S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea were identified based on a    quences without any corresponding genes automatically predicted
hypergeometric distribution (p-value computed by phyper function     (mostly due to gap in the genome sequence) were used to design
in R; q-value computed by p.adjust in R), however significantly     oligos for the Nimblegen microarrays.
enriched families (q-value,0.05) included only repetitive elements
or families specific to only these species. To identify functions    Microarray experiments
specific to these lineage specific proteins, we mapped GO terms to    A Nimblegen 1-plex array was designed using 21,200 B. cinerea
the protein  sets of  S.  sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea (B05.10) using    gene models corresponding to 19,454 ORFs either identified in
Blast2GO, and computed enrichment using Fisher’s Test exact   T4 or B05.10 genomes (12,071 T4 ORFs shared between T4 and
test.                                                            B05.10; 93 B05.10 ORFs shared between T4 and B05.10; 4,072
  To identify functions enriched in  S.  sclerotinia and B.  cinerea   T4 ORFs specific to T4; 3,218 B05.10 ORFs specific to B05.10),
proteins, we  identified PFAM domains in each of the above    12 experimental genes and 1,734 additional EST unisequences.
genomes, and computed enrichment or depletion in subsets of    Nine probes per sequence were defined, leading  to 169,347
species. Protein domains from PFAM release 25 (ftp.sanger.ac.uk/    probes representing 20,889 genes and covering 20,916 provided
pub/databases/Pfam) were assigned to proteins in each genome    gene models (19,222 ORFs, 12 experimental genes and 1,682
using  hmmsearch  from hmmer3  (http://hmmer.janelia.org/    ESTs). In addition, 16,871 random probes (negative controls)
software), requiring an Evalue cutoff of 1e-5. For each genome,    were designed. Two copies of each probe were placed on the
the  total number  of proteins with each type  of domain was     array.
computed; a protein with multiple domains of the same type was    A second Nimblegen 1-plex array was designed using 15,026
counted only once. To identify domains enriched in subsets of      S. sclerotiorum gene models corresponding to 14,522 ORFs and
genomes, significant differences were identified by computing the    504 additional EST unisequences. Thirteen probes per sequence
p-value for each domain based on a hypergeometric distribution    were defined, leading to 190,130 probes representing 14,801
(phyper function in R), and computing q-values to correct for    genes and covering 14,858 provided gene models (14,360 ORFs
multiple testing (p.adjust, fdr). Domains significantly enriched in    and 498 ESTs). In addition, 9,047 random probes (negative
the S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea genomes (Table S10) were filtered to     controls) were designed. Two copies of each probe were placed
remove those found  in transposable elements (PF03221, Tc5    on the array.
transposase DNA binding domain; PF00078, Reverse transcrip-       Expression of fungal genes was studied during infection on
tase; PF00665, Integrase core domain; PF03184, DDE superfam-     sunflower cotyledon, and compared with in vitro expression. The
ily  endonuclease;  PF03732,  Retrotransposon  gag   protein;     experimental conditions were: (i) Infection of sunflower cotyledons
PF00075, RNase H; PF05225,  helix-turn-helix, Psq domain).    by mycelial plugs of B. cinerea (B05.10) and S. sclerotiorum at 2 days
Domains significantly depleted in the S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea     after inoculation (100% of the surface area was  infected),  (ii)
genomes (Table S11) were filtered to list those that are conserved     mycelial cultures grown in vitro (malt agar) for each fungal strain,
in at least 5 species.                                         and (iii) non-infected sunflower cotyledons. RNAs were extracted
                                                           from 3 biological replicates, labelled and hybridized to arrays. 2 or
EST libraries                                              3 biological replicates per experimental condition were exploit-
  For S. sclerotiorum, a total of 96,700 filtered EST sequenced were     able. Data were analysed using ANAIS methods [150]. Probe
generated from eight cDNA libraries, prepared from mRNA from     hybridization signals were normalized using the quantile function,
developing sclerotia, developing apothecia following 55 h light    and summed for each gene. Genes were considered as expressed
exposure, mycelia at pH 7, infected Brassica or infected tomato,    when the signal was above the defined background (1.5 fold the
two infection cushion samples, and mycelium exposed to oxidative     95th percentile of random probes hybridization signals), in all the
stress (Table S30). ESTs were aligned to the S. sclerotiorum genome     biological replicates of at least one experimental condition. The
using BLAST and compared to predicted gene structures.             identification of differentially expressed genes was performed using
  Fourteen cDNA  libraries  of various B.  cinerea  isolates (T4,    an ANOVA test. To deal with multiple testings, the ANOVA p-
B05.10, SAS566SAS405, ATCC 58025) and stages of develop-     values were further submitted to Bonferroni correction. Tran-
ment have been prepared and sequenced in various laboratories      scripts with a corrected p-value,0.05 and more than 2.0 fold
(Table S31). Some of them were publicly available [148,149]    change  in  transcript  level  were  considered  as  significantly
(library BcA1 and AL11), others were sequenced in the framework      differentially expressed. Details of experiments, raw values and
of the B. cinerea sequencing project by Genoscope (http://www.       lists  of  differentially  expressed genes  with  associated norma-
genoscope.cns.fr/, libraries PD0A*) while others are private (Bayer     lized values are available at http://urgi.versailles.inra.fr/Data/
Crop Sciences/P. Tudzynski). From these 14 cDNA  libraries     Transcriptome.



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      21                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 22]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis


Database resources and interface                      Genbank accession numbers
  B. cinerea T4 resources (http://urgi.versailles.inra.fr/       Assemblies and annotations were submitted to GenBank under
Species/Botrytis).  Databases   and   Genome    Browser     the following accession numbers: AAGT01000000 (S. sclerotiorum),
(Gbrowse,  Apollo)  system  relies on  the  international  open    AAID00000000 (B. cinerea B05.10), FQ790245 to FQ790362 (B.
source  project Generic Model Organism Database (GMOD:      cinerea T4).
http://www.gmod.org). The database was populated with B.
cinerea T4 genome sequences  (supercontigs and  contigs) and   Supporting Information
features predicted or mapped to these sequences: predicted genes,
                                                            Figure S1  Alignment of S. sclerotiorum scaffolds to optical mapproteins from Uniprot and local fungal protein database, ESTs
                                                         and location of telomeres. S. sclerotiorum assembly scaffolds (bluefrom  14  B.   cinerea cDNA  libraries  (83,000  ESTs,  9667
                                                         and black numbered rectangles, alternating colors) were aligned tounisequences), ESTs from S. sclerotiorum (70,000), genes from B.
                                                                    the optical map contigs (grey boxes) based on shared restrictioncinerea strain B05.10 and S. sclerotiorum, genome supercontigs of B.
                                                                                       sites (see Materials and Methods). Scaffold 4 is split into 2 piecescinerea  (B05.10)  and   S.   sclerotiorum,  Repeats  (Transposable
                                                                       (4a and 4b) at a contig gap based on this alignment (see MaterialsElements and Tandem Repeats). Results from automated gene
                                                         and Methods). The two smallest scaffolds (35 and 36) could not beprediction  are  currently manually  curated  using an  editing
                                                                  placed on the optical map due to lack of anchoring restriction sites.
interface (Apollo), leading to an increase in quality and reliable
                                                              Telomeric repeat arrays of TTAGGG were detected specifically in
annotation (http://urgi.versailles.inra.fr/Tools/Apollo). We have
                                                               sequence at or linked to scaffold ends, as shown with green circles.
also developed and setup an integrated system relying on the
                                                             (PDF)
Genome Report System (unpublished, http://urgi.versailles.inra.
fr/grs/index.html) set up to display functional annotation data on    Figure S2 GC content distribution of S. sclerotiorum, B. cinerea,
proteins  for both  S.  sclerotiorum and  B.  cinerea  (T4,  B05.10).    and other representative Pezizomycotina fungi. Percent GC for
Searches are processed through GnpIS QuickSearch (http://urgi.    10 kb windows is plotted on the x-axis, and percent of all genome
versailles.inra.fr/gnpis).                                      windows for each GC bin is plotted on the y-axis. S. sclerotiorum (Ss),
  B. cinerea B05.10 and S. sclerotiorum resources.  Se-     B. cinerea (Bc) and B. graminis (Bg) show a shifted lower %GC profile
quence data from the Broad Insitute is available from http://www.    compared to the rest of these genomes. N. crassa (Nc) is unique in
broadinstitute.org/annotation/genome/sclerotinia_sclerotiorum/     displaying a bimodal distribution of %GC. Other genomes shown
MultiHome.html and http://www.broadinstitute.org/annotation/     are  Aspergillus fumigatus  (Af),  Aspergillus nidulans (An), Magnaporthe
genome/botrytis_cinerea/.                                                  oryzae (Mo), Gibberella zeae (Gz), and Phaeosphaeria nodorum (Pn).
                                                             (PDF)
Peptidases                                                 Figure S3  Evidence  for accuracy  of gene  prediction  in  S.
  Complete proteome sequences were downloaded from NCBI or      sclerotiorum (A), B. cinerea T4 (B) and B. cinerea B05.10 (C). Four types
JGI and  subjected  to Merops Batch BLAST  analysis  [151].     of evidence were combined: (i) Functional annotation (at least one
Sequences from S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea identified by Merops as     domain/motif), (ii) Orthology between S. sclerotiorum, B. cinerea and
putative peptidases were scrutinised based on the presence of     other fungi, (iii) EST support, (iv) Nimblegen Microarrays support.
active site and ligand residues as well as e values (cut off 1e-5).    (PDF)
Additional BLAST analysis was performed at NCBI in order to
                                                            Figure S4  Gene length distribution before and after filtering ofconfirm or reject suspicious hits. We excluded from the analysis
                                                               dubious gene predictions. Histogram of gene length for B. cinerea
the peptidases of which the activity is restricted to an autocatalytic
                                                                           (Bc) B05.10 and T4 initial and filtered (high confidence) genes, S.
activation of the precursor protein. We also excluded putative
                                                                                     sclerotiorum (Ss) initial and filtered (high confidence) genes, N. crassa
peptidases with problematic function inference such as the S9 and
                                                                     (Nc) genes, and G. zeae (Gz) genes.
S33 proteases. The peptidases of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea were
                                                             (PDF)
subjected to SignalP analysis [152]. Analyses of the other fungal
peptidases were restricted to the families of which at least one    Figure S5  Dotplot view of syntenic regions between genomes.
sequence was predicted to correspond to a secreted peptidase and    (PDF)
performed as described.
                                                            Figure S6  Diversity  of ScTIR1 genomic  copies.  Full-length
                                                           genomic copies of ScTIR1 were retrieved from the genome using
Methods for CAZy annotation                      REPET and  aligned  (clustalW). The  aligment was  used  to
  The best protein models of the S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea     construct  a  phylogenetic  tree  using Maximum  parsimony.
genomes were  subject  to  expert  analysis  using  the CAZy     Identical sequences copies are circled.
database (www.cazy.org) annotation pipeline [153]. Each model    (PDF)
was compared by BLAST [154] to libraries of known catalytic
                                                            Figure S7  Gene count per OrthoMCL family for each species.and carbohydrate-binding modules derived from the CAZy
                                                         Genes were  clustered  into  families  using OrthoMCL  for  S.database and from previously analyzed genomes. Each identi-
                                                                                       sclerotiorum, both strains of B. cinerea, and 12 other fungal genomes.fied protein model was subject to modular analysis compring
                                                    The x-axis bins measure the number of genes per family for eachBLAST [154] and HMMer [155] analysis against CAZy-derived
                                                                             species, where orphan genes not in families are in the 0 bin, geneslibraries and HMM profiles, respectively, followed by human
                                                                         in single copy in a family are in the 1 bin, and paralogous genes ofcuration.  Later,  the  quality  of each  identified model was
                                                         2 or more in a family are in the higher bins. The y-axis variesmanually evaluated and an expert functional annotation was
                                                            between the subplots, and counts the total number of genes in each
proposed by comparison against characterized enzymes from
                                                                  bin per species.
CAZy. The approaches are described in more detail elsewhere
                                                             (PDF)
[153].  Finally, comparative  analysis was performed  against
other fungal genomes using the same principles as described    Figure S8  Phylogeny of apoptosis-associated BIR1-homologs in
before [156].                                                         fungi and yeasts. Dark gray boxes indicate homologs with two



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      22                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 23]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis


BIR-domains  in a  single  protein,  light  gray  boxes  indicate    Table S11 PFAM domain depletion in S.  sclerotiorum and B.
homologs with one BIR-domain in a single protein, white boxes      cinerea.
indicate homologs lacking a BIR-domain.                         (PDF)
(PDF)
                                                        Table S12  Signaling pathway components in S. sclerotiorum and
Figure S9  Growth of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea and five other     B. cinerea as compared to orthologs in three filamentous fungi and
Ascomycetes on monosaccharides and simple or complex plant      S. cerevisiae.
polysaccharides. More extensive growth  profiles for these and    (PDF)
other fungi can be found at www.fung-growth.org.
                                                        Table S13   S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea homologs of apoptosis-
(PDF)
                                                                       associated genes found in other fungi.
Figure S10   (A). Representation of S. sclerotiorum EST libraries    (PDF)
(percentage) corresponding to the 63,810 clones. (B). Representa-
                                                        Table S14   S.  sclerotiorum and B.  cinerea orthologs of Aspergillustion of each of the B. cinerea libraries (percentage) corresponding to
                                                                               nidulans genes involved in mating and fruiting body development.the 67,625 clones (71,238 ESTs) mapped and clustered on the B.
                                                             (PDF)cinerea T4 genome before assembling in EST contigs.
(PDF)                                                   Table S15  Orthologous genes shared between S. sclerotiorum, B.
                                                                                       cinerea and sclerotia-producing Aspergilli, A.flavus and A. oryzae.Figure S11  Localization on the S. sclerotiorum genome map of
                                                             (PDF)genes encoding secondary metabolism key enzymes. Regions that
show synteny with B. cinerea are indicated in red. SB1 to SB19    Table S16   S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea orthologs of conidiation-
indicate genes that are shared between the two species whereas S1     associated genes in Aspergillus nidulans and Neurospora crassa.
to S9 indicate S. sclerotiorum-specific genes (see Table S23 for more    (PDF)
details). SB1: PHS1,SB2: PKS1, SB3: PKS2, SB4: PKS8, SB5:
                                                        Table S17   S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea orthologs of appressorium-PKS9, SB6: PKS10, SB7: PKS12, SB8:PKS13, SB9: PKS18,
                                                                       associated genes in Magnaporthe oryzae.SB10: PKS21,  SB11: CHS1,  SB12: PKS6,  SB13: NRPS1,
                                                             (PDF)SB14:NRPS2, SB15: NRPS3, SB16: NRPS4, SB17: NRPS5,
SB18: NRPS6, SB19:DMATS1, S1: SsFUS1, S2: SsPKS3, S3:    Table S18  Total Carbohydrate-active enzyme and associated
SsPKS4, S4: SsPKS5, S5:SsPKS7, S6: SsPKS11, S7: SsPKS14,    (CAZy) modules of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea compared to seven
S8: SsPKS15, S9: SsPKS16.                                        other Ascomycetes.
(PDF)                                                        (PDF)
Table S1  Linkage groups in B. cinerea based on the analysis of 68    Table S19  Comparison of plant cell wall (PCW) and fungal cell
progeny from a cross.                                                 wall (FCW) degrading and modifying CAZyme family subsets
(PDF)                                                       between S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea and seven other ascomycetes.
Table S2  Genome summary of Pezizomycotina fungi.            (PDF)
(PDF)                                                   Table S20  Comparison of plant cell wall (PCW) and fungal cell
Table S3  Duplicated blocks within the genomes of B.  cinerea     wall (FCW) sets of CBM families between S. sclerotiorum and B.
strain B05.10 and S. sclerotiorum.                                                cinerea and seven ascomycetes.
(PDF)                                                        (PDF)
Table S4  Repeats identified de novo by cross-match alignments in    Table S21  Polysaccharide degradation-related genes that are
S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea genomes.                              induced upon infection.
(PDF)                                                        (PDF)
Table S5  Repeats  identified  in  S.  sclerotiorum and  B.  cinerea    Table S22  Expression  analysis  of  genes  encoding  secreted
genomes by RepeatMasker.                                             proteins.
(PDF)                                                        (PDF)
Table S6  Number of TE families and TE copies identified in S.    Table S23  Genes encoding secondary metabolism key enzymes
sclerotiorum and B. cinerea genomes using REPET.                       in S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea genomes.
(PDF)                                                        (PDF)

Table S7  Number  of solo-LTRs and  full-length  copies  of    Table S24  Expression changes of genes encoding membrane
Gypsy/Copia-like retroelements identified in the genomes of S.     transporters during mycelial and in planta growth of S. sclerotiorum and
sclerotiorum (Sclery) and B. cinerea (Boty).                               B. cinerea.
(PDF)                                                        (PDF)

Table S8  Conservation of S. sclerotiorum and B. cinerea genes in    Table S25  Transcription Factor-encoding genes in S. sclerotiorum
OrthoMCL families.                                        and B. cinerea, as compared to other ascomycetes.
(PDF)                                                        (PDF)

Table S9 GO Term  enrichment  for  genes  specific  to  S.    Table S26  Fungal  strains used  for  the  construction  of the
sclerotiorum and B. cinerea.                                         phylogeny shown in Figure 2.
(PDF)                                                        (PDF)

Table S10 PFAM domain enrichment in S. sclerotiorum and B.    Table  S27  Primer  sets  for  amplification  of  loci  in  the
cinerea.                                                                  Sclerotiniaceae.
(PDF)                                                        (PDF)



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      23                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 24]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



Table S28  Amplification methods and parameters used  for      Alexis Billard, and Rene´ Fritz (BIOGER) for their help in the annotation;
phylogenetic analyses of housekeeping loci.                             Caroline Kunz  (Universite´ Pierre  et Marie Curie,  Paris, France)  for
(PDF)                                                                     providing the B. cinerea progeny used for constructing the genetic map;
                                                                      Pablo Valenzuela for providing EST information.
Table S29  Support values  for each node  in the phylogeny
(Figure 2).                                       Author Contributions
(PDF)
                                                                    Conceived and designed the experiments: J Amselem, C Da Silva, RP de
Table S30   S.  sclerotiorum EST  sequences  generated by  this      Vries, L Gout, M Hahn, BJ Howlett, L Kohn, M-H Lebrun, J Poulain, N
project.                                                                   Poussereau, J-M Pradier, E Que´villon, H Quesneville, JA Rollins, A
(PDF)                                                              Simon, B Se´gurens, JAL van Kan, M Viaud, P Wincker. Performed the
                                                                           experiments: J Amselem, M Andrew, I Benoit, O Bouzid, P Cotton, C Da
Table S31  B. cinerea EST sequences generated by this project.        Silva, A Gautier, C Giraud, M Leroch, C Levis, N Poussereau, J-M
(PDF)                                                                          Pradier, E Que´villon, C Rascle, B Se´gurens, A Sexton, JAL van Kan, M
                                                                       Viaud. Analyzed the data: J Amselem, M Andrew, V Anthouard, EPText S1   Botrytis cinerea genetic map.
                                                                               Benito, Z Chen, M Choquer, J Colle´mare, A Couloux, PM Coutinho, CA
(PDF)
                                                           Cuomo, C Da Silva, EG Danchin, RP de Vries, M Dickman, PS Dyer, S
Text S2  Dual mating in  Botrytis  cinerea (teleomorph Botryotinia      Fillinger, E Fournier, T Giraud, C Gonzalez, L Gout, S Grossetete, U
fuckeliana).                                                                    Gu¨ldener, M Hahn, B Henrissat, BJ Howlett, C Kodira, L Kohn, M
(PDF)                                                                 Kretschmer, N Lapalu, A Lappartient, M-H Lebrun, M Leroch, C Levis, E
                                                                         Mauceli, C Neuve´glise, B Oeser, M Pearson, KM Plummer, J-M Pradier,
Text S3  Secondary metabolism gene clusters.                 E Que´villon, JA Rollins, E Silva, J Schumacher, A Sexton, A Sharon, A
(PDF)                                                              Simon, DM Soanes, NJ Talbot, A ten Have, B Tudzynski, P Tudzynski,
                                                           JAL van Kan, M Viaud, M Templeton, C Yandava, O Yarden, Q Zeng, C
Acknowledgments                                                    Sirven. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis  tools:  J Amselem, RE
                                                                           Beever, R Beffa, B Brault, CA Cuomo, L Kohn, N Lapalu, H Quesneville,
We acknowledge the contribution  of the Broad  Institute Sequencing    E Que´villon, JA Rollins, M Templeton, P Wincker. Wrote the paper: J
Platform;  the URGI  platform and  particulary Aminah  Keliet,  Erik     Amselem, EP  Benito, PM Coutinho, CA Cuomo, RP de  Vries, M
Kimmel, Isabelle Luyten, and Se´bastien Reboux for their contribution in     Dickman, PS Dyer, S Fillinger, E Fornier, L Gout, M Hahn, L Kohn, N
databases, interfaces, and system administration; Fabrice Legeai for his     Lapalu, M-H Lebrun, KM Plummer, J-M Pradier, JA Rollins, A Sharon, A
contribution to the Genome Report System (GRS); Anne-Sophie Walker     Simon, A ten Have, B Tudzynski, P Tudzynski, JAL van Kan, M Viaud.
(BIOGER) for providing some of the pictures in Figure 2; Weiwei Liu,

References

   1.  Bolton MD, Thomma BP, Nelson BD (2006) Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (Lib.) de       15.  Aguileta G, Marthey S, Chiapello H, Lebrun MH, Rodolphe F, et al. (2008)
      Bary: Biology and molecular traits of a cosmopolitan pathogen. Mol Plant            Assessing  the performance  of  single-copy  genes  for  recovering  robust
      Pathol 7: 1–16.                                                                          phylogenies. Syst Biol 57: 613–627.
   2.  Williamson B, Tudzynski B, Tudzynski P, van Kan JAL (2007) Botrytis cinerea:       16. Schoch CL, Sung G, Lo´pez-Gira´ldez F, Townsend JP, Miadlikowska J, et al.
    The cause of grey mould disease. Mol Plant Pathol 8: 561–580.                          (2009) The ascomycota tree of  life: A phylum-wide phylogeny clarifies the
   3.  Oliver RP, Solomon PS (2010) New developments  in pathogenicity and             origin and evolution of fundamental reproductive and ecological traits. Syst
      virulence of necrotrophs. Curr Opin Plant Biol 13: 415–419.                              Biol 58: 224–239.
   4. Dickman MB, Park YK, Oltersdorf T, Li W, Clemente T,  et  al. (2001)       17. Wang H, Xu Z, Gao L, Hao B (2009) A fungal phylogeny based on 82
     Abrogation of disease development in plants expressing animal antiapoptotic           complete genomes using the composition vector method. BMC Evol Biol 9:
      genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98: 6957–6962.                                      195.
   5. Kim KS, Min JY, Dickman MB (2008) Oxalic acid  is an elicitor of plant       18.  Staats M, van Baarlen P, van Kan JAL (2005) Molecular phylogeny of the plant
     programmed cell death during Sclerotinia sclerotiorum disease development. Mol           pathogenic genus Botrytis and the evolution of host specificity. Mol Biol Evol 22:
      Plant Microbe Interact 21: 605–612.                                               333–346.
   6. van Baarlen P, Woltering EJ, Staats M, van Kan JAL (2007) Histochemical and       19.  Holst-Jensen A, Kohn LM, Jakobsen KS, Schumacher T (1997) Molecular
      genetic analysis of host and non-host interactions of Arabidopsis with three           phylogeny and evolution of Monilinia (sclerotiniaceae) based on coding and
       Botrytis species: An important role for cell death control. Mol Plant Pathol 8:           noncoding rDNA sequences. Am J Bot 84: 686–701.
     41–54.                                                                             20.  Jaffe DB, Butler J, Gnerre S, Mauceli E, Lindblad-Toh K, et al. (2003) Whole-
   7. Choquer M, Fournier E, Kunz C, Levis C, Pradier JM, et al. (2007) Botrytis          genome sequence assembly for mammalian genomes: Arachne 2. Genome Res
        cinerea virulence factors: New insights into a necrotrophic and polyphageous            13: 91–96.
      pathogen. FEMS Microbiol Lett 277: 1–10.                                         21.  Fraissinet-Tachet L, Reymond-Cotton P, Fevre M (1996) Molecular karyotype
   8.  Williams B, Kabbage M, Kim H, Britt R, Dickman MB (2011) Tipping the             of the phytopathogenic fungus Sclerotinia sclerotiorum. Curr Genet 29: 496–501.
      balance: Sclerotinia sclerotiorum secreted oxalic acid suppresses host defenses by       22.  Shirane N, Masuko M, Hayashi Y (1989) Light microscopic observation of
     manipulating  the  host redox  environment. PLoS Path  7: e1002107.             nuclei and  mitotic chromosomes  of  Botrytis  species. Phytopathology  79:
      doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002107.                                                728–730.
   9.  Tudzynski  P, Kokkelink L (2009)  Botrytis  cinerea: Molecular  aspects  of a       23. Cambareri EB, Aisner R, Carbon J (1998) Structure of the chromosome VII
      necrotrophic  life-style.  In:  Deising H,  ed. The Mycota.  Vol. V.  Plant           centromere region in Neurospora  crassa: Degenerate transposons and simple
      Relationships. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. pp 29–50.                              repeats. Mol Cell Biol 18: 5465–5477.
 10. Spanu PD, Abbott JC, Amselem  J, Burgis TA, Soanes DM, et  al. (2010)       24. Sharp PM, Lloyd AT (1993) Regional base composition variation along yeast
    Genome expansion and gene loss in powdery mildew fungi reveal tradeoffs in          chromosome III: Evolution of chormosome primary structure. Nucleic Acids
     extreme parasitism. Science 330: 1543–1546.                                     Res 21: 179–183.
 11. Hane JK, Lowe RG, Solomon PS, Tan KC, Schoch CL,  et  al. (2007)       25. Rouxel T, Grandaubert J, Hane JK, Hoede C, van de Wouw AP, et al. (2011)
     Dothideomycete plant interactions illuminated by genome sequencing and             Effector  diversification  within compartments  of  the  Leptosphaeria  maculans
    EST analysis of the wheat pathogen stagonospora nodorum. Plant Cell 19:          genome affected by repeat-induced point mutations. Nat Commun 2: 202.
     3347–3368.                                                                        26.  Leroch M, Mernke D, Koppenhoefer D, Schneider P, Mosbach A, et al. (2011)
 12.  Ellwood SR, Liu Z, Syme RA, Lai Z, Hane JK, et al. (2010) A first genome            Living colors in the Gray Mold pathogen  Botrytis  cinerea: Codon-optimized
      assembly of the barley fungal pathogen Pyrenophora teres f. teres. Genome Biol 11:           genes encoding green fluorescent protein and mCherry, which exhibit bright
     R109.                                                                                      fluorescence. Appl Environ Microbiol 77: 2887–2897.
 13. Wang Z, Johnston PR, Takamatsu S, Spatafora JW, Hibbett DS (2006)       27. Haas BJ, Delcher AL, Wortman JR, Salzberg SL (2004) DAGchainer: A tool
     Toward a phylogenetic classification of the leotiomycetes based on rDNA data.             for mining segmental genome duplications and synteny. Bioinformatics 20:
     Mycologia 98: 1065–1075.                                                       3643–3646.
 14.  Spatafora JW, Sung GH, Johnson D, Hesse C, O’Rourke B, et al. (2006) A five-       28.  Paoletti M, Saupe SJ (2009) Fungal incompatibility: Evolutionary origin in
     gene phylogeny of pezizomycotina. Mycologia 98: 1018–1028.                        pathogen defense? Bio Essays 31: 1201–1210.



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      24                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 25]
                                                                                  Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



29.  Jo SH, Koo DH, Kim JF, Hur CG, Lee S, et al. (2009) Evolution of ribosomal       59.  Fedorova ND, Khaldi N, Joardar VS, Maiti R, Amedeo P, et  al. (2008)
    DNA-derived satellite repeat in tomato genome. BMC Plant Biol 9: 42.              Genomic islands in the pathogenic filamentous fungus Aspergillus fumigatus. PLoS
30.  Quesneville H, Bergman CM, Andrieu O, Autard D, Nouaud D, et al. (2005)          Genet 4: e1000046. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000046.
    Combined evidence annotation of transposable elements in genome sequences.       60.  Martin SH, Wingfield BD, Wingfield MJ, Steenkamp ET (2011) Structure and
    PLoS Comput Biol 1: e22. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010022.                            evolution of the Fusarium mating type locus: New insights from the Gibberella
31.  Flutre T, Duprat E, Feuillet C, Quesneville H (2011) Considering transposable                fujikuroi complex. Fungal Genet Biol, In Press.
    element diversification in de novo annotation approaches. PLoS ONE 6: e16526.       61.  Singh G, Ashby AM (1998) Cloning of the mating type loci from Pyrenopeziza
     doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0016526.                                                                   brassicae reveals the presence of a novel mating type gene within a discomycete
32.  Garfinkel DJ, Nyswaner KM, Stefanisko KM, Chang C, Moore SP (2005) Ty1       MAT 1–2  locus encoding a  putative  metallothionein-like  protein. Mol
    copy number dynamics in Saccharomyces. Genetics 169: 1845–1857.                      Microbiol 30: 799–806.
33.  Lavin JL, Oguiza JA, Ramirez L, Pisabarro AG (2008) Comparative genomics       62.  Paoletti M, Rydholm C, Schwier EU, Anderson MJ, Szakacs G, et al. (2005)
     of the oxidative phosphorylation system in  fungi. Fungal Genet Biol 45:           Evidence for sexuality in the opportunistic fungal pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus.
    1248–1256.                                                                 Curr Biol 15: 1242–1248.
34.  Carneiro P, Duarte M, Videira A (2007) The external alternative NAD(P)H       63. Yun SH, Berbee ML, Yoder OC, Turgeon BG (1999) Evolution of the fungal
    dehydrogenase NDE3  is  localized both  in the mitochondria and  in the                self-fertile reproductive  life style from self-sterile ancestors. Proc Natl Acad
    cytoplasm of Neurospora crassa. J Mol Biol 368: 1114–1121.                                Sci U S A 96: 5592–5597.
35. Schumacher J, Viaud M, Simon A, Tudzynski B (2008) The Galpha subunit       64.  Inderbitzin P, Harkness J, Tiurgeon BG, Berbee ML (2005) Lateral transfer of
   BCG1, the phospholipase C (BcPLC1) and the calcineurin phosphatase co-           mating system in Stemphylium. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102: 11390–11395.
     ordinately regulate gene expression in the grey mould fungus Botrytis cinerea.       65. van der Vlugt-Bergmans CJB, Brandwagt BF, Wagemakers CAM,  van’t
    Mol Microbiol 67: 1027–1050.                                                        Klooster JW, van Kan JAL (1993) Genetic variation and segregation of DNA
36.  Catlett NL, Yoder OC, Turgeon BG (2003) Whole-genome analysis of two-           polymorphisms in Botrytis cinerea. Mycol Res 97: 1193–1200.
    component signal transduction genes in fungal pathogens. Eukaryot Cell 2:       66. Dyer PS, O’Gorman CM (2011) Sexual development and cryptic sexuality in
    1151–1161.                                                                                    fungi: insights from Aspergillus species. FEMS Microbiol Rev, in press.
37.  Wilson RA, Talbot NJ (2009) Under pressure: Investigating the biology of plant       67. Galagan  JE, Calvo SE, Cuomo C, Ma  LJ, Wortman JR,  et  al. (2005)
     infection by Magnaporthe oryzae. Nat Rev Microbiol 7: 185–195.                        Sequencing of Aspergillus nidulans and comparative analysis with A. fumigatus and
38.  Jurick WM, 2nd, Rollins JA (2007) Deletion of the adenylate cyclase (sac1) gene            A. oryzae. Nature 438: 1105–1115.
     affects  multiple developmental pathways and  pathogenicity  in  Sclerotinia       68.  Erental A, Dickman MB, Yarden O (2008) Sclerotial development in Sclerotinia
      sclerotiorum. Fungal Genet Biol 44: 521–530.                                                          sclerotiorum: Awakening molecular analysis of a ‘‘dormant’’ structure. Fung Biol
39.  Klimpel A, Gronover CS, Williamson B, Stewart JA, Tudzynski B (2002) The         Rev 22: 6–16.
     adenylate cyclase (BAC) in Botrytis cinerea is required for full pathogenicity. Mol                                                                                      69. Russo GM, Dahlberg KR, Van  Etten JL  (1982)  Identification  of  a
     Plant Pathol 3: 439–450.                                                                                            development-specific protein in sclerotia of Sclerotinia sclerotiorum. Exp Mycol
40. Schumacher J, Kokkelink L, Huesmann C, Jimenez-Teja D, Collado IG, et al.                                                                                                        6: 259–267.
     (2008) The cAMP-dependent  signaling pathway and  its  role  in  conidial                                                                                        70.  Li M, Rollins JA (2009) The development-specific protein (Ssp1) from Sclerotinia
     germination, growth, and virulence of the gray mold Botrytis cinerea. Mol Plant-                                                                                                                    sclerotiorum  is encoded by a novel gene expressed exclusively in sclerotium
    Microbe Interact 21: 1443–1459.
                                                                                                                 tissues. Mycologia 101: 34–43.
41. Reape TJ, McCabe PF (2010) Apoptotic-like regulation of programmed cell
                                                                                        71.  Li M, Rollins JA (2010) The development-specific ssp1 and ssp2 genes of
    death in plants. Apoptosis 15: 249–256.
                                                                                                                        Sclerotinia sclerotiorum encode lectins with distinct yet compensatory regulation.
42.  Williams B, Dickman M (2008) Plant programmed cell death: Can’t live with it;
                                                                                    Fungal Genet Biol 47: 531–538.
     can’t live without it. Mol Plant Pathol 9: 531–544.
                                                                                       72.  Wall DP,  Fraser HB, Hirsh AE  (2003)  Detecting  putative  orthologs.
43.  Navarre DA, Wolpert TJ  (1999)  Victorin  induction  of an  apoptotic/
                                                                                             Bioinformatics 19: 1710–1711.
     senescence-like response in oats. Plant Cell 11: 237–249.
                                                                                        73.  Borkovich KA, Alex LA, Yarden O, Freitag M, Turner GE, et  al. (2004)
44. Sweat T, Wolpert T (2005) Characterization of victorin-induced cell death in
                                                                                         Lessons from the genome sequence of Neurospora crassa: Tracing the path from
     Arabidopsis thaliana. Phytopathology 95: S101.
                                                                                genomic blueprint to multicellular organism. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 68:
45.  Veneault-Fourrey C, Barooah M, Egan M, Wakley G, Talbot NJ (2006)
                                                                                     1–108.
    Autophagic fungal cell death is necessary for infection by the rice blast fungus.
                                                                                        74. Gourgues M, Brunet-Simon A, Lebrun M, Levis C (2004) The tetraspanin
     Science 312: 580–583.
                                                                                       BcPls1 is required for appressorium-mediated penetration of Botrytis cinerea into
46. Kershaw MJ, Talbot NJ (2009) Genome-wide functional analysis reveals that
                                                                                              host plant leaves. Mol Microbiol 51: 619–629.
     infection-associated fungal autophagy is necessary for rice blast disease. Proc
                                                                                        75. Xue C, Park G, Choi W, Zheng L, Dean RA, et al. (2002) Two novel fungal     Natl Acad Sci U S A 106: 15967–15972.
                                                                                               virulence genes specifically expressed in appressoria of the rice blast fungus.47.  Finkelshtein A, Shlezinger N, Bunis O, Sharon A (2011) Botrytis cinerea BcNma
                                                                                             Plant Cell 14: 2107–2119.       is involved in apoptotic cell death but not in stress adaptation. Fungal Genet
     Biol 48: 621–630.                                                                  76.  Sexton AC, Cozijnsen AJ, Keniry A,  Jewell E, Love CG,  et  al. (2006)
                                                                              Comparison of transcription of multiple genes at three developmental stages of48. Sharon A, Finkelshtein A, Shlezinger N, Hatam I (2009) Fungal apoptosis:
     Function, genes and gene function. FEMS Microbiol Rev 33: 833–854.                  the plant pathogen Sclerotinia sclerotiorum. FEMS Microbiol Lett 258: 150–160.
49.  Shlezinger N, Minz A, Gur Y, Hatam  I, Dagdas YF, et  al. (2011) Anti-       77. Schamber A, Leroch M, Diwo J, Mendgen K, Hahn M (2010) The role of
     apoptotic machinery protects the necrotrophic fungus Botrytis cinerea from host-            mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signalling components and the Ste12
    induced  apoptotic-like  cell death during plant  infection. PLoS Pathog  7:             transcription factor in germination and pathogenicity of Botrytis cinerea. Mol
    e1002185. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002185.                                           Plant Pathol 11: 105–119.
50.  Poulter RT, Goodwin TJ, Butler MI (2007) The nuclear-encoded inteins of       78.  Rolke Y, Liu S, Quidde T, Williamson B, Schouten A, et al. (2004) Functional
     fungi. Fungal Genet Biol 44: 153–179.                                                       analysis  of H2O2-generating systems  in  Botrytis  cinerea: The major cu-zn-
51. Bokor AAM, van Kan JAL, Poulter RTM (2010) Sexual mating of Botrytis            superoxide dismutase (BCSOD1) contributes to virulence on french bean,
      cinerea illustrates PRP8 intein HEG activity. Fungal Genet Biol 47: 392–398.            whereas a glucose oxidase (BCGOD1)  is dispensable. Mol Plant Pathol 5:
52.  Malvarez G, Carbone I, Grunwald NJ, Subbarao KV, Schafer M, et al. (2007)           17–27.
   New populations of Sclerotinia sclerotiorum from lettuce in california and peas and       79. Hansberg W, Aguirre  J  (1990) Hyperoxidant  states cause microbial  cell
      lentils in Washington. Phytopathology 97: 470–483.                                         differentiation by cell isolation from dioxygen. J Theor Biol 142: 201–221.
53.  Faretra F, Antonacci E, Pollastro S (1988) Sexual behaviour and mating system       80.  Segmu¨ller N, Kokkelink L, Giesbert S, Odinius D, van Kan J, et al. (2008)
     of Botryotinia  fuckeliana, teleomorph of  Botrytis  cinerea. J Gen Microbiol 134:       NADPH oxidases are involved in differentiation and pathogenicity in Botrytis
    2543–2550.                                                                                                     cinerea. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 21: 808–819.
54. Debuchy R, Berteaux-Lecellier V, Silar P (2010) Mating systems and sexual       81.  Aguirre J, Rı´os-Momberg M, Hewitt D, Hansberg W (2005) Reactive oxygen
    morphogenesis in Ascomycetes. In: Borkovich KA, Ebbole DJ, eds. Cellular             species and development  in microbial  eukaryotes. Trends Microbiol  13:
    and Molecular Biology of Filamentous Fungi. Washington: ASM Press. pp           111–118.
    501–535.                                                                           82. Takemoto D, Tanaka A, Scott B (2007) NADPH oxidases in fungi: Diverse
55. Idnurm A, Walton FJ, Floyd A, Heitman J (2008) Identification of the sex genes             roles of reactive oxygen species in fungal cellular differentiation. Fungal Genet
     in an early diverged fungus. Nature 451: 193–196.                                        Biol 44: 1065–1076.
56. Dyer PS (2008) Evolutionary biology: Genomic clues to original sex in fungi.       83. Turrion-Gomez  JL, Benito EP  (2011) Flux  of  nitric oxide between  the
    Curr Biol 18: R207–R209.                                                            necrotrophic pathogen Botrytis cinerea and the host plant. Mol Plant Pathol. pp
57.  Fraser JA, Stajich JE, Tarcha EJ, Cole GT, Inglis DO, et al. (2007) Evolution of           606–616.
     the mating type locus: Insights gained from the dimorphic primary fungal       84. Temme N, Tudzynski P (2009) Does  Botrytis  cinerea ignore H2O2-induced
    pathogens Histoplasma capsulatum, Coccidioides immitis, and Coccidioides posadasii.            oxidative stress during infection? Characterization of Botrytis activator protein 1.
    Eukaryot Cell 6: 622–629.                                               Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 22: 987–998.
58. Mandel MA, Barker BM, Kroken  S, Rounsley SD, Orbach MJ (2007)       85. De Bary A  (1884) Comparative morphology and  biology  of  the  fungi
    Genomic and population analyses of the mating type loci in Coccidioides species          mycetozoa and bacteria. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 525 p.
     reveal evidence for sexual reproduction and gene acquisition. Eukaryot Cell 6:       86. Maxwell DP, Lumsden RD  (1970) Oxalic  acid production by  Sclerotinia
    1189–1199.                                                                                                sclerotiorum in infected bean and in culture. Phytopathology 60: 1395–1398.



     PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      25                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 26]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



 87. Godoy G, Steadman JR, Dickman MB, Dam R (1990) Use of mutants to      117. Toyomasu T, Tsukahara M, Kaneko A, Niida R, Mitsuhashi W, et al. (2007)
     demonstrate the role of oxalic acid in pathogenicity of Sclerotinia sclerotiorum on            Fusicoccins are biosynthesized by an unusual chimera diterpene synthase in
       Phaseolus vulgaris. Physiol Mol Plant Pathol 37: 179–191.                                     fungi. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104: 3084–3088.
 88.  Rollins JA (2003) The Sclerotinia sclerotiorum pac1 gene is required for sclerotial      118.  Pinedo C, Wang CM, Pradier JM, Dalmais B, Choquer M, et  al. (2008)
     development and virulence. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 16: 785–795.                   Sesquiterpene synthase from the botrydial biosynthetic gene cluster of the
 89. Bateman DF, Beer SV (1965) Simultaneous production and synergistic action           phytopathogen Botrytis cinerea. ACS Chem Biol 3: 791–801.
      of oxalic acid and polygalacturonase during pathogenesis by Sclerotium  rolfsii.      119.  Saikia S, Nicholson MJ, Young C, Parker EJ, Scott B (2008) The genetic basis
     Phytopathology 55: 204–211.                                                                  for indole-diterpene chemical diversity in filamentous fungi. Mycol Res 112:
 90. Marciano P, Di Lenna P, Magro P (1983) Oxalic acid, cell wall-degrading           184–199.
     enzymes and pH in pathogenesis and their significance in the virulence of two      120.  Siewers V, Kokkelink L, Smedsgaard J, Tudzynski P (2006) Identification of an
        Ssclerotinia sclerotiorum isolates on sunflower. Physiol Plant Pathol 22: 339–345.              abscisic acid gene  cluster in the grey mold  Botrytis  cinerea. Appl Environ
 91. Favaron  F,  Sella  L, D’Ovidio R  (2004)  Relationships among endo-           Microbiol 72: 4619–4626.
      polygalacturonase, oxalate, pH, and plant polygalacturonase-inhibiting protein      121.  Stefanato FL, Abou-Mansour E, Buchala A, Kretschmer M, Mosbach A, et al.
      (PGIP) in the interaction between Sclerotinia sclerotiorum and soybean. Mol Plant            (2009) The ABC transporter BcatrB from Botrytis cinerea exports camalexin and
     Microbe Interact 17: 1402–1409.                                                                                is a virulence factor on Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 58: 499–510.
 92.  Cessna SG,  Sears VE, Dickman MB, Low PS  (2000)  Oxalic  acid, a      122.  Kretschmer M, Leroch M, Mosbach A, Walker AS, Fillinger S, et al. (2009)
      pathogenicity factor for Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, suppresses the oxidative burst of            Fungicide-driven evolution and molecular basis of multidrug resistance in field
      the host plant. Plant Cell 12: 2191–2200.                                               populations of the grey mould fungus Botrytis cinerea. PLoS Pathog 5: e1000696.
 93. Guimaraes RL, Stotz HU (2004) Oxalate production by Sclerotinia sclerotiorum            doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000696.
      deregulates guard cells during infection. Plant Physiol 136: 3703–3711.            123.  Saier MH,  Jr., Tran CV, Barabote RD (2006) TCDB: The transporter
 94.  Rollins  JA, Dickman MB  (2001) pH  signaling  in  Sclerotinia  sclerotiorum:              classification database for membrane transport protein analyses and informa-
      Identification of a pacC/RIM1 homolog. Appl Environ Microbiol 67: 75–81.              tion. Nucleic Acids Res 34(Database issue): D181–D186.
 95. Dickman MB (2007) Subversion or coersion? Pathogenic derminants in fungal      124. Dulermo T, Rascle C, Chinnici G, Gout E, Bligny R, et al. (2009) Dynamic
      phytopathogens. Fungal Biology Rev 21: 125–129.                                  carbon transfer during pathogenesis of sunflower by the necrotrophic fungus
 96. Maxwell DP (1973) Oxalate formation in Whetzelinia sclerotiorum by oxaloacetate               Botrytis cinerea: From plant hexoses to mannitol. New Phytol 183: 1149–1162.
      acetylhydrolase. Physiol Mol Plant Pathol 3: 279–288.                            125. Kovalchuk A,  Driessen AJ  (2010)  Phylogenetic  analysis  of  fungal ABC
 97. Han Y, Joosten H, Niu W, Zhao Z, Mariano PS, et al. (2007) Oxaloacetate             transporters. BMC Genomics 11: 177.
      hydrolase, the C–C bond lyase of oxalate secreting fungi. J Biol Chem 282:      126. Coleman JJ, Mylonakis E (2009) Efflux in fungi: La piece de resistance. PLoS
     9581–9590.                                                                    Pathog 5: e1000486. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000486.
 98. Magro P, Marciano P, Di Lenna P (1988) Enzymatic oxalate decarboxylation      127.  Shelest E (2008) Transcription factors in fungi. FEMS Microbiol Lett 286:
      in isolates of Sclerotinia sclerotiorum. FEMS Microbiol Lett 49: 49–52.                    145–151.
 99.  Du¨sterho¨ft E, Posthumus MA, Voragen AGJ (1992) Non-starch polysaccha-      128. Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG (1997) The
      rides from sunflower (Helianthus annuus) meal and palm-kernel (Elaeis guineensis)        CLUSTAL_X windows interface: Flexible strategies for multiple sequence
     meal? Investigation of the structure of major polysaccharides. J Sci Food Agric           alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res 25: 4876–4882.
      59: 151–160.                                                                  129.  Swofford DL PAUP*.  phylogenetic  analysis  using parsimony (*and  other  methods).
100.  Siezen RJ, Renckens B, Boekhorst J (2007) Evolution of prokaryotic subtilases:           Version 4.
     Genome-wide  analysis  reveals  novel  subfamilies  with  different  catalytic      130.  Posada D, Crandall KA (1998) MODELTEST: Testing the model of DNA
      residues. Proteins: Struct Funct Bioinf 67: 681–694.                                          substitution. Bioinformatics 14: 817–818.
101.  Fujinaga M, Cherney MM, Oyama H, Oda K, James MNG (2004) The      131.  Posada D, Buckley TR (2004) Model  selection and model averaging  in
      molecular structure and catalytic mechanism of a novel carboxyl peptidase            phylogenetics: Advantages  of  akaike  information  criterion and  bayesian
     from Scytalidium lignicolum. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101: 3364–3369.                  approaches over likelihood ratio tests. Syst Biol 53: 793–808.
102.  ten Have A, Espino JJ, Dekkers E, Van Sluyter SC, Brito N, et al. (2010) The      132.  Huelsenbeck  JP, Ronquist F  (2001) MRBAYES:  Bayesian  inference  of
       Botrytis cinerea aspartic proteinase family. Fungal Genet Biol 47: 53–65.                   phylogenetic trees. Bioinformatics 17: 754–755.
103.  Schirawski J, Mannhaupt G, Munch K, Brefort T, Schipper K, et al. (2010)      133. Temnykh S, DeClerck G, Lukashova A, Lipovich L, Cartinhour S, et al. (2001)
      Pathogenicity determinants in smut fungi revealed by genome comparison.           Computational and experimental analysis of microsatellites in rice (Oryza sativa
      Science 330: 1546–1548.                                                                               L.): Frequency, length variation, transposon associations, and genetic marker
104.  Ravensdale M, Nemri A,  Thrall PH,  Ellis JG, Dodds PN  (2011) Co-             potential. Genome Res 11: 1441–1452.
      evolutionary interactions between host resistance and pathogen effector genes      134. Lander ES, Green P, Abrahamson  J, Barlow A, Daly MJ,  et  al. (1987)
      in flax rust disease. Mol Plant Pathol 12: 93–102.                        MAPMAKER: An interactive computer package for constructing primary
105. Khang CH, Berruyer R, Giraldo MC, Kankanala P, Park SY, et al. (2010)            genetic linkage maps of experimental and natural populations. Genomics 1:
      Translocation of Magnaporthe oryzae effectors into rice cells and their subsequent           174–181.
       cell-to-cell movement. Plant Cell 22: 1388–1403.                                 135.  Foissac S, Gouzy J, Rombauts S, Mathe´ C, Amselem J, et al. (2008) Genome
106.  Faris JD, Zhang Z, Lu H, Lu S, Reddy L, et al. (2010) A unique wheat disease            annotation in plants and fungi : Eugene as a model platform. Curr Bioinform 3:
       resistance-like gene governs effector-triggered susceptibility to necrotrophic           87–97.
      pathogens. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107: 13544–13549.                        136.  Schiex T, Moisan A, Rouze´ P (2001) EuGe`ne: An eucaryotic gene finder that
107.  Ciuffetti LM, Manning VA, Pandelova I, Betts MF, Martinez JP (2010) Host-          combines  several  sources  of  evidence.  In: Gascuel O, Sagot M-,  eds.
       selective toxins, ptr ToxA and ptr ToxB, as necrotrophic effectors in the           Computational biology, LNCS 2066. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer. pp
      Pyrenophora tritici-repentis-wheat interaction. New Phytol 187: 911–919.                   111–125.
108. Noda  J, Brito N, Gonzalez C (2010) The  Botrytis  cinerea xylanase Xyn11A      137. Degroeve  S,  Saeys Y, De  Baets  B, Rouze  P, Van de Peer Y  (2005)
      contributes to virulence with  its necrotizing  activity, not with  its catalytic           SpliceMachine: Predicting  splice  sites from high-dimensional local context
       activity. BMC Plant Biol 10: 38.                                                           representations. Bioinformatics 21: 1332–1338.
109. Colmenares AJ, Aleu J, Duran-Patron R, Collado IG, Hernandez-Galan R      138. Lowe TM, Eddy SR (1997) tRNAscan-SE: A program for improved detection
      (2002) The putative role of botrydial and related metabolites in the infection             of transfer RNA genes in genomic sequence. Nucleic Acids Res 25: 955–964.
     mechanism of Botrytis cinerea. J Chem Ecol 28: 997–1005.                         139.  Kurtz S, Phillippy A, Delcher AL, Smoot M, Shumway M, et  al. (2004)
110. Tani H, Koshino H, Sakuno E, Cutler HG, Nakajima H (2006) Botcinins E             Versatile and open software for comparing large genomes. Genome Biol 5:
     and F and  botcinolide from  Botrytis  cinerea and  structural  revision  of          R12.
      botcinolides. J Nat Prod 69: 722–725.                                           140.  Levis C, Fortini D, Brygoo Y (1997) Flipper, a mobile Fot1-like transposable
111.  Keller NP, Turner G, Bennett JW (2005) Fungal secondary metabolism - from           element in Botrytis cinerea. Mol Gen Genet 254: 674–680.
      biochemistry to genomics. Nat Rev Microbiol 3: 937–947.                        141.  Diolez A, Marches F, Fortini D, Brygoo Y (1995) Boty, a long-terminal-repeat
112. Agger S, Lopez-Gallego F, Schmidt-Dannert C (2009) Diversity of sesquiter-            retroelement  in the phytopathogenic fungus  Botrytis  cinerea. Appl Environ
     pene  synthases  in the basidiomycete  Coprinus  cinereus. Mol Microbiol 72:           Microbiol 61: 103–108.
     1181–1195.                                                                    142.  Quevillon E, Silventoinen V,  Pillai S, Harte N, Mulder N, et  al. (2005)
113. Fox EM, Howlett BJ (2008) Secondary metabolism: Regulation and role in            InterProScan: Protein domains identifier. Nucleic Acids Res 33(Web Server
      fungal biology. Curr Opin Microbiol 11: 481–487.                                                issue): W116–W120.
114. Osbourn A (2010) Secondary metabolic gene clusters: Evolutionary toolkits for      143.  Marchler-Bauer A, Anderson JB, Chitsaz F, Derbyshire MK, DeWeese-Scott C,
      chemical innovation. Trends Genet 26: 449–457.                                              et al. (2009) CDD: Specific functional annotation with the conserved domain
115. Cuomo CA, Gu¨ldener U, Xu  J, Trail F, Turgeon BG, et  al. (2007) The            database. Nucleic Acids Research 37(suppl 1): D205–D210.
      Fusarium graminearum genome reveals a link between localized polymorphism      144.  Kanehisa M, Goto S, Furumichi M, Tanabe M, Hirakawa M (2010) KEGG
     and pathogen specialization. Science 317: 1400–1402.                                       for representation and analysis of molecular networks involving diseases and
116.  Dalmais B, Schumacher J, Moraga J, Le Pecheur P, Tudzynski B, et al. (2011)            drugs. Nucleic Acids Res 38(Database issue): D355–D360.
    The Botrytis cinerea phytotoxin botcinic acid requires two polyketide synthases      145.  Tatusov RL, Fedorova ND, Jackson JD, Jacobs AR, Kiryutin B, et al. (2003)
       for production and has a redundant role in virulence with botrydial. Mol Plant         The COG  database: An updated  version  includes  eukaryotes. BMC
      Pathol. pp 564–579.                                                                    Bioinformatics 4: 41.



      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      26                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230


[PDF physical page 27]
                                                                                   Genomes of Sclerotinia and Botrytis



146. Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G, Sonnhammer ELL (2001) Predicting      153.  Cantarel BL, Coutinho PM, Rancurel C, Bernard T, Lombard V, et al. (2009)
     transmembrane protein topology with a hidden markov model: Application to         The carbohydrate-active EnZymes database (CAZy): An expert resource for
     complete genomes. J Mol Biol 305: 567–580.                                          glycogenomics. Nucleic Acids Res 37(Database issue): D233–238.
147.  Li L, Stoeckert CJ, Jr., Roos DS (2003) OrthoMCL: Identification of ortholog      154.  Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, et al. (1997) Gapped
     groups for eukaryotic genomes. Genome Res 13: 2178–2189.                   BLAST and PSI-BLAST: A new generation  of  protein database search
148. Viaud M, Legeai F, Pradier J, Brygoo Y, Bitton F, et al. (2005) Expressed           programs. Nucleic Acids Res 25: 3389–3402.
     sequence tags from the phytopathogenic fungus  Botrytis  cinerea. Eur J Plant      155. Eddy SR (1998) Profile hidden markov models. Bioinformatics 14: 755–763.
      Pathol 111: 139–146.                                                           156.  Martin F, Kohler A, Murat C, Balestrini R, Coutinho PM, et  al. (2010)
149.  Silva E, Valdes J, Holmes D, Shmaryahu A, Valenzuela PD (2006) Generation            Perigord black truffle genome uncovers evolutionary origins and mechanisms of
     and analysis of expressed sequence tags from  Botrytis  cinerea. Biol Res 39:             symbiosis. Nature 464: 1033–1038.
     367–376.                                                                                    157.  Collemare  J,  Billard A,  Bo¨hnert HU, Lebrun M  (2008)  Biosynthesis  of
150. Simon A, Biot E (2010) ANAIS: Analysis of NimbleGen arrays interface.                                                                                        secondary metabolites in the rice blast fungus Magnaporthe grisea: The role of
      Bioinformatics 26: 2468–2469.                                                                                         hybrid PKS-NRPS in pathogenicity. Mycol Res 112: 207–215.
151.  Rawlings ND, Morton FR (2008) The MEROPS batch BLAST: A tool to
                                                                                    158.  Bushley KE, Turgeon BG (2010) Phylogenomics reveals subfamilies of fungal
      detect peptidases and their non-peptidase homologues in a genome. Biochimie
                                                                                     nonribosomal peptide synthetases and their evolutionary relationships. BMC
      90: 243–259.
                                                                                      Evol Biol 10: 26.
152.  Nielsen H, Engelbrecht  J, Brunak S, von Heijne G (1997) Identification of
      prokaryotic and eukaryotic signal peptides and prediction of their cleavage
        sites. Protein Eng 10: 1–6.





      PLoS Genetics  | www.plosgenetics.org                      27                    August 2011  | Volume 7  | Issue 8  | e1002230