                                                                                                                View Article Online





16:49:44.
22/10/2014
on
University
Tufts
by
Downloaded
2005.
June
21
on
Published





           Scheme 5  Proposed enzymatic and non-enzymatic reactions of verticillene-12-yl cation (A+); the bold arrow indicates a route in the plausible
             enzymatic reaction.


          Discussion                                                         in the active site of terpene synthases. Crystal structures of
                                                                          bornyl diphosphate synthase27 and squalene–hopene cyclase28
         From the series of experimental results described above, we    complexed with aza analogues of cation intermediates have been
           proposed a  detailed  cyclization mechanism of a  plausible     reported. In the active sites of these enzymes, highly ﬂexible
           phomactatriene synthase (PMTS) as shown  in Scheme  5.     intermediates adopt suitable orientations and conformations for
          The results of feeding experiments with 13C-labelled acetates     cyclization by a number of hydrophobic contacts with amino
            suggested that PMTS incorporates GGDP and stabilizes it as a     acid residues.
             suitable boat-like transition state in which the terminal allylic      Experimental results on the acid treatment of verticillol (5)
           pyrophosphate group and two oleﬁns are located at proper    provide useful information on the reactivity of carbocationic
             positions for cyclization. Enzyme-assisted ionization of the     intermediates and on the reaction pathways forming diterpene
           diphosphate group and production of the resultant allylic cation    hydrocarbons. The result that BF3 treatment of 5 at room tem-
             trigger sequential C–C bond formations to give verticillen-12-     perature gave a number of products suggests the high reactivity
              yl cation (A+). Based on the incorporation study with 13C-     of the initial intermediate A+ under standard conditions for the
             labelled acetate, these reactions proceed in a highly restricted    enzymatic reaction, and the existence of many reaction pathways
            space of the active site. Recently, experimental evidence has     yielding diterpene hydrocarbons. This suggests that the plausible
           been accumulated on the preorganization of a polyene substrate   PMTS freezes the conformation of cation A+ as the most stable


                                                              O r g . B i o m o l . C h e m . , 2 0 0 5 , 3 , 2 7 1 3 – 2 7 2 2      2 7 1 9