
[PDF physical page 1]
Trends in
Genetics

Spotlight
Convergent evolution for  themselves, the microbes colonizing them,  the mantle cells of M. petechialis. By com-
                                           or a combination of both [3]. While most  bining complementary chromatography,
antibiotic biosynthesis in  pathways elucidated  in invertebrates  in  immunocytochemistry, and molecular cy-
bacteria and animals        the past decade  originated from  their  togenetic techniques, they demonstrated
                                        microbiomes, recent examples from corals,  that a metabolite accumulates in struc-
Nicolas Papon   ,1,*,@              sea urchins, and sea cucumbers indicate  tures along the epithelia of the mantle mar-
Vincent Courdavault   ,2,*,@ and     that the hosts can also synthesize complex  gin (Figure 1C). Additional transmission
Marnix H. Medema   3,4,*,@          metabolites themselves [4–7]. Now, a new  electronic microscopy analysis shed light
                                  and remarkable report by Yue and col-  on the storage of this molecule in speciﬁc
Convergent  evolution has been  leagues from the research groups of  mucous cells of the mantle and on the
described  for  several  metabolic  Margaret McFall-Ngai and Baozhong Liu  secretion of the metabolites outside the ep-
pathways across the kingdoms of  has provided surprising insights into the   ithelium. While the authors claim that this
                                   endogenous biosynthesis of polyketide   antibiotic represents erythromycin  itself,life. However, there is hitherto no ev-
                                                 antibiotics in a mollusk [8].              based on  its mass-to-charge ratio and
idence for such an interkingdom pro-
                                                                                      recognition by erythromycin-speciﬁc anti-
cess for antimicrobials. A new report                                    The mud-dwelling clam, Meretrix petechialis,  bodies, additional research will be required
suggests that marine animals have                                                           is one of the most commercially maricultured  to provide analytical evidence for this in the
evolved the ability to biosynthesize                                             shellﬁsh in China (Figure 1A) and  is an  form of tandem mass spectrometry or nu-
antimicrobial polyketides, in parallel  emerging model for studying reproduction  clear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
with bacteria.                      and immune responses against pathogen  Nevertheless, the molecule might well repre-
                                             invasion in mollusks. In this context, a tran-  sent a cyclic polyketide in a way reminiscent
                                           scriptomic analysis allowed Yue and col-   of erythromycin or its precursors.
For decades, the marine world has pro-  leagues to identify a nucleotide sequence,
vided human society with extremely di-  named MpES, that was predicted to encode  To determine a putative role for the MpES-
verse natural products. Several hundred  a protein displaying a combination of do-  predicted PKS, the authors then took ad-
new marine molecules produced by bacte-  mains characteristic of a class I polyketide  vantage of a previously developed RNAi
ria, fungi, algae, and invertebrates are iden-  synthase (PKS), a type of enzyme rarely  strategy in M. petechialis. RNAi targeting
tiﬁed from the world’s oceans each year  found in animals but well described in  MpES signiﬁcantly reduced both the level
and have potential interest for food, indus-  bacteria and fungi for producing complex  of MpES mRNA and the accumulation of
try, cosmetics, and health [1]. A large pro-  polyketides. The authors then went on  corresponding metabolites in the shellﬁsh
portion of these biocompounds arise from  to show that MpES shares some amino  mantle, providing ﬁrm evidence of a func-
so-called ‘secondary metabolism’, also  acid sequence similarity with the bacterial   tional role of MpES in the synthesis of the
known as specialized metabolism. They  deoxyerythronolide B synthase (DEBS,  putative polyketide metabolite in the mud-
are mostly involved in intra- and interspe-  Figure 1B), which is known for speciﬁcally  dwelling clam  (Figure  1B). They  also
ciﬁc communications and some are used  driving the biosynthesis of a precursor of  showed that antibacterial activity was sub-
as chemical weapons to survive in the sea-  the broad-spectrum antibiotic erythromy-   stantially reduced after removing the puta-
bed. Four decades of intensive chemical   cin. However, the protein domain architec-   tive polyketide metabolite using antibody-
research, combined with the progressive  tures of MpES and DEBS are markedly  mediated afﬁnity chromatography.
explosion in the availability of genome   different and the sequence  identity  of
resources, has deeply strengthened our  MpES to DEBS is not substantially higher   Lastly, to decipher polyketide biosynthesis
knowledge of the architecture of second-  than the identity of MpES to other bacterial   in M. petechialis and to potentially broaden
ary biosynthetic pathways in marine bac-  PKSs. Interestingly, MpES transcripts were    it to other animals, a combination of ge-
teria, fungi, and algae [2]. However, little  found to preferentially accumulate in the  netic breeding, expression analysis, and
is known about the production of sec-  shellﬁsh mantle, a tissue acting as both  genome mining provided a compilation of
ondary metabolites in the main marine  a mechanical and biochemical barrier by  data suggesting that:  (i) the MpES DNA
invertebrate clades, including sponges,   interfacing directly with the environment.    sequence is present in the M. petechialis
cnidarians, bryozoans, echinoderms, as-                                    genome,   (ii) the MpES-encoding gene
cidians, and mollusks. Furthermore, we  These observations led Yue and col-   is expressed in the early developmental
are not sure whether these complex mol-  leagues to investigate the putative pres-  stages of the shellﬁsh,  (iii) two alleles of
ecules are synthesized by marine animals  ence of erythromycin-like molecules in  MpES segregate during reproduction, and


                                                                                                                    Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4  237


[PDF physical page 2]
                                                      Trends in Genetics





                                                                                                                                                   TrendsTrends inin GeneticsGenetics
Figure 1. Endogenous biosynthesis of a polyketide antibiotic in the mud-dwelling clam Meretrix petechialis. (A) Anatomy of M. petechialis. (B) Yue and
colleagues identiﬁed a nucleotide sequence, named mpES (in blue), predicted to encode a protein with a domain architecture similar to a type I polyketide synthase
(PKS), in the bivalve M. petechialis. Further investigations revealed that MpES has distant amino acid sequence similarity to the bacterial deoxyerythronolide B synthase
(DEBS, encoded by eryAI-III), which is known for speciﬁcally driving the biosynthesis of a precursor of erythromycin. In addition, explorations of eukaryotic genomic
resources revealed that MpES gene homologs are sporadically found in roughly 30 additional species belonging to various animal clades within the tree of life (in sky
blue). (C) Investigators also showed that MpES transcripts are preferentially detected in the shellﬁsh mantle and that a possibly erythromycin-like metabolite is
accumulated in speciﬁc mucous cells along the epithelium of the mantle margin and secreted outside the epithelium.



(iv) additional genes encoding proteins  of mechanical, cellular, and biochemical  metabolic engineering, which had hitherto
similar to enzymes involved in polyketide  strategies for surviving in highly challenging  been ﬁlled by bacterial, fungal, and plant
tailoring in bacteria can also be identiﬁed  environments. Above all, this ﬁnding pro-  enzymes.
in the M. petechialis genome (although  vides a striking example of a convergent
no evidence was presented  for  their  evolution  of  antimicrobial polyketides  Acknowledgments
involvement in a pathway with MpES).  across distinct kingdoms and propels   V.C. acknowledges funding from the ARD2020 Bio-
Further genomic explorations revealed  exciting research that will elucidate the   pharmaceutical program of the Région Centre Val de
that MpES gene homologs are sporadically   full structure of the metabolite and its   Loire (ETOPOCentre project), le Studium (Consortium
                                                                                                                           fellowship), and ANR MIACYC (ANR-20-CE43-0010).
found in roughly 30 additional eukaryotic  complete biosynthetic pathway. Major
species within the tree of life (e.g., reptilia,  advances  in multi-omics technologies
                                                                                     Declaration of interests
amphibia, ﬁshes, and birds) (Figure 1B). In  may assist in identifying all the enzymes in
                                                                             No interests are declared.
addition, phylogenetic inference provided  such animal metabolic pathways, even
compelling evidence that MpES is of animal   in the absence of gene clustering [9,10].
                                                                                                                      1Univ Angers, Univ Brest, IRF, SFR ICAT, F-49000 Angers,
origin.                            Once these enzymes are characterized, it   France
                                                          will be particularly important to decipher   2Biomolécules et Biotechnologies Végétales, BBV, EA2106,
                                                                                                                                        Université de Tours, Tours, France
In sum, Yue and colleagues shed light on   their tissue/cell/subcellular compartmental-    3Bioinformatics Group, Wageningen University,
the likely endogenous biosynthesis of a   ization, to determine whether there is a   Droevendaalsesteeg, 6708, PB, Wageningen, The Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                      4Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Sylviusweg 72,
polyketide metabolite in the mud-dwelling  higher level of complexity in this metabolic   2333BE Leiden, The Netherlands
clam M. petechialis, potentially making  pathway, as is observed for most plant
this mollusk the ﬁrst animal known to pro-  secondary metabolites. Finally, it is im-   *Correspondence:
                                                                                                                              nicolas.papon@univ-angers.fr (N. Papon),
duce a complex polyketide antibiotic.  portant to mention that such research    vincent.courdavault@univ-tours.fr (V. Courdavault), and
From an ecological point of view, this  could also ﬁnd future applications  in   marnix.medema@wur.nl (M.H. Medema).
                                                                                                                                @Twitter: @NicolasPapon49 (N. Papon), @v_courdavault
report teaches us how some marine in-  health biotechnology. The newly identi-    (V. Courdavault), and @marnixmedema (M.H. Medema).
vertebrates, devoid of any adaptive im-  ﬁed animal enzymes for polyketide bio-    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.2023.02.005
mune system, have co-opted a plethora  synthesis could reinforce the toolkit for  © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.


238   Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4


[PDF physical page 3]
Trends in Genetics





References                                                    4. Li, F. et al. (2022) Sea urchin polyketide synthase SpPks1     8. Yue, X. et al. (2022) The mud-dwelling clam Meretrix
  1. Sigwart, J.D. et al. (2021) Unlocking the potential of marine       produces the naphthalene precursor to echinoderm pigments.         petechialis secretes endogenously synthesized erythromycin.
     biodiscovery. Nat. Prod. Rep. 38, 1235–1242                       J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144, 9363–9371                               Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 119, e2214150119
  2. Papon, N. et al. (2022) Marine drugs: biology, pipelines,     5. Burkhardt, I. et al. (2022) Ancient plant-like terpene biosyn-     9. Singh, K.S. et al. (2022) Integrative omics approaches for
     current and future prospects for production. Biotechnol.        thesis in corals. Nat. Chem. Biol. 18, 664–669                    biosynthetic pathway discovery in plants. Nat. Prod. Rep.
    Adv. 54, 107871                                               6. Scesa, P.D. et al. (2022) Ancient defensive terpene biosynthetic       39, 1876–1896
  3. Voser, T.M. et al. (2022) How different are marine microbial       gene clusters in the soft corals. Nat. Chem. Biol. 18, 659–663   10. Dugé de Bernonville, T. et al. (2020) Identifying missing
     natural products compared to their terrestrial counterparts?     7. Thimmappa, R. et al. (2022) Biosynthesis of saponin defensive        biosynthesis enzymes of plant natural products. Trends
    Nat. Prod. Rep. 39, 7–19                                compounds in sea cucumbers. Nat. Chem. Biol. 18, 774–781       Pharmacol. Sci. 41, 142–146





                                                                                                                    Trends in Genetics, April 2023, Vol. 39, No. 4  239