
[PDF physical page 1]
                           Research Article

                                                How to cite: Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202507847
 Biosynthesis                                                                               doi.org/10.1002/anie.202507847

P450 Enzyme LyoI Performs Hydro-2,2′-Bifuran Oxidation in the
Polyether Ionophore Lysocellin

Michelle H. Rasmussen, Søren L. B. Møller, Esben B. Svenningsen, Thomas Tørring,*
and Thomas B. Poulsen*



  Abstract: Polyether ionophores are potent antimicrobials, albeit also cytotoxic against mammalian cells. We have identiﬁed
  several polyether ionophores containing a common hydro-2,2′-bifuran-2-ol (hemiketal) moiety, which cannot be derived
  from the canonical biosynthetic steps observed for the compound class, suggesting an unusual oxidative transformation.
  To identify the responsible enzyme, we applied CRISPR–BEST to knock out genes in the lysocellin-producing strain S.
  longwoodensis. This allowed us to propose the ﬁrst annotation of the lysocellin biosynthetic gene cluster and identify
  the responsible P450 enzyme, LyoI, through reconstitution of the function in vivo. LyoI knockout provided access to
  the non-oxidized precursor (pre-lysocellin) which allowed both in vitro validation of the unusual direct hydro-2,2′-
  bifuran to hydro-2,2′-bifuran-2-ol oxidation and investigation of the impact on biological activity. Interestingly, absence
  of the LyoI-mediated oxidation greatly reduced the biological potency of the compound. Closer investigation of the
  sequence revealed that LyoI lacks a key conserved acidic residue, which proved essential for the unusual oxidative
  function of the enzyme. Through a sequence similarity network of LyoI, we were able to identify a wide range of
  non-canonical P450 enzymes, highlighting the possibilities of a biosynthesis-focused approach to discovering novel
  enzymes.



Introduction                                               ﬁcation of an unusual in vivo enzymatic transformation and
                                                             the subsequent identiﬁcation of the responsible biosynthetic
Enzymes catalyze a wide range of chemical transformations    gene.[5–7]  Speciﬁcally, cytochrome P450 enzymes, and the
with  exceptional  regio- and  stereoselectivities,  including    great variety of oxidative reactions they catalyze, has recently
C─C bond formations, cyclizations, and C─H bond  acti-   been garnering focus in the ﬁeld.[8–11] Here, we highlight the
vations, which can allow for the introduction of chemical    identiﬁcation of an intriguing enzymatic transformation by a
diversity into otherwise inaccessible positions in complex   P450 enzyme in the family of polyether ionophores, inspired
molecules.[1]  In  addition  to  the  fascination  of  Natures   by our previous work on this compound family.
impressive (bio)synthetic repertoire, the interest in applying       Polyether ionophores are polyketide natural products,
enzymes in synthetic reactions, termed chemoenzymatic syn-    biosynthetically produced by members of the Streptomyc-
thesis, has recently increased in both academia and industry    etaceae family.[12] They are oxygen-rich molecules, containing
driven by increasing demands for sustainable production   a variety of oxygenated functional groups, such as alcohols,
processes.[2–4] The discovery of novel enzymes is therefore of    ketones, and ether rings. The oxygen groups are distributed
substantial interest with one approach being through identi-   throughout the polyketide hydrocarbon backbone, which is
                                                               generally polycyclic, saturated, and rich in stereocenters.[13]
                                                             Polyether ionophores  display broad  biological  activities,
                                                       which are believed to primarily be driven by their ability[*] M. H. Rasmussen, S. L. B. Møller, E. B. Svenningsen, T. B. Poulsen
   Department of Chemistry, Aarhus University, Langelandsgade 140,     to perturb ion gradients[14] although other mechanisms have
   DK, Aarhus C 8000, Denmark                                     also been reported.[15,16] They are particularly potent anti-
    E-mail: thpou@chem.au.dk                                          microbials,[12] and selected members are applied heavily in
    T. Tørring                                                               agriculture.[17,18] However, due to general uncertainty about
   Department of Biological and Chemical Engineering, Aarhus           their mammalian activities, polyether ionophores have not
    University, Gustav Wieds Vej 10, DK, Aarhus C 8000, Denmark       been applied in human  clinical  trials. We,[19] as well as
    E-mail: thomast@bce.au.dk                                            others,[20] have recently studied the  ability of polyether
    Additional supporting information can be found online in the         ionophores to target bacterial persisters and bioﬁlms. Fur-
   Supporting Information section                                                           thermore, we have applied synthesis to understand the fun-
  © 2025 The Author(s). Angewandte Chemie International Edition     damental impact of stereochemistry on polyether ionophore
    published by Wiley-VCH GmbH. This is an open access article under    activity[21] and shown that semi-synthetic analogues of natural
    the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial
                                                             polyether ionophores can possess enhanced  antibacterial
    License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any
   medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used    selectivity. The latter studies suggest that the therapeutic win-
    for commercial purposes.                            dow of these compounds can be widened.[22] Consequently,


Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202507847 (1 of 10)        © 2025 The Author(s). Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by Wiley-VCH GmbH


[PDF physical page 2]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     43,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202507847,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Library
                                                                                                                                              on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [11/01/2026].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the
Figure 1. Natural carboxyl polyether ionophores containing the ﬁve-membered hemiketal scaﬀold (HBFO) (highlighted in green). The underlined                                  Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     andcompound names indicate the drawn structure, while the names below indicate structural analogues.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Conditions
we have a keen interest in methods allowing for further explo-    biosynthetic genes were knocked out to deﬁne the biosyn-
ration of the chemical space around the natural polyether    thetic gene cluster and to discover the oxidative enzyme, a
ionophores, with the identiﬁcation of new biocatalytic meth-   cytochrome P450. This also allowed us to characterize the
ods for late-stage modiﬁcations having particular appeal.        hydro-2,2′-bifuran precursor, C17-des-oxy-lysocellin (hence-
   Through our work, we have observed that several family    forth: pre-lysocellin), and to study the role of the oxidation
members,  including  the  potent  anti-viral compound X-    in the  biological  activity of  lysocellin. The enzyme was
206[23] and  lysocellin,[24]  share a  special hydrofuran-2-ol   expressed heterologously to investigate its chemoenzymatic
(5-membered hemiketal) group with an attached furan ring    potential, showing a fast and highly speciﬁc tailoring enzyme.
(Figure 1a). Unlike the related six-membered hemiketal (a    Investigations into the amino acid sequence of the P450
tetrahydro-2H-pyranol-2-ol derivative) also present in both   enzyme showed that the sequence is missing a key conserved                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
X-206 and lysocellin, this particular motif cannot readily   residue in the highly conserved “acid–alcohol” pair, that          on
result from the characteristic cyclization reactions that occur    typically is involved in the last step of the catalytic cycle in                        Wiley
during the biosynthesis of these polyketides,[25] and we there-   P450 enzymes.[31]
fore speculated that its formation involved an unidentiﬁed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Online
oxidative tailoring enzyme operating directly on a hydro-2,2′-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Library
bifuran (HBF) substrate. The introduction of hydroxyl groups   Results and Discussion                                                                     for
by tailoring enzymes is well precedented in the compound                                                                                                                                                                                                  rules
class,[26–29] but the speciﬁc scaffold (subsequently referred to    Identiﬁcation and Bioinformatic Investigation of the                      of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           use;as a hydro-2,2′-bifuran-2-ol, HBFO, moiety) has not been    Biosynthetic Gene Cluster of Lysocellin
                                                                                                                                              OA
previously investigated. Our interest was further piqued by
the fact that the putative hydro-2,2′-bifuran (HBF) oxidation   To identify the biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) of lysocellin,                                      articles
substrate, which interestingly is present in other ionophores, is   we analyzed the full genome of S. longwoodensis using anti-              are
highly hindered and inaccessible for diversiﬁcation by classic  SMASH (version 7.0).[32] A total of 33 BGCs were identiﬁed,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       governed
synthetic methods, suggesting that the responsible oxidative   seven within the category of polyketide synthase (PKS) pro-         by
enzyme might be a valuable catalyst to functionalize complex    ducers, one of these–a type 1 PKS BGC–was predicted to give              the
molecules.                                               a chemical structure in concordance with lysocellin. Within
   Here, we utilize the ionophore lysocellin and its producing   the BGC, we predicted one ketoreductase (KR) and two                                               applicable
                                        as a                                     model tostrain,        S. longwoodensis              DSM 41677,[30]                                                    study   dehydratase                                                       (DH) domains                                                                                           as                                                                                                  inactive                                                                                    due to mutations                                                                                                                              in
                                                                                                      an                                      Creativethis    unusual              oxidative transformation.                                      In                                               practice,                                                      several                                                                                                             (Figure                                                                                                                             S1).                                                                  active site conserved                                                                     amino                                                                                            acid                                                                                                          sequence[33,34]
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202507847 (2 of 10)        © 2025 The Author(s). Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by Wiley-VCH GmbH                                 Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                License


[PDF physical page 3]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     43,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202507847,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Library
                                                                                                                                              on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [11/01/2026].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Conditions





Figure 2. Proposed biosynthesis of lysocellin. a) Proposed biosynthesis sequence of the backbone of lysocellin. Each circle represents an enzymatic
domain: AT (acyl transferase), T (thiolation), KS (ketosynthase), DH (dehydratase), ER (enoyl reductase), KR (ketoreductase), and TE (thioesterase).
White circles indicate inactive domains. The stereochemistry of the lysocellin backbone is based on the stereochemistry of lysocellin.[35] b) Proposed
tailoring reactions of lysocellin. The order by which the cyclization reactions occur is unknown. All tailoring reactions are portrayed to occur on the
assembly line, though it is currently uncertain at which point the compound is released as the free acid.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
Combining the predicted chemical structure with knowledge   The P450 Enzyme LyoI is Involved in the Biosynthesis of Lysocellin          on
of the inactive domains, the full structure of lysocellin–except                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wiley
for the oxidation–was biosynthetically accounted for. This   To probe  the  role  of  lyoI and  lyoJ, we  applied  the
allows us to propose the ﬁrst annotation of the lysocellin BGC   Streptomyces-speciﬁc method CRISPR–BEST[38,39] to achieve                             Online
(Figures 2a and S2).                                               their individual knockouts. In addition, the core biosynthetic                                  Library
   Following assembly of the linear polyketide, we pro-   gene, lyoA, was inactivated to conﬁrm that the correct BGC              for
pose the cyclization of lysocellin to occur directly in the   had been identiﬁed. In practice, single-guide RNAs (sgRNAs)                        rules
western part of the structure, forming the aforementioned    for the three genes were designed using CRISPy-web,[40]          of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            use;six-membered hemiketal, and through two epoxidations (by    separately bridged into the pCRISPR–cBEST plasmid and
                                                                                                                                              OA
lyoK) followed by a cyclization cascade (by lyoL) in the   introduced into E.  coli ET12567/pUZ8002. The plasmids
eastern part of the structure (Figure 2b), as is commonly   were subsequently transferred from the E. coli strain to S.                                       articles
observed for the family of polyether ionophores.[25] We   longwoodensis by interspecies conjugation. Positive knockout              are
propose lysocellin to be released as the free acid as the last   mutants were conﬁrmed by sequencing.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       governedstep of the biosynthesis, as observed for multiple carboxyl      Fermentation broths  of the three knockout mutants,
                                                                                                                                              by
polyether ionophores.[27,28,36,37] Analysis of the BGC led us to     lyoA,   lyoI, and   lyoJ, along with the wild type (wt)              the
identify two additional genes (lyoI and lyoJ) in proximity of    S. longwoodensis were investigated by HPLC-MS for the
the BGC (Figure S2), which were both predicted to encode   production of secondary metabolites (Figure 3a). Knockout                                                applicable
cytochrome          P450               enzymes                      and thereby                                     being candidates                                                           for    of                                                                the                                                                  core                                                                            biosynthetic                                                                                      gene, lyoA,                                                                                                      resulted                                                                                                                    in                                                                                                    a complete
                              (HBF)                                                oxidation.mediating the               cryptic                      hydro-2,2′-bifuran                                                                      loss                                                                    of                                                                              lysocellin                                                                                production,                                                                                 conﬁrming                                                                                                              that                                                                                                           the                                                                                                                      correct                                       Creative
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202507847 (3 of 10)        © 2025 The Author(s). Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by Wiley-VCH GmbH                                  Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                License


[PDF physical page 4]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     43,
                                                           achieved by using a fed-batch protocol and ﬁnishing the
                                                           production 7 days after initiation of feeding. Lysocellin and                                                                   pre-lysocellin were both isolated from fermentation broths                                               Downloaded
                                                               (4 L, 26 and 8 mg, respectively) using an altered version of                   from
                                                             the protocol used in the original isolation paper.[24]
                                                       Through this approach, lysocellin (1) (Figure 4a) was
                                                           obtained as an amorphous white solid with a molecular
                                                         formula of C34H60O10, as established by the positive HR-
                                                ESI-MS ion peak at m/z 646.4522 [M + NH4]+ (calculated
                                                                646.4525), indicating ﬁve double bond equivalents (DBEs).
                                                             This  is in accordance with the reported structure of the
                                                    compound, which has been unambiguously assigned through
                                                        X-ray  diffraction.[35] Other studies have reported NMR-
                                                            data for lysocellin but these differ with respect to overall
                                                              conditions used (including ﬁeld strength) and associated                                                                         counter-ions.[41,42] As we were aiming to conclusively identify                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202507847,
                                                             the precise location of the LyoI-mediated oxidation, we                        Wiley
                                                              therefore conducted our own detailed NMR-based structural
                                                          assignment of both lysocellin and pre-lysocellin (see sup-                            Online
                                                         plementary information for detailed analysis, Tables S2, S3,                                 Library
                                                              Figures S12, S13).                                                       on
                                                                      Pre-lysocellin (2) (Figure 4a) was likewise obtained as
                                                     an amorphous white solid, however exhibiting a molecular                                                         formula of C34H60O9, as determined by the positive HR-ESI-                                                              [11/01/2026].
                                      MS ion peak at m/z 635.4131 [M + Na]+ (calcd. 635.4130),              See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the
                                                                 also indicating ﬁve DBEs and showing the absence of an
                                                      oxygen atom relative to lysocellin. Overall, 1 and 2 exhibited                        Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and
                                                            high spectroscopic similarities with a few key differences
Figure 3. Fermentation results from wild type (wt) and knockout strains    (Tables S2, S3). Notably, the absent oxygen atom in pre-
of S. longwoodensis. a) MS chromatograms from fermentations of S.                                                                     lysocellin evidently originated from a hemiketal (δC 108.1),                                               Conditions
longwoodensis wt, a strain with a knockout in a core biosynthetic gene
                                                       which is immediately apparent by comparing the 13C NMR(  lyoA), and two strains with knockouts in P450 enzymes (  lyoI and
  lyoJ). b) Results of complementation of S. longwoodensis   lyoI with       spectra (Figure 4b). In addition, pre-lysocellin contains one
pGM1190_lyoI. For full dataset, see Figure S3. Two diﬀerent HPLC-MS    more methine carbon with a corresponding signal doublet
methods were used for obtaining the data in a) and b).              (δH 2.96) (Figure 4b) as opposed to lysocellin. Comparing
                                                             the chemical shifts between the two compounds generally
                                                   showed minor differences though with higher variations inBGC had been identiﬁed. Knock-out of the P450 enzyme
                                                             the region around C17 (Figure 4c), as expected. The relativein closest proximity to the core BGC, lyoI, resulted in the
                                                             stereochemistry of C17 was based on NOE-correlations fromproduction of a new species with a mass of 16 Da less
                                              H17 to Me-27, Me-26, H22, H23 as well as absence of NOE-than lysocellin–possibly corresponding to the loss of a single
                                                                 correlations from H17 to H24, H25 and H18 (Figure S13).oxygen atom. The knockout of lyoJ did not directly affect                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                  The data was further underscored by the observation of          onlysocellin production, thereby excluding it from involvement
                                                                   similar fragmentation patterns in lysocellin and pre-lysocellinwith the BGC.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Wiley
                                                                   in HPLC-MS/MS analysis (Figure S4). Viewed overall, our   To  validate  these  results  in  vivo, we complemented                                                           assignments clearly pinpointed a differential oxidation at C17                            OnlineS. longwoodensis   lyoI with the lyoI sequence inserted
                                                               as being the key structural difference between lysocellin andin the pGM1190 plasmid through interspecies conjugation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Library
                                                                     pre-lysocellin.                                                                                        forThe complementation resulted in the reconstitution, albeit
at lower production titers, of the wt lysocellin phenotype                                                                                                                                                                                                  rules
(Figure 3b), thereby conﬁrming the role of the lyoI gene                                                                             of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           use;                                                              C17-Oxidation has a Major Impact on Biological Activity
product’s involvement in the biosynthesis of lysocellin.                                                                                     OA
                                                  To understand the potential consequence of this unusual                                      articles
Structural Investigation Pinpoints Oxidation of Pre-Lysocellin       oxidation on biological activity, we evaluated the antibacterial              are
                                                            efﬁcacy of lysocellin and pre-lysocellin against both Gram-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       governed
We  initiated  large-scale  fermentations  to  isolate  both    positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Lysocellin displayed          by
lysocellin (from S. longwoodensis) and the lysocellin analogue   potent antibiotic activity in minimal inhibitory concentration              the
pre-lysocellin (from S. longwoodensis   lyoI). The fermen-   (MIC, 1 µg mL−1) assays against Gram-positive strains (S.
tations of both strains were performed in 4 L bioreactors,   aureus and B. cereus), in line with other natural polyether                                               applicable
                                                                            (Figure                                                                                             5a,b). In contrast,                                                                ionophores[19]to   ensure           sufﬁcient                  oxygen                           supply to the                                               bacteria, crucial
                                                                                                               pre-lysocellin had a                                      Creative                                                                              loss in potency                                                                                 (>32-fold                                                                                            change).for    successful               productions.                             Successful                                      fermentations                                              were    drastic
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202507847 (4 of 10)        © 2025 The Author(s). Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by Wiley-VCH GmbH                                 Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                License


[PDF physical page 5]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     43,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202507847,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Library
                                                                                                                                              on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [11/01/2026].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Conditions



Figure 4. NMR evaluation of lysocellin and pre-lysocellin. a) Structures of lysocellin and pre-lysocellin with numbered carbon atoms. HMBC and NOE
correlations can be found in Figure S12 and S13. b) Key diﬀerence observed between 1H (top) and 13C (bottom) NMR spectra of lysocellin and
pre-lysocellin. c) Diﬀerences in chemical shifts in the 1H (top) and 13C (bottom) NMR spectra of lysocellin and pre-lysocellin.



   To expand on the potency of lysocellin, we explored the   mitochondria was also observed. The proﬁle of lysocellin
compound’s impact on bioﬁlms of S. aureus (Figure 5b).    correlated  strongly (∼0.8)  to other ionophores such  as
Lysocellin was highly potent, both in regards to inhibition   salinomycin, X-206, nanchangmycin, monensin, and narasin
(0.5 µg mL−1) and eradication (64 µg mL−1), in line with   (Figure 5c heatmap). These data support the function of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
the potency of other natural polyether ionophores, such as    lysocellin as an ionophore in mammalian cells and the loss          on
lasalocid and nanchangmycin.[19] Given pre-lysocellin’s low    of ionophore activity of pre-lysocellin. Viewed overall, these                        Wiley
potency in the MIC assays, the compound was not tested    studies clearly highlight the signiﬁcance of the hydrofuran-2-
against bioﬁlms. Finally, we also evaluated the compounds’    ol (ﬁve-membered hemiketal) for the biological potency of                             Online
activities in three mammalian cell  lines. In line with the    lysocellin. In the reported crystal structure,[35] the hemiketal                                  Library
trend observed in the antimicrobial studies, lysocellin was   OH-group is directly involved in ion-binding which supports              for
a more potent inhibitor of cell viability than pre-lysocellin.    that its presence may play a stabilizing role. This is particularly                        rules
For a more nuanced picture of the activities of ionophores    interesting as the underlying hydrobifuran (HBF) motif is          of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            use;in mammalian  cells,[22] we have  previously  applied the   present in many other polyether ionophores which still pos-
                                                                                                                                              OA
cell painting  assay.[43,44] The assay detects morphological    sess potent antibiotic activity. LyoI thus appears to have been
changes induced by bioactive compounds by staining with    evolutionarily provided with a decisive role for triggering                                       articles
ﬂuorophores, ﬂuorescence microscopy, and image analysis,    antibiotic potency in the speciﬁc context of lysocellin.                           are
which results in a phenotypic ﬁngerprint that represents the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       governedbioactivity of the compound. Applying lysocellin in this assay,
                                                                                                                                              by
we observed strong induction of a canonical “ionophore”-    LyoI Generates Lysocellin from Pre-Lysocellin In Vitro                                the
proﬁle, which is, for e.g., characterized by strongly increased
MitoTracker staining (Figure 5c images). In comparison,  We next pursued in vitro experiments to directly validate the                                                applicable
pre-lysocellin            was much                             less active,                                  but                                            at 12.5 µM,                                              >100-                                                                       activity                                                                       of LyoI                                                                                to perform                                                                                          oxidation                                                                                                       of                                                                                                      the hydrobifuran
fold higher than                     lysocellin,                           a weak                                      perturbation                                                     of                                                      the                                                (HBF) motif                                                                             to generate                                                                                                 lysocellin                                                                                   from                                                                                                                  pre-lysocellin.                                                                                                      LyoI                                       Creative
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202507847 (5 of 10)        © 2025 The Author(s). Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by Wiley-VCH GmbH                                  Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                License


[PDF physical page 6]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     43,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202507847,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Library
                                                                                                                                              on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [11/01/2026].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Conditions





Figure 5. Comparative biological data for lysocellin and pre-lysocellin. a) Representative dose-response curve demonstrating eﬀects on antibacterial
activity in S. aureus and cell viability in the mammalian cell line BJ. Points are mean ± SD, n = 3. b) Summary data of antibacterial MIC and MBC
(N = 2) and mammalian cell viability IC50 (N = 2). Data is mean over biological replicates. c) Cell painting assay with lysocellin. Left: Representative
cell painting images of DMSO, narasin, nanchangmycin, lysocellin, and pre-lysocellin. The bottom row of images represents vehicle control (DMSO)
and pre-lysocellin, which does not show mitochondrial perturbaton (red stain), compared to active ionophores in the top row of images. Scale
bar = 50 µm. Right: Heatmap of phenotypic ﬁngerprint of ionophores sorted by hierarchical clustering shows tight correlations between known                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)ionophores and lysocellin.
                                                                                                                                              on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wiley
was expressed in E. coli to give a puriﬁed enzyme with the dis-      Having established a reliable assay, we sought to inves-                            Online
tinctive red color associated with cytochrome P450 enzymes.    tigate the promiscuity of the enzyme. Toward this end, we                                 Library
This was further underscored by observation of the charac-    tested the enzyme on other polyether ionophores contain-              for
teristic switch in UV absorbance from 450 to 420 nm upon    ing unhydroxylated hydrobifuran (HBF) moieties similar                        rules
activation of the reduced enzyme with CO[45] (Figure S5).    to the one of pre-lysocellin, speciﬁcally ionomycin, madu-          of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           use;Having conﬁrmed that the enzyme could undergo activation,   ramycin, and monensin (Figure 6b). Interestingly, none of
                                                                                                                                              OA
we surveyed conditions for the oxidative chemoenzymatic   these polyether ionophores underwent oxidation (Figure
assay, ﬁnally applying LyoI with ferredoxin/ferredoxin reduc-    S6), demonstrating that LyoI appears to be highly speciﬁc                                      articles
tase (from S. oleracea), glucose-6-phosphate (G6P)/glucose-6-   regarding its substrate acceptance.                                                         are
phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) and NADPH. The in vitro                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       governedactivation was successful, resulting in full conversion of pre-
                                                                                                                                              by
lysocellin to lysocellin in <12 min (Figure 6a). Subsequent    LyoI is Missing a Key Amino Acid in a Conserved P450 Sequence                the
experiments  revealed  that conversion was  also  possible
using putidaredoxin/putidaredoxin reductase as regeneration    Investigating the P450 sequence conservation of LyoI, we                                               applicable
system.                                                       identiﬁed a key amino acid change in the highly conserved                                      Creative
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202507847 (6 of 10)        © 2025 The Author(s). Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by Wiley-VCH GmbH                                 Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                License


[PDF physical page 7]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     43,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202507847,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Online

Figure 6. Direct oxidation of pre-lysocellin to lysocellin by LyoI. a) HPLC-MS chromatograms (TIC) of the chemoenzymatic conversion of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Library
pre-lysocellin to lysocellin using LyoI, ferredoxin/ferredoxin reductase, glucose-6-phosphate/glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogense and NADPH at              on
diﬀerent time points. b) Polyether ionophores containing unhydroxylated hydrobifuran moieties similar to the ones of pre-lysocellin.                                                                                                                                                                 [11/01/2026].
“acid–alcohol” pair motif (Figure S7).[46] Instead of aspartic    predict to produce compounds with polyketide backbones              See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the
acid (D) or glutamic acid (E) as the acidic residue, LyoI    highly similar to the one of lysocellin (Figure S10). To the
contains the neutral amino acid isoleucine  (I), I237. The    best of our knowledge, none of these predicted compounds                        Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and
alcohol–acid pair is involved in the last step of the catalytic   have been isolated. Most enzymes of clusters I, IX, and X are
cycle, a protonation step, which prepares the reactive P450    also found in the proximity of predicted BGCs with IX and Xspecies.[31] Few bacterial enzymes have been identiﬁed where   being in proximity to PKS BGCs. Several members in cluster                                                Conditions
the alcohol,[10,47–49] the acid,[50] or both[51] is not conserved,   IX are found in known BGC associated with macrolides such
and it is currently unknown whether this affects the mech-    as rosaramycin/rosamicin A[58,59] and tylosin,[60] where they
anism of the enzyme. Previous studies generating mutations    oxidize the terminal methyl group of an ethyl-substituent to
of the acidic residue have identiﬁed that the acidic residue   generate an aldehyde. In contrast, the enzymes of cluster I are
is essential for the rate of NAD(P)H oxidation activity.[52–55]   found next to non-ribosomal peptide synthase (NRPS) BGCs,
The rare lack of the feature is apparent when comparing   while the enzymes of cluster II–VIII generally are not found
LyoI to P450 enzymes introducing C─H oxidations in other    in proximity to any BGCs.
polyether ionophores in the form of either secondary alcohols       Investigating the acid–alcohol pair in the enzymes of
(SnlF,  in salinomycin[29]) or a primary alcohols (MonD,   the  LyoI-cluster, they  all contain the same “AGHITT”-
in monensin,[26] NanP, in nanchangmycin,[27] and NigD, in   sequence as found in LyoI. Further investigation of the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
nigericin[28]) (Figure 7a). To gauge the effect of the lack of   acid–alcohol pair showed that in all clusters containing more          on
the acidic residue, we expressed mutants of LyoI replacing   than four nodes, 17 out of 60 clusters exclusively contained                        Wiley
isoleucine with either acidic residue (I237D/E). Both mutant   the “AGHITT”-sequence, corresponding to 155 proteins. Five
enzymes could be activated with CO (Figure S5), but neither    clusters, including the two largest clusters, contained enzymes                             Online
were able to transform pre-lysocellin to lysocellin (Figure   with either “AGHITT” or “AGH-V/L-TT”, resulting in the                                  Library
S8). The “lack” of the acidic residue therefore appears   observation of the speciﬁc “AGHITT”-sequence in >200              for
essential for the transformation, which can be underscored    proteins. In comparison, performing a similar SNN analysis                        rules
by the close proximity of I237 to the active site heme group    of MonD (Figure S11), which contains the canonical acid–          of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            use;(Figure 7b).                                                   alcohol pair (Figure 7a), did not identify any enzymes with
                                                                                                                                              OA
  We further investigated LyoI by generating a sequence   the “AGHITT”-sequence–all contain the canonical “ET”
similarity network (SSN) using the EFI-Enzyme Similarity   acid–alcohol  pair.  Overall,  this  analysis shows  that  the                                       articles
Tool (Figures 7c and  S9).[57] Based on the amino acid   “AGHITT-motif” is not exclusive to LyoI and it highlights              are
sequence of LyoI, 1000 sequences were identiﬁed using   how LyoI in this case can be an effective hook to identify                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       governedBLAST and clustered. LyoI (in cluster LII) only clustered   other enzymes with isoleucine–as well as a broader range of
                                                                                                                                              by
to three other sequences, all P450 enzymes found in other   amino acids–replacing the acidic residue. The closer scrutiny              the
Streptomyces strains. Evaluating the genomic context of these    of the activity of these enzymes will be of substantial interest
enzymes, they are all found in proximity to BGCs, which we    for future investigations.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 applicable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Creative
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202507847 (7 of 10)        © 2025 The Author(s). Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by Wiley-VCH GmbH                                  Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                License


[PDF physical page 8]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     43,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202507847,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Library
                                                                                                                                              on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [11/01/2026].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Conditions





Figure 7. Investigation of conservation sequences in LyoI. a) Comparison of the conservation sequence A/G-G-X-D/E-T-T/S, which includes the
acid–alcohol pair (D/E-T), in LyoI with Streptomyces strains producing the polyether ionophores salinomycin, monensin, nanchangmycin, and
nigericin. b) Structural analysis of the proximity of T238 (green) and I237 (red) to the active site heme group in LyoI using AlphaFold 3.[56] c) The 10
(I-X) largest clusters along with LyoI’s cluster (LII) of the sequence similarity network (SSN) of LyoI. In the cases, where most enzymes of a speciﬁc
cluster are found in proximity to a speciﬁc type of BGC, this has been noted next to the cluster number. The full SNN can be found in Figure S9.


Conclusion                                       Author Contributions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                                                                                                              on
Here, we have proposed the notation of the lysocellin biosyn-  TBP and TT conceptualized the study. MHR performed                        Wiley
thetic gene cluster–the ﬁrst of any biosynthetic gene cluster in    all experimental work, except compound puriﬁcation and
the lysocellin compound family–and the following cyclization  NMR, which was performed by SLBM, and mammalian                            Online
reactions. We have identiﬁed a new cytochrome P450 enzyme    cell  biological  experiments,  which  were  performed  by                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Library
(LyoI) responsible for C17-hydro-2,2′-bifuran (HBF) oxida-   EBS. MHR wrote  the manuscript  with  input from  all              for
tion in lysocellin, conﬁrmed it in vivo, and demonstrated its    authors.                                                                                                                                                                   rules
critical importance for the biological (antibacterial) activity of                                                                             of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           use;
lysocellin. The enzyme has been applied in a chemoenzymatic
                                                                                                                                              OA
assay to show efﬁcient and substrate-speciﬁc oxidation of
                                               Acknowledgements                                                                                                                                                                                                          articlespre-lysocellin in vitro. Furthermore, sequence and mutational
investigations revealed LyoI to be missing a key conserved   This  project  has  received  funding from  the European              are
acidic residue, which not only proved essential for the function   Research Council research and innovation programme (grant                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       governed
of the enzyme but also represents a larger P450-subclass that   agreement No 865738). The authors would like to thank         by
may be involved in other unusual oxidative transformations.   Camilla Bak Nielsen and Prof. Mogens Johannsen for help              the
All     in  all, our study highlights                                the                                           possibilities                                                  of taking                                                            with                                               HPLC-MS/MS                                                                                             analysis.                                                                                 Access                                                                                                   to facilities                                                                                                                     at the Danish
a  biosynthesis-focused                      approach                                     to                                         discovering                                                   novel                                                        Center                                                                          for Ultrahigh-Field                                                NMR                                                                                         Spectroscopy                                                                                                funded                                                                                                  by the                                                applicable
enzymes.                                               Danish Ministry of Higher Education and Science (Grant no.                                      Creative
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202507847 (8 of 10)        © 2025 The Author(s). Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by Wiley-VCH GmbH                                 Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                License


[PDF physical page 9]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     43,
AU-2010–612–181) and the Novo Nordisk Foundation (Grant    [18]  T. R. Callaway, T. S. Edrington, J. L. Rychlik, K. J. Genovese,
no. NNF220 C0075797) is acknowledged.                                  T. L. Poole, Y. S. Jung, K. M. Bischoff, R. C. Anderson, D. J. I.
                                                                             Nisbet: Curr. Issues Intest. Microbiol. 2003, 4, 43–51.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded
                                                                            [19] M. Wollesen, K. Mikkelsen, M. S. Tvilum, M. Vestergaard,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            from                                                         M. Wang, R. L. Meyer, H. Ingmer, T. B. Poulsen, T. Tørring,
Conﬂict of Interests                                                   Microbiol. Spectr. 2023, 11, e00625-23.
                                                                            [20] X. Zhu, A. Hong, X. Sun, W. Wang, G. He, H. Luo, Z. Wu, Q.
                                                                Xu, Z. Hu, X. Wu, D. Huang, L. Li, X. Zhao, X. Deng, Front.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.                                                                                      Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2022, 12, 1–16.
                                                                            [21]  S. L. B. Møller, M. H. Rasmussen, J. Li, E. B. Svenningsen, G.
                                                                                                                 J. Wørmer, T. Tørring, T. B. Poulsen, ChemBioChem 2024, 25,
                                                                       e202400013.
Data Availability Statements                                     [22]  S. Lin, H. Liu, E. B. Svenningsen, M. Wollesen, K. M. Jacobsen,
                                                                                          F. D. Andersen, J. Moyano-Villameriel, C. N. Pedersen, P. Nørby,
All raw data and data analysis are available on OSF.io (DOI:          T. Tørring, T. B. Poulsen, Nat. Chem. 2021, 13, 47–55.
10.17605/OSF.IO/2H3A9).                                             [23] E. B. Svenningsen, J. Thyrsted, J. Blay-Cadanet, H. Liu, S. Lin,
                                                                                                                 J. Moyano-Villameriel, D. Olagnier, M. Idorn, S. R. Paludan, C.
                                                                  K. Holm, T. B. Poulsen, Antiviral Res. 2021, 185, 104988.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202507847,
Keywords: Bioactivity • Biosynthesis • Chemoenzymatic             [24] E. Ebata, H. Kasahara, K. Sekine, Y. Inoue, J. Antibiot. 1975, 28,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wileysynthesis • Natural products • P450 enzyme                            118–121.
                                                                            [25] M. C. Tang, Y. Zou, K. Watanabe, C. T. Walsh, Y. Tang, Chem.                             Online                                                                          Rev. 2017, 117, 5226–5333.
                                                                            [26] W. Hüttel, J. B. Spencer, P. F. Leadlay, Beilstein J. Org. Chem.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Library
                                                                           2014, 10, 361–368.                                                    on
 [1] E. L. Bell, W. Finnigan, S. P. France, A. P. Green, M. A. Hayes, L.    [27] Y. Sun, X. Zhou, H. Dong, G. Tu, M. Wang, B. Wang, Z. Deng,
        J. Hepworth, S. L. Lovelock, H. Niikura, S. Osuna, E. Romero,       Chem. Biol. 2003, 10, 431–441.
    K. S. Ryan, N. J. Turner, S. L. B. Flitsch, Nat. Rev. Methods Prim.    [28] B. M. Harvey, T. Mironenko, Y. Sun, H. Hong, Z. Deng, P. F.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [11/01/2026].
     2021, 1, 1–21.                                                       Leadlay, K. J. Weissman, S. F. Haydock, Chem. Biol. 2007, 14,              See
 [2]  J. Li, A. Amatuni, H. Renata, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2020, 55,         703–714.                                                                                           the
     111–118.                                                                            [29] C.                                                                                    Jiang, H.                                                                         Wang,                                                                                   Q. Kang,  J. Liu, L. Bai, Appl. Environ.                        Terms [3]     C. N. Stout, N. M. Wasfy, F. Chen, H. Renata, J. Am. Chem. Soc.                                                                           Microbiol.                                                                                      2012,                                                                                                   78, 994–1003.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and     2023, 145, 18161–18181.                                              [30] B. L. T. Prosser, N. J. S. L. S.p. N. Palleroni, Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol.
 [4] E. O. Romero, A. T. Saucedo, J. R. Hernández-Meléndez, D.         1976, 26, 319–322.     Yang, S. Chakrabarty, A. R. H. Narayan, J. Am. Chem. Soc. Au    [31]  S. Kalita, S. Shaik, H. K. Kisan, K. D. Dubey, ACS Catal. 2020,                                                Conditions
     2023, 3, 2073–2085.                                                        10, 11481–11492.
 [5] D. Zabala, J. W. Cartwright, D. M. Roberts, B. J. C. Law, L. Song,    [32] K. Blin, S. Shaw, H. E. Augustijn, Z. L. Reitz, F. Biermann,
    M. Samborskyy, P. F. Leadlay, J. Mickleﬁeld, G. L. Challis, J. Am.       M. Alanjary, A. Fetter, B. R. Terlouw, W. W. Metcalf, E. J. N.
    Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 4342–4345.                                        Helfrich, G. P. Van Wezel, M. H. Medema, T. Weber, Nucleic
 [6] H. J. Kim, M. W. Ruszczycky, S. Choi, Y. Liu, H. Liu, Nature 473,        Acids Res. 2023, 51, W46–W50.
     109–112.                                                             [33] A. K. Joshi, S. Smith, J. Biol. Chem. 1993, 268, 22508–22513.
 [7] H. Nakamura, E. E. Schultz, E. P. Balskus, Nat. Chem. Biol.    [34] R.  Reid,  M.  Piagentini,  E.  Rodriguez,  G.  Ashley,  N.
     2017, 13, 916–921.                                                 Viswanathan, J. Carney, D. V. Santi, C. Richard Hutchinson, R.
 [8]  J. D. Rudolf, C. Y. Chang, M. Ma, B. Shen, Nat. Prod. Rep. 2017,        McDaniel, Biochemistry, 2003, 42, 72–79.
     34, 1141–1172.                                                       [35] N. Otake, M. Koenuma, H. Kinashi, S. Sato, Y. Saito, J. Chem.
 [9] L. E. Zetzsche, J. A. Yazarians, S. Chakrabarty, M. E. Hinze, L.         Soc. Chem. Commun. 1975, 6, 92–93.
    A. M. Murray, A. L. Lukowski, L. A. Joyce, A. R. H. Narayan,    [36]  T. Liu, D. You, C. Valenzano, Y. Sun, J. Li, Q. Yu, X. Zhou, D.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
     Nature 2022, 603, 79–85.                                            E. Cane, Z. Deng, Chem. Biol. 2006, 13, 945–955.                       on
[10] C.        N. Stout, H. Renata, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2024, 146, 21815–    [37] B.                                                           M.                                                                          Harvey,                                                                          H.                                                                             Hong, M.                                                                                     A.                                                                                                           Jones,                                                                                                       Z. A. Hughes-Thomas,                                                                                                                      R.
     21823.                                                         M.                                                                         Goss,                                                                M. L.                                                                                     Heathcote,                                                                                                      V.                                                                               M.                                                                                                       Bolanos-Garcia,                                                                                                  W. Kroutil,                                                                                                                                                                                                          J.                        Wiley
[11] Z. Li, B. Xu, T. A. Alsup, X. Wei, W. Ning, D. G. Icenhour, M.         Staunton, P. F. Leadlay, J. B. Spencer, ChemBioChem 2006, 7,                             Online
    A. Ehrenberger, I. Ghiviriga, B. D. Giang, J. D. Rudolf, J. Am.         1435–1442.
    Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 22361–22365.                                  [38] Y. Tong, C. M. Whitford, H. L. Robertsen, K. Blin, T.  S.                                  Library
[12] D. A. Kevin II, D. A. Meujo, M. T Hamann, Expert Opin Drug         Jørgensen, A. K. Klitgaard, T. Gren, X. Jiang, T. Weber, S. Y.              for
     Discov 2009, 4, 109–146.                                            Lee, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2019, 116, 20366–20375.                                          rules
[13] R. D. H. Murray, J. A. Robinson, in Fortschritte Der Chemie    [39] Y. Tong, C. M. Whitford, K. Blin, T. S. Jørgensen, T. Weber, S. Y.          of
     Organischer Naturstoffe /Progress in the Chemistry of Organic        Lee, Nat. Protoc. 2020, 15, 2470–2502.                                                                    use;
     Natural Products, Vol. 58 (Eds.: W. Herz., G.W. Kirby, W.    [40] K. Blin, L. Ebdrup, T. Weber,  S. C.-W. Yup: Synth.  Syst.          OA
      Steglich., C. Tamm); Springer-Verlag, Vienna, 1991, pp 1–283.           Biotechnol. 2016, 1, 118–121.                                                                                                                                                                         articles
[14] B. C. Pressman, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 1976, 45, 501–530.             [41] N. Otake, H. Seto, M. Koenuma, Agric. Biol. Chem. 1978, 42,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     are
[15] H. Liu, S. Lin, K. M. Jacobsen, T. B. Poulsen, Angew. Chemie         1879–1886.
     2019, 58, 13630–13642.                                               [42] Y. Kusakabe, T. Mizuno, S. Kawabata, S. Tanji, A. Seino, H.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       governed
[16]  T. T. Mai, A. Hamaï, A. Hienzsch, T. Cañeque, S. Müller, J.         Seto, N. ¯Otake, J. Antibiot. 1982, 35, 1119–1129.                         by
     Wicinski, O. Cabaud, C. Leroy, A. David, V. Acevedo, A. Ryo,    [43] M. A. Bray, S. Singh, H. Han, C. T. Davis, B. Borgeson, C.              the
     C. Ginestier, D. Birnbaum, E. Charafe-Jauffret, P. Codogno,         Hartland, M. Kost-Alimova, S. M. Gustafsdottir, C. C. Gibson,
    M. Mehrpour, R. Rodriguez,  Nat. Chem.  2017,  9, 1025–       A. E. Carpenter, Nat. Protoc. 2016, 11, 1757–1774.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     applicable
     1033.                                                                 [44] E. B. Svenningsen, T. B. Poulsen, Bioorganic Med. Chem. 2019,
[17] W. G. Bergen, D. B. Bates, J. Anim. Sci. 1984, 58, 1465–1483.             27, 2609–2615.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Creative
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202507847 (9 of 10)        © 2025 The Author(s). Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by Wiley-VCH GmbH                                  Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                License


[PDF physical page 10]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     43,
[45] A. Luthra, I. G. Denisov, S. G. Sligar, Arch. Biochem. Biophys.    [55]  T. Coleman, J. E. Stok, M. N. Podgorski, J. B. Bruning, J. J. De
     2011, 507, 26–35.                                                      Voss, S. G. Bell, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem. 2020, 25, 583–596.
[46]  I. G. Denisov, T. M. Makris, S. G. Sligar, I. Schlichting, Chem.    [56]  J. Abramson, J. Adler, J. Dunger, R. Evans, T. Green, A. Pritzel,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Downloaded
     Rev. 2005, 105, 2253–2278.                                        O. Ronneberger, L. Willmore, A. J. Ballard, J. Bambrick, S. W.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           from[47]  J. R. Cupp-Vickery, O. Han, C. R. Hutchinson, T. L. Poulos, Nat.         Bodenstein, D. A. Evans, C. C. Hung, M. O’Neill, D. Reiman, K.
      Struct. Biol. 1996, 3, 632–637.                                      Tunyasuvunakool, Z. Wu, A. Žemgulyt˙e, E. Arvaniti, C. Beattie,
[48]  J. E. Stok, S. Yamada, A. J. Farlow, K. E. Slessor, J. J. De Voss,        O. Bertolli, A. Bridgland, A. Cherepanov, M. Congreve, A. I.
     Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2013, 1834, 688–696.                         Cowen-Rivers, A. Cowie, M. Figurnov, F. B. Fuchs, H. Gladman,
[49] B. Zhao, F.  P. Guengerich, A. Bellamine, D. C. Lamb, M.        R. Jain, et al, Nature 2024, 630, 493–500.
     Izumikawa, L. Lei, L. M. Podust, M. Sundaramoorthy,  J. A.    [57] R. Zallot, N. Oberg, J. A. Gerlt, Biochemistry 2019, 58, 4169–
      Kalaitzis, L. M. Reddy, S. L. Kelly, B. S. Moore, D. Stec, M.         4182.
     Voehler, J. R. Falck, T. Shimada, M. R. Waterman, J. Biol. Chem.    [58]  T. Awakawa, M. Crüsemann, J. Munguia, N. Ziemert, V. Nizet,
     2005, 280, 11599–11607.                                      W. Fenical, B. S. Moore, ChemBioChem 2015, 16, 1443–1447.
[50]  I. C. K. Lau, R. Feyereisen, D. R. Nelson, S. G. Bell, Arch.    [59] Y. Iizaka, N. Higashi, M. Ishida, R. Oiwa, Y. Ichikawa, M.
     Biochem. Biophys. 2019, 669, 11–21.                                 Takeda, Y. Anzai, F. Kato, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2013,
[51] A. Präg, B. A. Grüning, M. Häckh, S. Lüdeke, M. Wilde, A.          57, 1529–1531.
     Luzhetskyy, M. Richter, M. Luzhetska, S. Günther, M. Müller,    [60] L. A. Merson-Davies, E. Cundliffe, Mol. Microbiol. 1994, 13,
       J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 6195–6198.                              349–355.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202507847,
[52] H. Yeom,  S. G. Sligar, Biochem. Biophys. 1997, 337, 209–
     216.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Wiley
[53]  P. Lee-robichaud, M. E. Akhtar, M. Akhtar, Biochem. J. 1998,    Manuscript received: April 08, 2025                                                                                                                                Online     330, 967–974.                                                  Revised manuscript received: August 21, 2025
[54] M. Vidakovic, S. G. Sligar, H. Li, T. L. Poulos, Biochemistry 1998,    Manuscript accepted: August 21, 2025                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Library
     37, 9211–9219.                                                   Version of record online: September 02, 2025                                  on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [11/01/2026].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Conditions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                                                                                                              on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rules
                                                                                                                                              of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           use;
                                                                                                                                              OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       articles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       governed
                                                                                                                                              by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    applicable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Creative
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202507847 (10 of 10)        © 2025 The Author(s). Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by Wiley-VCH GmbH                                 Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                License