ARTICLE                                    COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02697-8


them clustered on chromosome 12 and exhibited co-expression,    of RepeatMasker36 library and the de novo repetitive sequences constructed by
which contributes to the further elucidation of the Taxol bio-    RepeatModeler, we used RepeatMasker (v.4.0.5)36 (http://www.repeatmasker.org/)
                                                                                          for genome repeat annotation. We used Genometools (v1.5.9)37 (-motif tgcasynthetic pathway.
                                                                               -motifmis 1 -minlenltr 100 -maxlenltr 3000 -mintsd 4 -maxtsd 20) to detect full-
                                                                                    length LTR retrotransposons in four gymnosperms and three angiosperm (T.
Methods                                                                      yunnanensis, G. montanum, G. biloba, S. giganteum, A. trichopoda, O. sativa and A.
Plant materials, DNA library construction and sequencing. Fresh leaves were     thaliana) genomes. Further, we used tBLASTn (V2.2.26) to identify Copia and
collected from T. yunnanensis in Yunnan province. High-quality genomic DNA    Gypsy super-families in seven genomes based on the reported Gypsy and Copia
was isolated from the fresh leaves using the CTAB method29, and the DNA quality    reverse transcriptase domains with sequences EAYLDDLASRSRKRKDHPTHLR
and concentration were tested by 0.75% agarose gel electrophoresis, NanoDrop    LIFERoCRYFRIRLNPNKCSFCVTSGRLLGFIVSTTGIMVDPLKVGAIVQLPPPR
One spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and Qubit 3.0 Fluorometer (Life   TIVQLQSLQGKANFLRRFIANYAE and WKVYQMDVKSAFLNGYLEEEVYVQ
Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA).                                 QPPRYEVRGQEDKVYRLKKALNGLKQAPRAWYSKIDSYMIKNEFIRSTSEP
   After the DNA quality and integrity were tested, it was randomly sheared by   TLYTKVNEQGQILIVCLYVDDLIY, respectively16. Target hits were obtained
Covaris ultrasonic disruptor. Illumina sequencing pair-end libraries with an insert    using a strict ﬁlter criteria of identity ≥50% (Gypsy) and 60% (Copia) and
size of 300 bp were prepared using Nextera DNA Flex Library Prep Kit (Illumina,    coverage ratio ≥0.90. Then, the resultant amino acid sequences were aligned using
San Diego, CA, USA). Sequencing was performed using the Illumina NovaSeq    MUSCLE (V3.8.31)38 with default parameters. Phylogenetic trees were inferred
platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Raw reads were cleaned to discard low-    based on multiple sequence alignment using FastTree (V2.1.9)39. The integration
quality reads (reads with adaptors or unknown nucleotides (Ns) or reads with more    times (t) of intact LTRs were estimated using the equation t = K/2r, where K is the
than 20% low-quality bases) using the SOAPnuke (v2.1.4) tool (https://github.com/   number of nucleotide substitutions per site between each LTR pair and r is the
BGI-ﬂexlab/SOAPnuke) and, after data ﬁltering, clean data were used for            nucleotide substitution rate, which was set to 7.34573 × 10−10 substitutions per site
subsequent analyses.                                                             per year11.
   For Oxford Nanopore sequencing, the libraries were prepared using the SQK-
LSK109 ligation kit and using the standard protocol. The puriﬁed library was
                                                               Gene prediction. Evidence from transcript mapping, ab initio gene prediction, and
loaded onto primed R9.4 Spot-On Flow Cells and sequenced using a PromethION
                                                                      homologous gene alignment was combined to predict protein-coding genes in the
sequencer (Oxford Nanopore Technologies, Oxford, UK) with 48-h runs at Wuhan
                                                                                     T. yunnanensis genome. ONT cDNA reads from T. yunnanensis were aligned
Benagen Tech Solutions Company Limited, Wuhan, China. Base-calling analysis of
                                                                                       against the genome using Minimap2 (v2.17)40. Transcripts were assembled using
raw data was performed using the Oxford Nanopore GUPPY software (v0.3.0).
                                                                                             stringtie2 (v2.1.5)41 and all assembled transcripts ORF were predicted by Trans-
                                                                        Decoder (v5.1.0) (https://github.com/TransDecoder/TransDecoder). Augustus
RNA library construction, sequencing and data processing. For gene prediction    (v3.3.2)42, Genscan (v1.0) (http://bioinf.uni-greifswald.de/webaugustus/
analysis, total RNA was extracted from young leaves of T. yunnanensis using the     predictiontutorial) and GlimmerHMM (v3.0.4) (http://ccb.jhu.edu/software/
RNA prep Pure Plant Plus Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions         glimmer/index.shtml) were used for ab initio gene prediction. For homologous
(Tiangen Biotech (Beijing) Co., Ltd., China). RNA samples were pooled and used a   gene alignment, the proteins from four relative species (Picea abies, Pinus lam-
strand-switching method and the cDNA-PCR Sequencing Kit (SQK-PCS109) to      bertiana, Pinus taeda and S. giganteum) were aligned to the genome using Exon-
carry out sequencing of cDNA by PromethION sequencer (Oxford Nanopore        erate (v2.4.0) (https://github.com/nathanweeks/exonerate). Finally, Use MAKER
Technologies, Oxford, UK).                                                           (v2.31.10) software (http://yandell.topaz.genetics.utah.edu/cgi-bin/
  To analyze the gene expression pattern, total RNA was extracted from           maker_license.cgi) to integrate gene sets predicted by three methods and remove
15 samples that comprise three biological replicates of independent samples of ﬁve    incomplete genes and genes with too short CDS (CDS length < 150 bp), a non-
tissues (root, stem, twig bark, bark and leaf) and sequencing was performed using   redundant and more complete gene set were obtained. We employed the BUSCO
the Illumina NovaSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). The stem refers to    software (v.4.1.2)18 for evaluating the quality of the prediction based on the
the young shoots ca. 1 mm in diameter; twig bark is the bark of lateral branch      eukaryotic and embryophyta database.
about 0.5 cm in diameter; bark refers to the bark of the tree trunk about 5 cm in
diameter.
   RNA-seq reads were mapped to the reference genome assembly using STAR    Gene function annotation. Functional annotation of the predicted protein-coding
(v2.5.1b; parameters: -two pass Mode)30 and the FPKM was calculated to evaluate    genes was carried out by performing Blastp (e value cut-off 1e−05) searches against
the expression level of each gene using the HTSeq (v.0.11.2) tool31 after averaging    entries in both the NCBI nr and Uniprot databases (http://www.uniprot.org/).
some replicated samples. DESeq was used for normalizing gene expression (Base    Searches for gene motifs and domains were performed using InterProScan
Mean) in each sample, and for identifying differentially expressed genes (DEGs) for    (v5.33)43 and HMMER (v3.1). The GO terms (http://geneontology.org/) for genes
each compared group by using P-adj (adjusted P value) < 0.05 as the threshold. Co-   were obtained from the corresponding InterPro (https://github.com/ebi-pf-team/
expression network analysis (Pearson correlation coefﬁcient > 0.8, P < 0.05) was      interproscan) or Uniprot entry (https://www.uniprot.org/). Pathway annotation
performed and the co-expressed genes that may share taxol metabolism were       was performed using KOBAS (v3.0) (https://github.com/xmao/kobas) against the
characterized.                                            KEGG database.


Genome assembly. Based on the sequencing data of T. yunnanensis, the K-mer    Phylogenetic tree construction. All amino acid sequences of the 14 selected
analysis method was used to estimate the genome size and heterozygosity using the    species were aligned using Blastp (v.2.6.0; parameter: -evalue 1e−5 -outfmt 6), and
kmer_freq program in the GCEpackage (v.1.0.0).                                    the gene family clustering was performed using OrthoMCL software (v.2.0.9;
   Genomic assembly was performed using SMARTdenovo software (https://        parameters: percentMatchCutoff = 30, evalueExponentCutoff = 1e−5, expansion
github.com/ruanjue/smartdenovo). Two rounds of error correction were             coefﬁcient 1.5)44.
performed on the assembly result based on the nanopore sequencing data using     A single-copy gene family shared by at least eight selected species (575 gene
Racon (v1.4.11) (https://github.com/isovic/racon). Two rounds of error correction    families) was screened to construct phylogenetic trees. The 575 gene family ﬁles
were performed on the assembly result based on the Illumina Novaseq sequencing   were each aligned using MUSCLE (v.3.8.31)38, both as amino acid and nucleotide,
data using Pilon (v1.23)32. Finally, the genome was removed from the heterozygous    resulting in two distinct alignments per gene family. We also forced nucleotide
sequences using the Purge_haplotigs pipeline (v.1.0.4)33 to obtain the ﬁnal          sequences on the amino acid alignments using a custom Perl script to obtain
assembly result. To evaluate the genome, BUSCO (v.4.1.2)18 assessments and the    codon-preserving alignments of nucleotide sequences. Gene trees were then
Illumina short reads were aligned to the assembled genome using BWA, resulting    reconstructed for each gene family using RAxML (v.8.2.10) software45 with 100
in a mapping rate of 99.64%.                                                             replicates of bootstrapping. For each gene family, we estimated four different gene
                                                                                             trees based on: amino acid alignments, DNA alignment, codon alignment
                                                                                      (nucleotides forced to the amino acid alignment), and codon 1 and 2 alignment
Hi-C sequencing and data processing. High-quality DNA extracted from young
                                                                          (codon alignments where the third codon position was removed). Nucleotide-based
leaves of T. yunnanensis was used for Hi-C sequencing. Formaldehyde was used for
                                                                                     analyses were conducted using the GTR + GAMMA model; for amino acid
ﬁxing chromatin. In situ Hi-C chromosome conformation capture was performed
                                                                                          analyses, we used WAG model. For four different datasets, we inferred fouraccording to the DNase-based protocol described by Ramani34. The libraries were
                                                           maximum likelihood tree of species from gene trees using RAxML (v.8.2.10)
sequenced using 150 bp paired-end mode on an Illumina NovaSeq (Illumina, San
                                                                                        software45. A phylogenetic tree of each single-copy gene was further constructed to
Diego, CA, USA). For pseudochromosome level scaffolding, we used the assembly
                                                                                             infer a consensus species tree using ASTRAL (v5.7.1)46.
software ALLHIC (v0.9.12) for stitching, and then we imported the ﬁnal ﬁles (.hic
                                                                              For supermatrix analyses, we concatenated all gene alignments and MLand .assembly) generated by the software into Juicebox (v1.11.08)35 for manual
                                                                               supermatrix analyses were performed using RAxML (v.8.2.10)45 software. In this
optimization.
                                                                                        study, four supermatrix datasets were created for amino acid, codon alignment
                                                                                      (nucleotides forced to the amino acid alignment), nucleotide alignments and
Repeat sequence annotation. We identiﬁed de novo repetitive sequences in the T.    codon1, 2 alignment (codon alignments where the third codon position was
yunnanensis genome using the RepeatModeler (v.1.0.4) (https://github.com/         removed). These data matrices were used for maximum likelihood phylogenetic
rmhubley/RepeatModeler) software. After combining known repetitive sequences    analyses by RAxML (v.8.2.10)45 with the GTR + GAMMA models for nucleotide


6                     COMMUNICATIONS BIOLOGY | (2021)4:1203 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02697-8 | www.nature.com/commsbio