
[PDF physical page 1]
                                                   Article


A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent
diversification

Graphical abstract                                Authors

                                                           Yajun Li, Runhui Li, Junzhong Shang, ...,
                                                         Qiao Zhao, Yao-Wu Yuan, Guogui Ning

                                              Correspondence
                                                           ggning@mail.hzau.edu.cn

                                                           In brief

                                                   Genomic analysis of more than 100 Rosa
                                                            species uncovers a multi-step process
                                                                        for the de novo origination of SCREP, a
                                                                  taxon-restricted gene specific to the
                                                    Rosa genus, highlighting its function in
                                                          modulating eugenol biosynthesis and
                                                                    driving rose scent diversification.





Highlights
• Assembled two high-quality rose (Rosa) genomes and
   analyzed ∼100 Rosa genomes

• Unveiled a multi-step process leading to the de novo
   origination of a new gene in Rosa

• Recruitment of mobile DNA to promoter regions enhances
   taxon-specific gene expression

•  Taxon-specific gene modulates eugenol biosynthesis and
   drives rose scent divergence





              Li et al., 2025, Cell 188, 1–17
          October 30, 2025 © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those
             for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
             https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.08.011                                                                ll


[PDF physical page 2]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

                                                                                                                       ll


Article
A de novo-originated gene drives
rose scent diversification

Yajun Li, 1,2,7 Runhui Li, 1,2,7 Junzhong Shang, 1,2,7 Kaige Zhao, 1,2,7 Yaqi Sui, 1,2 Zhenhua Liu, 3 Huijun Yan,4 Manzhu Bao, 1,2
Mei Liang, 1,2 Qiao Zhao, 5 Yao-Wu Yuan, 6 and Guogui Ning 1,2,8, *
1National Key Laboratory for Germplasm Innovation & Utilization of Horticultural Crops, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070,
China
2Institute of Flowers Research, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China
3BioSmartSeek Company, Wuhan 430070, China
4Flower Research Institute of Yunnan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, National Engineering Research Center for Ornamental Horticulture,
Kunming, China
5Key Laboratory of Quantitative Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China
6Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA
7These authors contributed equally
8Lead contact
*Correspondence: ggning@mail.hzau.edu.cn
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.08.011




SUMMARY

How evolution builds genes, how these genes attain enhanced expression, and how they integrate into
existing regulatory networks to drive phenotypic diversification are all fascinating questions. Here, we gener-
ated chromosome-level genome assemblies for two Rosa banksiae subspecies and re-sequenced an
additional 40 rose accessions. Genomic analysis of more than 100 Rosa accessions revealed multiple evolu-
tionary steps leading to the de novo origination of a taxon-restricted gene, SCREP, specific to the rose line-
age. Extensive transcriptomic, metabolomic, and functional analyses demonstrated that the recruitment of a
Miniature Inverted-repeat Transposable Element (MITE) transposon into the gene promoter led to elevated
expression, that the gene SCREP orchestrates eugenol biosynthesis, and that the evolutionary dynamics
of SCREP account for variation in rose scent among different species and cultivars. Our results provide in-
sights into the mechanism of de novo gene origination, the role of transposable elements in gene expression,
and the evolutionary consequences of taxon-restricted genes in phenotypic diversification.



INTRODUCTION                                            noids/phenylpropanoids and terpene compounds, play essential
                                                                    roles in deterring herbivores, attracting natural enemies of pests,
The emergence of genes has been attributed to various pro-   and facilitating plants’ successful adaptation to diverse environ-
cesses, including gene duplication-divergence, transposable   ments.11 In plants, floral emission of phenylpropene, including
element domestication, lateral gene transfer, gene fusion and   eugenol, serves to attract pollinators and provide resistance
fission, and de novo origination from non-coding sequences.1–3   against fungi and bacteria. 12,13 It has been reported that bees in-
Although de novo origination was once regarded as a rare phe-   fected by parasites prefer eugenol-free diets over those contain-
nomenon, emerging evidence suggests that it occurs at consid-   ing eugenol, and this preference influences pollinator-mediated
erable frequency. 4–7 However, only a few of the studies reported   selection on floral traits. 14 The fragrance of many roses is domi-
the construction of genes from scratch through multiple evolu-   nated by aromatics (benzenoids/phenylpropanoids). However,
tionary steps. 2,8,9 Furthermore, our understanding of how these   the genetic basis underlying rose scent diversification remains
newly formed genes achieve enhanced expression and become   poorly understood.
integrated into existing gene regulatory networks—thereby influ-    The phenylpropanoid pathway, as an ancestral pathway, is
encing phenotypic evolution—remains limited.                 widespread in plants. Key structural genes on this pathway
  The rose genus, Rosa (family Rosaceae), includes more than   have been characterized in many species. Research on petunias
200 species distributed worldwide. To date, more than 35,000   demonstrated the role of PhCCR1 and PhCCoAOMT1 in eugenol
hybrid roses have been developed from about ten wild progeni-   biosynthesis. FaCAD1 is involved in reducing coniferaldehyde to
tor species, most of which are disadvantaged in terms of scent   coniferyl alcohol in Fragaria × ananassa. 15 Eugenol synthase
characteristics. 10 Fragrances, primarily composed of benze-   (EGS)  converts  coniferyl  acetate  into  eugenol, and many



                                                                                  Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025 © 2025 Elsevier Inc.    1
                                       All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.


[PDF physical page 3]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

          ll
                                                                   Article


EGS genes have been functionally characterized in petunia   reads (Tables S1C and S1D). Using Hifiasm, we assembled the
(PhEGS1) 16 and strawberry (FaEGS1 and FaEGS2). 17            484.34 Mb genome of RbY with a contig N50 of 61.84 Mb and
  Whole-genome sequencing technology greatly facilitates phy-   the 476.52 Mb genome of RbW with a contig N50 of 46.54 Mb,
logenomic analysis and gene discovery. Here, we assembled   respectively (Table S1E). After scaffolding the assembled con-
high-quality chromosomal-level  reference genomes  of two    tigs using Hi-C sequencing data, we obtained seven pseudo-
Rosa subspecies and identified a highly variable genomic locus  chromosomes totaling 472.61 Mb for RbY and 444.83 Mb for
by comparative analysis of the two reference genomes and  RbW, respectively (Figures 1C, S2C, and S2D; Table S1F).
genome re-sequencing data of over 100 Rosa species. This lo-   Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs (BUSCO) anal-
cus contains a taxon-restricted gene (named SCREP) that   ysis indicated that the genome completeness of RbY and RbW
emerged approximately 16.8 million years ago (mya) as a line-    is at 98.1% and 98.6%, respectively (Tables S1G and S1H). In
age-specific gene within the genus Rosa. We uncovered a   the genomes of RbY and RbW, we annotated 41,954 and
multi-step process leading to the formation of SCREP. In partic-   41,043 protein-coding genes, of which 29,689 (70.77%) and
ular, we found that the recruitment of a MITE transposon into the   29,068 (70.82%) have Gene Ontology (GO) functional annota-
upstream sequence of this de novo-originated gene led to   tions, respectively (Figure 1C; Tables S1I–S1L). The quality and
enhanced expression in many Rosa species. Functional analysis   completeness of the genomes of RbY and RbW were further as-
demonstrated that SCREP orchestrates eugenol biosynthesis by   sessed through a comparative analysis with published rose ge-
modulating the expression of key structural genes on the phenyl-  nomes (Figure 1D; Table S1M). Phylogenetic analysis and diver-
propanoid  pathway.  Furthermore, we observed  that both   gence time estimation based on 716 single-copy orthologs from
SCREP and the recruited MITE transposon were effectively fixed   eleven species (Table S1N) indicated  that RbY and RbW
in the late-diverging Rosa species and that, to some extent,   diverged around 1.98 mya (95% highest posterior density:
diversification of rose scent  is dependent on the evolution   1.66–2.25 mya) (Figures 1D and S2E–S2G). Genome comparison
of SCREP.                                             between the two subspecies showed that 461 segments with a
                                                                 length exceeding 10 kb are present in RbY but absent in RbW,
RESULTS                                            and 489 such segments are present in RbW but absent in RbY
                                                                (Tables S2A–S2D).
Diversity of the scent compounds in two subspecies of
rose                                                      Origin and evolution of the SCREP gene
Previous studies have confirmed the existence of extensive   To investigate the potential role of structural variation (SV) in the
phenotypical divergence among different rose species. Here,  VOC divergence between the two subspecies, we screened for
we conducted a metabolome analysis on 13 tissues from two   genes that locate within these SVs and show differential expres-
subspecies of R. banksiae, RbY (R. banksiae with yellow un-   sion between RbW and RbY floral tissues. We identified 58 genes
scented flower) and RbW (R. banksiae with white scented flower)   exclusively expressed in RbY and 21 genes exclusively expressed
(Figures 1A, 1B, and S1A–S1C; Table S1A). Our findings indicate    in RbW (Tables S2B and S2D). One of these genes, RbY2G0
that  the  benzenoid/phenylpropanoid  volatile  organic com-   98300  (RbYChr2(+):61918535-61920112),  named RbSCREP
pounds (VOCs) account for a significant proportion of the total   here, caught our attention as it showed significant and exclusive
floral aroma (Figure S1D). Quantitative determination of VOCs re-   expression in RbY but seemed to be an incomplete gene in
vealed that the content of intermediate compounds (coniferyl  RbW (Figure 2A).
alcohol) and the end product (eugenol), derived from phenylpro-     Comparison between the genomic DNA and transcript se-
panoid metabolism, was higher in all five floral development pe-   quences indicated that SCREP contains two exons (exon 1 and
riods in RbW than in RbY (Figures S1E–S1I). Notably, the eugenol   exon 2) and one intron. In addition, a MITE transposon was iden-
content in the RbW S1 petals was more than 20 times higher than    tified in the SCREP promoter region, specifically 436–829 bp up-
that in RbY (Figure S1I). Eugenol is also present in trace amounts   stream of the ATG translation start codon (Data S1.1; Table S2E).
in stems and leaves but is completely lacking in roots. These re-   The analysis of the MITE pattern indicates a significant amplifica-
sults demonstrate significant differences in phenylpropanoids    tion in the RbY genome, as well as a notable difference in copy
metabolism between the two rose subspecies.                number between the RbW and RbY genomes (Data S1.1;
                                                             Table S2F). Genome re-sequencing has revealed that the full-
Genomic analysis and structural variations in the two       length RbSCREP  is  present  in  all  ‘‘yellow’’ accessions  of
rose subspecies                                             R. banksiae (RbY). By contrast, only exon 2 of the RbSCREP
To determine the genetic basis of VOC variation between RbW   gene is found in the ‘‘white’’ accessions (RbW), which are charac-
and RbY, we first generated de novo chromosome-level genome   terized by eugenol-rich, scented flowers (Figure 2B). Furthermore,
assemblies for these two subspecies using PacBio high-fidelity   Translation-Based Local Alignment  of DNA Sequences with
(HiFi) sequencing and high-throughput/resolution chromosome   Protein Sequences (TBLASTN) and Position-Specific Iterated
conformation capture (Hi-C) scaffolding. The K-mer analysis re-  BLAST (PSI-BLAST) searches in NCBI showed that homologous
vealed that the estimated genome size of both RbW and RbY   sequences of RbSCREP exon 2 were exclusively present in the
was approximately 400 Mb (Figures S2A and S2B; Table S1B).   Rosaceae  family, and homologous  sequences  of exon 1
In total, we generated 98.29 Gb of PacBio HiFi reads (76.82 Gb   were found only in the genus Rosa (Data S1.2–S1.3). These
186× for RbY and 21.47 Gb 55× coverage for RbW) and   results were further confirmed by querying the Genome Database
226.01 Gb (178.74 Gb for RbY and 47.27 Gb for RbW) of Hi-C    for Rosaceae (GDR: https://www.rosaceae.org/) (Table S2G). No



2     Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025


[PDF physical page 4]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

                                                                                                                       ll
Article





Figure 1. Comparative analysis of floral volatiles and genomes of R. banksiae yellow and R. banksiae white
(A) Phenotypes and karyotypes of R. banksiae yellow (RbY) and R. banksiae white (RbW).
(B) Chromatogram of eugenol and coniferyl alcohol in RbW and RbY flowers. WS1, flowers at the first stage of development in RbW. YS1, flowers at the first stage
of development in RbY. The division of the period of floral development was shown in Figure S1A.
(C) Overview of genomic features along with RbY and RbW. The outer layer represents the genomic landscape of the RbY chromosome (left) and RbW chro-
mosome (right) (a). The other displayed tracks include gene density (b), TE abundance (c), and SV (d), and the relationship between syntenic blocks is indicated by
connecting lines (e).
(D) Phylogenetic tree of the RbY and RbW species. The numbers on the branches indicate the counts of gene family expansion and contraction. The various
colored backgrounds of the phylogenetic trees represent distinct branching groups. Gray represents the outgroups that lie beyond the Rosaceae subfamily.
Green indicates the Amygdaloideae subfamily (outgroups located within the Rosaceae subfamily but outside the Rosoideae). Cyan indicates the outgroups
located within the Rosoideae subfamily but outside the genus Rosa. Blue represents species closely related to R. banksiae within the genus Rosa.
See also Figures S1 and S2 and Table S1.

conserved domains  (E  value < 1e− 5,  Template  modeling   Rosoideae (Figures 2C, 2D, and S3; Tables S2I–S2K). We anno-
score > 0.5) were identified for the RbSCREP protein through   tated the chromosome positions of RbSCREP homologs in each
searches conducted  using  Foldseek and SMART. A  low-   Rosoideae genome (TBLASTN E value < 1e− 5 and identity
complexity  region,   classified  as  disordered  regions  by  >50%, with exon 1 present nearby for Rosa). In Rubus occiden-
MetaDisorder (Data S1.4 and S1.5), and two potential CCHC    talis, the sequence similar to exon 2 of RbSCREP, RocSCREP_
(Zn) domains were  detected by SMART  (Simple  Modular    like1, is not located within the collinear region where RbSCREP
Architecture Research Tool) with low confidence (E value > 1e–5).   resides in RbY/RbW. According to a search of the NCBI nucleo-
The RbSCREP gene has only one closely related paralog, labeled   tide nonredundant database, the homologous sequence of
as RbY2G098280,  in  both  the RbY and RbW genomes   RocSCREP_like1 is exclusively identified in species within the
(Table S2H; Data S1.6).                                     Rosoideae subfamily and is absent in other species among the
  The genomic region encompassing ∼10 genes upstream and   outgroups (Data S1.7). However, in Fragaria vesca, the homolo-
∼10 genes downstream of RbSCREP exhibited significant collin-   gous  sequences  FveSCREP_like1/2/3  are  present  in  the
earity among the eleven examined species in the subfamily   collinear region (Figure S3A). Within the genus Rosa, SCREP



                                                                                                        Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025    3


[PDF physical page 5]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

          ll
                                                                   Article





Figure 2. Origin and fixation of the SCREP gene in Rosa genus species
(A) SV in the region containing RbSCREP between RbY and RbW. The green link denotes collinear genomic region. The orange link represents the genomic
position of the RbSCREP gene in RbY and its counterpart in RbW. The gene is highlighted in gray, with the line denoting the intron and the box representing the
exons.
(B) Genome re-sequencing data indicate that the yellow accessions of R. bankiae have a complete RbSCREP gene, whereas the white accessions have only
exon 2.
(C) Origin and fixation of the SCREP genes are illustrated through phylogenomics. Phylogenetic tree and divergence time of species (left), distribution of
RbSCREP and its highly similar sequences in these genomes among various species, and the region collinearity where RbSCREP is located (right). J, Jurassic;



                                                                                                             (legend continued on next page)

4     Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025


[PDF physical page 6]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

                                                                                                                       ll
Article


and SCREP-like sequences are also quite dynamic among    in Rubus occidentalis is transcribed, but the SCREP_like se-
different species. For example, R. wichuraiana has a gene (RwiS-   quences in Fragaria vesca are not. Within the genus Rosa, the
CREP)  very  similar  to RbSCREP across  its  entire  length   RbSCREP-like genes lacking the promoter but containing the
(identity > 90%), but it does not reside within the collinear region.   intron tend to have low expression levels, whereas genes lacking
Conversely, another similar sequence (RwiSCREP_like4), lack-   both the promoter and  intron show no expression  at  all
ing introns, is found within the collinear region. In the published   (Figures 2D and S3B; Tables S2I and S2J; Data S2). The expres-
R. chinensis genome, there are six tandem copies of RbSCREP   sion  patterns  of  these RbSCREP homologs were  further
homologs (RchSCREP and RchSCREP_like1-5) in the collinear   confirmed through PCR amplification of gDNA extracted from
regions (Figures 2C, S3A, and S3B; Tables S2I and S2J). Using   R. rugosa and R. wichuraiana (Data S1.8A) and through cDNA
RbSCREP as a reference, the Ka/Ks ratio of SCREP homologous   analysis of R. rugosa, R. chinenses, and R. wichuraiana using
sequences across various rose species exceeds 1, while the ho-   various tissues (Data S1.8B–S1.12).
mologous sequences in other Rosaceae species are below 1
(Table S2L). This observation suggests that these genes may   Phenylpropanoids and eugenol biosynthesis in rose
have experienced positive selection, indicating potential adap-   To identify key genes involved in eugenol biosynthesis in rose,
tive evolution or functional innovation.                    we generated a total of 296 Gb clean RNA-seq reads from 39
  To further investigate the evolutionary dynamics of RbSCREP  RNA-seq  libraries of R. banksiae (Table S1L). Subsequently,
homologs across the genus Rosa, we obtained whole-genome   14,045  differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified
re-sequencing data for 104 species from nine sections in the   (Figures S4A and S4B). Weighted gene co-expression network
subgenus Rosa and two other subgenera, as classified  in   analysis (WGCNA) was performed on 21,504 filtered genes iden-
the Flora Reipublicae Popularis Sinicae (Table S2M). Using the    tified from R. banksiae (with Fragments Per Kilobase of transcript
RbY genome as a reference, we identified nucleotide substitu-   per Million mapped reads [FPKM] > 1 in at least one sample and a
tions in all re-sequenced species and constructed a phyloge-   coefficient of variation exceeding 30% across 13 samples), lead-
netic tree (Figure 2E). Additionally, we compared the ∼3.5-kb   ing to the identification of 24 modules (Figures S4C and S4D).
region encompassing the RbSCREP gene, including the pro-   Analysis of the module-eugenol relationships for 13 samples re-
moter, exon 1, exon 2, and the intron, across all sampled spe-   vealed significant correlations between eugenol and the red and
cies. Our results revealed significant variability within this region   palevioletred3 modules (R > 0.75 and p value < 0.001), as well
(Figure 2E). We observed co-inheritance of exon 1 and the intron   as weaker correlations with the darkslateblue (0.5 < R < 0.75
with high probability across different species. The promoter re-   and 0.001 < p value < 0.01) and the antiquewhite4 module
gion was found to be virtually absent in section Cinnamomeae      (− 0.75 < R <  − 0.5 and 0.01 < p value < 0.05), respectively
and Pimpinellifoliae as well as the outgroup subgenus Hulthemia   (Figures S3A and S4E–S4H). Among these modules, 13 genes
(represented by R. persica). However, the relatively late-diverged   were identified as being involved in the phenylpropanoid pathway
section, Chinenses and Synstglae, exhibited a consistent trend,   (Figures 3B and 3C) based on conserved domains. These include
with most species containing the complete coding region and its   one 4CL, two caffeic acid 3-O-methyltransferases (COMTs), one
upstream 2-kb promoter. Our findings suggest that the gene   coniferyl-aldehyde dehydrogenase (REF), four cinnamoyl-CoA re-
SCREP gradually stabilized its inheritance and functions during   ductases (CCRs), four coniferyl alcohol acyltransferases (CFATs),
speciation within the Rosa genus. To further explore the origins   and one EGS (Table S3). The putative structural genes, such as
of SCREP, we gathered a comprehensive array of existing   key enzyme genes, including COMTs, CCRs, REFs, and EGSs,
genomic sequences within the genus Rosa and conducted an   exhibit high sequence similarity in various rose species (Data
analysis of their syntenic regions in this genus. By conducting   S1.13–S1.16).
sequence alignments across species, including R. persica,    These enzyme genes from R. bankiae were selected for func-
R. spinosissima, R. banksiae white, R. banksiae yellow, and    tional testing following phylogenetic and gene expression anal-
R. chinensis, we discovered that the previously identified ances-   ysis (Figures S4I–S4N). The RbCOMT1 proteins underwent
tral non-coding homologous sequences of SCREP were unable   testing with caffeic acid, caffeic aldehyde, and caffeyl alcohol.
to be transcribed and translated due to several factors, including   Product detection revealed the specific catalytic activity of
splicing site mutations, frameshift mutations, and premature  RbCOMT1 for the methylation reaction of caffeic acid, but no
termination codons (Figures S3C and S3D).                         catalytic activity for the methylation of caffeic aldehyde or caffeyl
 RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis of floral organs from   alcohol under the same conditions (Figure 3D; Data S1.17). Addi-
these Rosoideae species (Table S2K) showed that SCREP_like1    tionally, RbCCR1 was found to catalyze the conversion of




K1, Early Cretaceous; K2, Late Cretaceous; E1, Paleocene; E2, Eocene; E3, Oligocene; N1, Miocene; N2, Pliocene; Q, Quaternary. The asterisk (*) indicates
bootstrap support above 95% in 500 simulations. mya stands for 1 million years ago. The red dashed line highlights the divergence time of the Rosaceae genus.
(D) De novo origin of SCREP (left) and characteristics of SCREP homologous genes (right). The SCREP gene is found in many rose species but is absent in the
ancestors. Green boxes denote the flanking genes of SCREP genes or their orthologs in syntenic regions. Expression of SCREP genes is illustrated through RNA-
seq analysis (right).
(E) Evolutionary patterns of SCREP homologous genes within the Rosa genus. All 104 accessions were collected for alignment to the RbY genome. The botanical
classification is indicated by the different colored blocks below the Latin name of the species. The gradient from white to yellow to blue represents the alignment
counts from low to high. The species indicated by red circles possess chromosome-level genomes, and those marked with red stars have contig-level genomes.
See also Figure S3, Table S2, and Data S2.



                                                                                                        Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025    5


[PDF physical page 7]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

          ll
                                                                   Article





Figure 3. Functional characterization of key genes related to eugenol biosynthesis in R. banksiae
(A) Correlation analysis of the metabolites in the eugenol biosynthesis pathway with the WGCNA module. The content of caffeic acid, ferulic acid, coniferyl
aldehyde, and coniferyl alcohol is displayed in Figure S1. These squares represent the correlation between WGCNA modules. The size and color of each square
indicate the strength of these correlations. The lines illustrate the relationships between modules and metabolites, with different line colors denoting significant
correlations (p ≤ 0.05).
(B) Correlation of eugenol biosynthesis pathway genes with RbSCREP and eugenol. The circles located on the periphery represent genes associated with the
eugenol pathway. The color and thickness of the lines represent, respectively, the strength and significance of the correlation between these genes and eugenol
or RbSCREP. The genes highlighted in red exhibit strong correlation with elevated expression levels.
(C) Schematic of the metabolic pathway from caffeic acid to eugenol.
(D–F) Chromatograms showing the formed products from in vitro assays of RbCOMT1, RbCCR1, and RbREF1 enzymes, respectively. EV, empty vector. Std,
standard.


                                                                                                             (legend continued on next page)

6     Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025


[PDF physical page 8]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

                                                                                                                       ll
Article


feruloyl-coenzyme A (CoA)  to coniferaldehyde  (Figure  3E).      In the transgenic rose plants overexpressing RbSCREP, the ex-
In vitro assays of purified RbREF1 protein demonstrated  its   pressions of RcCOMT1, RcCCR1, and RcEGS2 were significantly
capability to oxidize coniferaldehyde to ferulic acid (Figure 3F).    decreased, while the expression of RcREF1 was significantly
  In the transgenic strawberry fruits overexpressing RbCOMT1,   increased (Figures 5A–5C; Data S1.20; Tables S4A–S4C). In the
RbCCR1, and RbEGS2 (Figures S5A–S5E), a significant increase   transgenic strawberry  fruits that overexpress RbSCREP, our
in the products of the three enzymes (ferulic acid, coniferalde-  RNA-seq analysis revealed a significant decrease in the expres-
hyde, and eugenol, respectively) was observed (Figures 3G, 3H,   sion levels of COMT1, CCR1, and EGS2 (Figure 5C; Data S1.21;
and 3J). Additionally, levels of eugenol were also found to be   Tables S4D–S4F). Conversely,  in rose plantlets with SCREP
increased  in  strawberry   fruits  overexpressing  RbCOMT1,   silenced by RNAi, there was a significant increase in the expres-
RbCCR1, and RbEGS2 (Figures 3G, 3H, 3J, and S5E). Conversely,   sion of RcCOMT2, RcCCR1, and RcEGS2, along with a consider-
transgenic strawberry fruits overexpressing RbREF1 exhibited   able decrease in RcREF1 (Figures 5D–5F). This resulted in an
a substantial decrease in coniferaldehyde and eugenol content,   obvious elevation in eugenol content as well as its precursors,
along  with  an  increase  in  the  ferulic  acid  accumulation   coniferyl alcohol and coniferyl aldehyde. These differences are
(Figures 3I and S5C–S5E). Furthermore, similar results were ob-    significant when compared with those observed in wild-type
tained when gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS)   (WT) plants and in plants overexpressing RbSCREP (Figures 5G
analysis was performed on transgenic petunia petals overex-   and 5H). The findings align with the observed trends in gene
pressing  RbCOMT1,  RbREF1,  and  RbEGS2,  respectively   expression and metabolite content in petals subjected to Tobacco
(Figures S5F–S5N).  Collectively, these  findings  confirm  the   Rattle  Virus  (TRV)-mediated  SCREP   silencing   in  roses
involvement of RbCOMT1, RbREF1, RbCCR1, and RbEGS2 in   (Figures S6A–S6D; Data S1.22). In addition, the overexpression
the eugenol biosynthesis pathway.                          and RNA interference (RNAi) silencing of SCREP in the hairy roots
                                                                      of R. rugosa ‘‘Zizhi’’ reflected the expression trends of these genes
RbSCREP and the metabolism of phenylpropanoids        and associated phenotypic changes, further validating the regula-
In our WGCNA analysis, it was found that RbSCREP exists in the   tory role of SCREP (Figures S6E–S6M). Furthermore, four individ-
antiquewhite4 module, which is negatively correlated to eugenol   ual root lines with CRISPR-Cas9-mediated gene editing of SCREP
content (Figures 3A and 3B). The RNA-seq and qRT-PCR ana-   had been identified. The analysis of gene expression and metab-
lyses of flowers between RbW and RbY revealed a significant dif-    olites in these genetically edited roots robustly demonstrates that
ference  in  eugenol  contents  and RbSCREP  expression  SCREP regulates phenylpropanoid metabolism (Figures S6N–
(Figure 4A). The subcellular localization of the RbSCREP-GFP   S6R). DNA Affinity Purification Sequencing (DAP-seq) analysis
fusion protein in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves and protoplasts   demonstrated that RbSCREP is capable of binding to the pro-
derived from rose petals indicated that the GFP fluorescence   moters of genes involved in the eugenol biosynthesis pathway.
was predominantly localized  in the nucleus and cytoplasm   These genes include the four structural genes (Rb4CL, RbCCR1,
(Figure 4B). Furthermore, the transcription activation activity  RbCFAT, and RbEGS2) and two transcription factors (Figures 5I
assay demonstrated that RbSCREP likely functions as a tran-   and S6S–S6U; Data S1.23; Tables S4G and S4H). Additionally,
scription factor (Data S1.18). To validate promoter activity, four   motif enrichment analysis of RbSCREP binding sites revealed a
segments (− 1,712, − 1,355, − 911, and − 435) upstream of the   shared GAGA factor (GAGAGA) (Figure 5J). The binding activity
translation start codon (ATG) were cloned and used for lucif-    in CCR and EGS was  further  validated through chromatin
erase-based assays (Figure 4C). The results revealed that the   immunoprecipitation  (ChIP)-qPCR, Y1H, and EMSA assays
recruitment of the MITE transposon in the RbSCREP promoter   (Figures 5K and S6V–S6Y). These results indicated that RbSCREP
greatly enhanced its promoter activity (Figures 4D and 4E). Spe-    is a transcription factor and acts as a repressor of those genes
cifically, the promoter fragment with MITE excision (P1RM) ex-   related  to  phenylpropanoid  metabolic  pathway—specifically
hibited significantly reduced activity in comparison with the  RbCOMT1, RbCCR1, and RbEGS2—while serving as an activator
intact promoter (P1), confirming that the presence of the MITE   of RbREF1 expression (Figures 5L–5N). Overall, it is evident that
element contributes to the enhanced activity of the RbSCREP  RbSCREP fine-tunes eugenol biosynthesis by modulating the
promoter (Data S1.19). These findings are consistent with tran-   expression of these key genes involved in the phenylpropanoid
scriptome analysis showing that insertion of MITE transposons   metabolic pathway.
into the promoter region increased the expression of SCREP
(Figure S3B; Table S2H). The RNA-seq and qRT-PCR results   Function of SCREP homologs and the relationship
also showed that RbCOMT1, RbCCR1, and RbEGS1 were highly  between SCREP and scent
expressed in RbW, while RbREF1 was highly expressed in RbY  To test whether SCREP orthologs have a conserved role in the
(Figures S4M and S4N).                                    genus Rosa, we cloned the SCREP genes from R. banksiae,



(G) The levels of ferulic acid (left) and eugenol (right) in strawberry fruit overexpressing RbCOMT1. The control group consisted of strawberry fruits transformed
with an empty vector (EV).
(H) The levels of coniferyl aldehyde (left) and eugenol (right) in strawberry fruit overexpressing RbCCR1.
(I) The levels of ferulic (left) and eugenol (right) in strawberry fruit overexpressing RbREF1.
(J) The levels of eugenol in strawberry fruit overexpressing RbEGS2.
Data represent the mean ± SD (n = 3). Significant differences compared with the WT were determined by the unpaired Student’s t tests: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
See also Figure S4 and Table S3.



                                                                                                        Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025    7


[PDF physical page 9]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

          ll
                                                                   Article





Figure 4. Analysis of transcriptional activity of RbSCREP
(A) Expression analysis of RbSCREP in RbW and RbY by both RT-PCR and qRT-PCR.
(B) Subcellular localization of RbSCREP in N. benthamiana and Rosa chinensis.
(C) Schematic of the constructed vectors containing various fragments (P1\P2\P3\P4) for driving the LUC reporter gene. The MITE regions are highlighted in red.
(D) Luciferase (LUC) activity assays were conducted to test the various fragments from the RbSCREP promoter in N. benthamiana.
(E) Activity of RbSCREP promoters of varying lengths.
Different lowercase letters above bars indicate significant differences, as determined by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test.
See also Data S1.18 and S1.19.


R. wichuraiana, R. chinensis, and R. rugosa and overexpressed   cies (Figures 1B, 2A, and 2B). Genome re-sequencing and the
these genes in the strawberry fruits and petunia petals, which   petal eugenol profiling of a total of 38 Rosa spp., including 14
lack the SCREP gene (Data S1.8B and S1.24). The four SCREP   wild sources, 12 ancient, and 12 modern roses, show that the
orthologs share 93.11% sequence  identity (Data  S1.25).  In   complete SCREP gene is consistently present in the genomes
the  transgenic  strawberry  fruits  overexpressing RbSCREP,   of the most evolved species and cultivars, while the presence
RcSCREP, RrSCREP, and RwSCREP, the expression levels of   of MITE in the gene promoter corresponds to the absence or
the FaCOMT, FaCCR, and FaEGS2 decreased significantly, and   lower eugenol levels in these species (Figure 6D). These results
the expression of FaREF1 increased in these transgenic straw-   suggest that the loss and gain of the SCREP function contribute
berry fruits (Figures 6A and S7A–S7H). Consistent with the expres-   to the diversification of eugenol content among species and
sion modulation to these genes involved in eugenol biosynthesis,    cultivars.
all  transgenic  strawberry  fruits  overexpressing RbSCREP,
RrSCREP, RcSCREP, and RwSCREP contained lower eugenol  DISCUSSION
content compared with the wild type (Figure 6B). Similar results
were observed in transgenic petunia petals (Figures S7I–S7N).    In this study, we have de novo assembled high-quality genomes of
In  addition,  transcriptional  activation  assays showed  that   two subspecies of Rosa banksiae. This represents a significant
RrSCREP, RcSCREP, and RwSCREP repress the expression of   improvement in terms of completeness compared with previous
COMT from their native species (Figure 6C). These results suggest   rose genome assemblies.18,19 We have identified a collinear and
that SCREP in R. rugosa, R. wichuraiana, and R. chinensis has a   diverse genomic region in the genomes of Rosoideae species.
conserved function in fine-tuning eugenol biosynthesis through   Within this region, putative DNA fragment insertions, DNA recom-
modulation of the expression of key genes in the phenylpropanoid   bination, and changes in DNA sequence have led to the emer-
metabolic pathway.                                       gence of a taxon-restricted gene through multiple evolutionary
  Notably, the absence of the RbSCREP gene in RbW is consis-   steps. Specifically, within this variable genomic locus, a taxon-
tent with the high level of eugenol or its derivatives in this subspe-   restricted gene encoding a functional protein emerged within the



8     Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025


[PDF physical page 10]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

                                                                                                                       ll
Article





Figure 5. Newly originated taxon-restricted RbSCREP genes serve as a negative regulator in the eugenol biosynthesis pathway
(A) Phenotypes of WT and rose plants overexpressing RbSCREP.
(B) Expression analysis of RbSCREP in rose leaves overexpressing RbSCREP.

                                                                                                             (legend continued on next page)

                                                                                                        Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025    9


[PDF physical page 11]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

          ll
                                                                   Article


last 16.8 million years. In species of the genus Rosa, although the   important functions in various organisms.20,24–27 However, it is still
taxon-restricted gene (SCREP) has formed, the collinear genomic   not well studied whether these newly formed genes could regulate
region where the SCREP is located remains highly variable. We   essential biosynthetic pathways. In our study, we functionally
observed that the syntenic regions of the SCREP gene exhibit sig-   characterized key enzymes closely related to eugenol production
nificant mosaic loss and gain within the Rosa lineage during the    in the phenylpropanoid metabolism pathway, including COMT,
speciation processes. The conserved second exon of SCREP con-  CCR, cinnamyl-alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD), and EGS in rose
tains orthologous or paralogous DNA sequences in only a few out-   species. Our findings indicate that many of those genes share
group species, including those from Rubus and Fragaria genera,   the same or highly homologous sequences and have conserved
and these sequences do not produce transcripts. Whereas, almost   functions across the tested rose species. Previous reports have
all species within the Rosa group contain the second exon of   primarily indicated that many orthologous transcription factors
SCREP. Furthermore,  all the complete building blocks of the   regulate the phenylpropanoid metabolic pathways by modulating
SCREP have been retained, and the SCREP gene has been   these key enzymes. Many myoblastoma transcription factors
permanently integrated into the genomes of these evolved rose  (MYB TFs) have been identified as contributors to phenylpropa-
species following speciation.                                    noid metabolism and the regulation of volatile compound emis-
  The emergence of lineage-specific or uncharacterized genes   sions. A regulatory network comprising ODORANT1 (ODO1),
has been previously reported to attribute to gene duplication-  EMISSION OF BENZENOIDS I (EOBI), and EOBII can directly acti-
divergence, transposable element protein domestication, lateral   vate the transcription of many genes related to the phenylpropa-
gene  transfer, de novo  origination, gene fusion, and gene   noid metabolic pathway.28,29 Additionally,  it has been reported
fission. 3,20–23 In our study, it is evident that the emergence of   that specific R2R3 MYB TFs, such as RcMYB1, FaMYB10, and
SCREP presents a complex process, as there are no complete  FaMYB63, play a role in the biosynthesis of eugenol in strawberry
homologous DNA sequences in the genomes of outgroup spe-   and rose plants.15,17,30 Here, we present a de novo-originated
cies, and the formation of SCREP requires several events.   gene, SCREP, which integrates into the ancestral phenylpropa-
Initially, the highly homologous sequences of exon 2 of SCREP   noid metabolic pathway by modulating these structure genes.
did not appear in the collinear region where SCREP originated   The remote structural similarity to the CCHC domains might
in the genome of Rubus occidentalis. Subsequently, it entered   have enabled SCREP to bind gene promoters. It appears that
this region in the Fragaria vesca genome and the genomes of   the regulatory network governing the biosynthesis of phenylpro-
Rosa species during speciation. In the genus Rosa, the emer-   panoid volatiles has become more complex in roses. This also re-
gence of exon 1 and the intron resulted  in the complete   veals an additional strategy by which plants shape themselves
sequence of SCREP. Possibly due to DNA changes, a promoter   through the expansion of their genetic repertoire.
was formed in many rose species. Finally, insertion of a MITE     Previous reports suggest that newly formed genes typically
transposable element into the SCREP promoter region greatly   begin as transcripts characterized by low expression levels
increased its expression level. In those rose species belonging   and high tissue specificity. While most newly formed genes are
to Sect. Chinenses, which diverged relatively late, SCREP with   rapidly lost, those that persist and become fixed within evolved
both a complete coding region and upstream promoter region   species tend to acquire broader and higher expression levels. 31
is fixed within their genomes. Thus, it is suggested that the birth  Gene expression primarily depends on promoters, which has led
of SCREP involves a complex, multi-step process (Figure 7).   to increased interest in identifying differences among promoters
Furthermore, homologous genes to SCREP lacking introns are   and editing them to modify gene expression patterns, ultimately
also present in many rose species, potentially as a result of ret-   enhancing agronomically important traits. 32–35 Consistent with
roposition events. This indicates that the SCREP gene continu-   previous reports, 36–38 our study reveals that the recruitment of
ously contributes to genetic innovation during the subsequent   transposable elements within promoter regions serves as a
diversification of rose species. In summary, we discovered that  mechanism for the evolution of expression patterns for newly
a  multi-step mechanism  underlies  the emergence  of  the   formed genes. Thus, promoter editing can be effectively em-
gene SCREP.                                               ployed in CRISPR-Cas9-based genome insertion technologies
  Previous studies have suggested that newly formed genes,   by utilizing MITE transposons for the targeted modification of
which are involved in ancestral networks, eventually acquire   gene expression. This approach ultimately aims to generate



(C) Heatmap of gene expression of the eugenol biosynthesis genes in R. banksiae, rose leaves, and strawberry fruits. Red asterisks denote the essential genes
involved in the eugenol biosynthesis pathway.
(D) Schematic diagrams of the SCREP-RNAi constructs and various individual lines of Rose SCREP-RNAi plantlets.
(E) Expression analysis of RcSCREP in RcSCREP-RNAi plantlets.
(F) Expression analysis of RcCOMT1, RcREF1, RcCCR1, and RcEGS2 in RcSCREP-RNAi plantlets.
(G) The levels of coniferyl aldehyde and coniferyl alcohol in rose leaves overexpressing RbSCREP.
(H) The levels of coniferyl aldehyde and coniferyl alcohol in RcSCREP-RNAi plantlets.
(I) DAP-seq analysis reveals SCREP binding around the promoters of eugenol biosynthesis genes. The gene body is illustrated at the bottom of each panel.
(J) Motif sequence logos for RbSCREP identified by DAP-seq and ChIP-qPCR, respectively.
(K) ChIP-qPCR analysis indicates that RbSCREP binds to the GA-rich regions of the CCR and EGS promoters.
(L–N) Schematic diagrams of vectors and transcriptional activation analysis in N. benthamiana.
Data represent the mean ± SD (n = 3) (Student’s t tests: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).
See also Figures S5 and S6, Data S1.20–S1.23, and Table S4.



10    Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025


[PDF physical page 12]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

                                                                                                                       ll
Article





Figure 6. Natural alleles of RbSCREP maintain the conserved function
(A) Expression analysis of FaCOMT by qRT-PCR in strawberry fruits overexpressing RbSCREP, RcSCREP, RrSCREP, and RwSCREP, respectively. The control
group consisted of strawberry fruits transformed with an empty vector (EV).
(B) Eugenol content in strawberry fruit overexpressing RbSCREP, RcSCREP, RrSCREP, and RwSCREP.
(C) Schematic diagrams depicting the effectors and reporters utilized for conducting LUC activity assays in N. benthamiana. pRrCOMT1pro-LUC with EV or 35S-
RrSCREP effector, pRwCOMT1pro-LUC with EV or 35S-RwSCREP effector, and pRcCOMT1pro-LUC with EV or 35S-RcSCREP effector were co-transformed
into N. benthamiana leaves.
(D) DNA structure and DNA-re-sequencing tracks of the SCREP genes visualized using the IGV browser are presented alongside the numbers of 38 rose species
or cultivars. The species that contain eugenol in their floral scents are indicated by solid purple circles. The numbers within the circles represent the eugenol
content (μg/g).
Data represent the mean ± SD (n = 3). Significant differences compared with the EV were determined by the unpaired Student’s t tests: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
See also Figure S7, Data S1.24–S1.25, and Table S4I.



                                                                                                        Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025   11


[PDF physical page 13]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

          ll
                                                                   Article





Figure 7. Diversification of rose scent through evolution of a newly originated taxon-restricted gene
Firstly, the emergence of the second exon precedes the formation of the first exon and intron of SCREP during gene birth. Finally, the recruitment of MITE in the
SCREP promoter significantly enhances the expression of SCREP. SCREP represses the biosynthesis of eugenol. The red dots indicate the presence of eugenol.
The yellow block represents the second exon of SCREP, while the red and green blocks denote the first exon and intron of SCREP, respectively. The blue block
illustrates the MITE transposon. The used species are as follows: Arabidopsis thaliana (Ath), Vitis vinifera (Vvi), Malus prunifolia (Mpr), Rubus occidentalis (Roc),
Fragaria vesca (Fve), Rosa persica (Rpe), Rosa spinosissima (Rsp), Rosa chinensis (Rch), Rosa wichuraiana (Rwi), Rosa banksiae yellow (RbY), Rosa rugosa (Rru),
and Rosa banksiae white (RbW).



genetic variations within a specific promoter, thereby facilitating      In summary, our study successfully de novo assembled high-
the achievement of desirable agronomic  traits. Additionally,   quality genomes for two subspecies and re-sequenced most of
cross-species comparative genetic research is often hindered   the species in the Rosa genus. Comparative genomics has
by the limited availability of alleles. 39 Divergence in gene function   revealed the birth, evolution, and fixation of SCREP (a taxon-
typically arises from mutations in coding regions or in cis-regula-   restricted gene) in Rosaceae genomes, demonstrating a com-
tory regions.40 SCREP contains many alleles resulting from fortu-   plex,  multi-step mechanism  for de novo gene  origination.
itous natural mutations in various Rosa species. Our analysis of   Through a combination of transcriptome, metabolism, trans-
four SCREP genes from R. rugosa, R. banksiae, R. chinensis,   genic, physiological, and biochemical analyses, we have found
and R. multifloria reveals that these gene alleles not only have   that the newly formed gene SCREP orchestrates phenylpropa-
the capability to modulate the expression of functional structural   noid metabolism and ultimately determines eugenol biosyn-
genes related to phenylpropanoid metabolism within Rosa, but   thesis. Together, our findings not only provide insights into the
also in outgroup lineages such as F. vesca. This suggests that   mechanisms of gene origination but also shed light on the inte-
no functional divergence in regulating phenylpropanoid meta-   gration of a newly formed gene into ancestral regulatory and
bolism has occurred in SCREP evolution within Rosaceae. Our   metabolic networks and its role in phenotypic diversification.
findings not only indicate that the loss or gain of SCREP and
the insertion of the MITE transposon are major contributors to   Limitations of the study
the divergence of rose scents during speciation and domestica-   In this study, we present a case that illustrates how evolution
tion but also suggest a promising target gene for breeding and/or   constructs a functional gene from scratch and examines the
genetic engineering of rose cultivars with distinct scent profiles.   phenotypic consequence of this de novo gene in roses. We



12    Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025


[PDF physical page 14]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

                                                                                                                       ll
Article


demonstrate that the newly originated gene, SCREP, has been         ○ Transposable element (TE) and gene annotation
integrated  into  the  ancestral  phenylpropanoid  metabolic         ○ Sequence variation and synteny analyses
pathway by modulating the expression of various structural         ○ Phylogenomic analysis and WGD identification
                                                                  ○ Genome variant calling and phylogenetic analysis of the genus Rosa
genes on the eugenol biosynthesis pathway.  It appears that         ○ Identification of the de novo genes
the regulatory network governing the biosynthesis of phenylpro-         ○ Metabolome and transcriptome analysis
panoid volatiles has become more complex in roses. However,         ○ Phylogenetic analyses to orthologous genes related to eugenol
we still do not understand why roses have developed an addi-             biosynthesis
tional pathway instead of adhering to the more commonly uti-         ○ GC-MS analysis of volatile compounds
lized route, nor the selective force that led to the fixation of this         ○ LC-MS analysis of eugenol substances
                                                                  ○ HPLC assay
newly formed gene in late-diverged Rosa species. In addition,
                                                                  ○ qRT-PCR analysis
whether SCREP is involved in the regulation of other plant traits         ○ Function evalution of eugenol biosynthesis enzymes in vitro
besides eugenol production remains unclear. These questions         ○ Subcellular localization and transcriptional activation assays
present exciting opportunities to further explore the mechanisms         ○ Luciferase transient assay
of gene origination and phenotypic diversification in this underu-         ○ Transient expression analysis in strawberry fruit and petunia petal
tilized study system.                                               ○ Virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) assay
                                                                  ○ Vector construction
                                                                  ○ Stable transformation in rose plants and roots
RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
                                                                  ○ DAP-seq sampling and data analysis
                                                                  ○ Yeast One-Hybrid (Y1H) Assay
Lead contact
                                                                  ○ Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs)
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be
                                                                  ○ ChIP-qPCR analysis
directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Guogui Ning (ggning@
                                                    • QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSISmail.hzau.edu.cn).


Materials availability
Materials and additional information can be obtained from the lead contact af-  SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
ter completing a material transfer agreement.

                                                                      Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.
Data and code availability                                                2025.08.011.
Data presented in this study can be accessed in the supplemental information
or through the China National GeneBank DataBase (CNGBdb: https://db.    Received: February 11, 2025
cngb.org/) and China National Center for Bioinformation (CNCB: https://    Revised: June 4, 2025
www.cncb.ac.cn/). Accession numbers are listed in the key resources table.   Accepted: August 7, 2025
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper
is available from the lead contact upon request.
                                                    REFERENCES

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
                                                                                         1. Toll-Riera, M., Bosch, N., Bellora, N., Castelo, R., Armengol, L., Estivill,
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Pro-          X., and Alba` , M.M. (2009). Origin of primate orphan genes: a comparative
gram (no. 2023YFD2300901), the Construction of a Modern Agricultural Indus-        genomics approach. Mol. Biol. Evol. 26, 603–612. https://doi.org/10.
trial Technology System (CRAS-23), and the National Natural Science Founda-        1093/molbev/msn281.
tion of China (no. 31772343). We thank these colleagues for their comments       2. Long, M., and Langley, C.H. (1993). Natural selection and the origin of
that greatly improved the manuscript.                                                    jingwei, a chimeric processed functional gene in Drosophila. Science
                                                                               260, 91–95. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7682012.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS                                                          3. Tautz, D., and Domazet-Lo so, T. (2011). The evolutionary origin of orphan
                                                                             genes. Nat. Rev. Genet. 12, 692–702. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg3053.
G.N. designed the experiments. Y.L., R.L., J.S., K.Z., Y.S., Z.L., and H.Y. per-
                                                                                         4. Levy, A. (2019). How evolution builds genes from scratch. Nature 574,
formed the experiments. G.N., Y.L., and R.L. analyzed the data and wrote the
                                                                           314–316. https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-019-03061-x.
manuscript. G.N. supervised the research. G.N., Y.-W.Y., Q.Z., M.B., and M.L.
                                                                                         5. Zhang, L., Ren, Y., Yang, T., Li, G., Chen, J., Gschwend, A.R., Yu, Y.,
finished the revised work. All authors participated in data interpretation.
                                                                        Hou, G., Zi, J., Zhou, R., et al. (2019). Rapid evolution of protein diversity
                                                                      by de novo origination in Oryza. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 3, 679–690. https://doi.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
                                                                             org/10.1038/s41559-019-0822-5.
The authors declare no competing interests.                                          6. Rives, N., Lamba, V., Cheng, C.H.C., and Zhuang, X. (2024). Diverse or-
                                                                                             igins of near-identical antifreeze proteins in unrelated fish lineages pro-
                                                                                   vide insights into evolutionary mechanisms of new gene birth and protein
STAR★METHODS
                                                                      sequence convergence. Mol. Biol. Evol. 41, msae182. https://doi.org/10.
                                                                         1093/molbev/msae182.
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include
the following:                                                                           7. Li, C.Y., Zhang, Y., Wang, Z., Zhang, Y., Cao, C., Zhang, P.W., Lu, S.J.,
  • KEY RESOURCES TABLE                                                                    Li, X.M., Yu, Q., Zheng, X., et al. (2010). A human-specific de novo pro-
  • EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS                tein-coding gene associated with human brain functions. PLoS Comput.
      ○ Plant materials                                                                     Biol. 6, e1000734. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000734.
  • METHOD DETAILS                                                              8. McLysaght, A., and Hurst, L.D. (2016). Open questions in the study of de
      ○ Whole-genome and transcriptome sequencing                        novo genes: what, how and why. Nat. Rev. Genet. 17, 567–578. https://
      ○ De novo genome assembly and evaluation                                doi.org/10.1038/nrg.2016.78.



                                                                                                        Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025   13


[PDF physical page 15]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

          ll
                                                                   Article



   9. Liu, X., Xiao, C., Xu, X., Zhang, J., Mo, F., Chen, J.Y., Delihas, N., Zhang,     24. Chen, S., Ni, X., Krinsky, B.H., Zhang, Y.E., Vibranovski, M.D., White, K.
      L., An, N.A., and Li, C.Y. (2024). Origin of functional de novo genes in hu-          P., and Long, M. (2012). Reshaping of global gene expression networks
    mans from "hopeful monsters". Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. RNA 15, e1845.       and sex-biased gene expression by integration of a young gene. EMBO
     https://doi.org/10.1002/wrna.1845.                                                   J. 31, 2798–2809. https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2012.108.

 10. Conart, C., Saclier, N., Foucher, F., Goubert, C., Rius-Bony, A., Para-     25. Berto, S., and Nowick, K. (2018). Species-specific changes in a primate
     mita, S.N., Moja, S., Thouroude, T., Douady, C., Sun, P., et al. (2022).          transcription factor network provide insights into the molecular evolution
     Duplication and specialization of NUDX1 in Rosaceae led to geraniol          of the primate prefrontal cortex. Genome Biol. Evol. 10, 2023–2036.
     production in rose petals. Mol. Biol. Evol. 39, msac002. https://doi.         https://doi.org/10.1093/gbe/evy149.
     org/10.1093/molbev/msac002.                                                                               26. Arnoult, L., Su, K.F.Y., Manoel, D., Minervino, C., Magrin˜ a, J., Gompel,
 11. Shen, Y., Rao, Y., Ma, M., Li, Y., He, Y., Wang, Z., Liang, M., and Ning, G.          N., and Prud’homme, B. (2013). Emergence and diversification of fly
      (2024). Coordination among flower pigments, scents and pollinators in        pigmentation through evolution of a gene regulatory module. Science
     ornamental plants. Hortic. Adv. 2, 6. https://doi.org/10.1007/s44281-         339, 1423–1426. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1233749.
     024-00029-4.
                                                                               27. Xia, S., Chen, J., Arsala, D., Emerson, J.J., and Long, M. (2025). Func-
 12. Prasad, N.S., Raghavendra, R., Lokesh, B.R., and Naidu, K.A. (2004).          tional innovation through new genes as a general evolutionary pro-
     Spice phenolics inhibit human PMNL 5-lipoxygenase. Prostaglandins         cess. Nat. Genet. 57, 295–309. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-024-
     Leukot. Essent. Fatty Acids 70, 521–528.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.        02059-0.
     plefa.2003.11.006.
                                                                               28. Verdonk, J.C., Haring, M.A., van Tunen, A.J., and Schuurink, R.C. (2005).
 13. Atkinson, R.G. (2018). Phenylpropenes: Occurrence, distribution, and      ODORANT1 regulates fragrance biosynthesis in petunia flowers. Plant
     biosynthesis in fruit. J. Agric. Food Chem. 66, 2259–2272. https://doi.          Cell 17, 1612–1624. https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.104.028837.
     org/10.1021/acs.jafc.6b04696.
                                                                               29. Spitzer-Rimon, B., Farhi, M., Albo, B., Cna’ani, A., Ben Zvi, M.M., Masci,
 14. Palmer-Young, E.C., Calhoun, A.C., Mirzayeva, A., and Sadd, B.M.           T., Edelbaum, O., Yu, Y., Shklarman, E., Ovadis, M., et al. (2012). The
      (2018). Effects of the floral phytochemical eugenol on parasite evolution      R2R3-MYB like regulatory factor EOBI, acting downstream of EOBII, reg-
    and bumble bee infection and preference. Sci. Rep. 8, 2074. https://doi.         ulates scent production by activating ODO1 and structural scent-related
     org/10.1038/s41598-018-20369-2.                                      genes in petunia. Plant Cell 24, 5089–5105. https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.
 15. Medina-Puche, L., Molina-Hidalgo, F.J., Boersma, M., Schuurink, R.C.,        112.105247.
      Lo´pez-Vidriero,  I., Solano, R., Franco-Zorrilla, J.M., Caballero,  J.L.,     30. He, G., Zhang, R., Jiang, S., Wang, H., and Ming, F. (2023). The MYB tran-
     Blanco-Portales, R., and Mun˜ oz-Blanco, J. (2015). An R2R3-MYB tran-          scription factor RcMYB1 plays a central role in rose anthocyanin biosyn-
      scription factor regulates eugenol production in ripe strawberry fruit re-          thesis. Hortic. Res. 10, uhad080. https://doi.org/10.1093/hr/uhad080.
     ceptacles. Plant Physiol. 168, 598–614. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.114.
                                                                               31. Schmitz, J.F., Chain, F.J.J., and Bornberg-Bauer, E. (2020). Evolution of
     252908.
                                                                                 novel genes  in three-spined stickleback populations. Heredity 125,
 16. Koeduka, T., Louie, G.V., Orlova, I., Kish, C.M., Ibdah, M., Wilkerson, C.        50–59. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41437-020-0319-7.
     G., Bowman, M.E., Baiga, T.J., Noel, J.P., Dudareva, N., et al. (2008). The
                                                                               32. Rodrıguez-Leal, D., Lemmon, Z.H., Man, J., Bartlett, M.E., and Lippman,
     multiple phenylpropene synthases in both Clarkia breweri and Petunia
                                                                                  Z.B. (2017). Engineering Quantitative Trait Variation for Crop Improve-
     hybrida represent two distinct protein lineages. Plant J. 54, 362–374.
                                                                    ment by Genome Editing. Cell 171, 470–480.e8. https://doi.org/10.
     https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03412.x.
                                                                                      1016/j.cell.2017.08.030.
 17. Wang, S., Shi, M., Zhang, Y., Pan, Z., Xie, X., Zhang, L., Sun, P., Feng, H.,
                                                                               33. Liu, L., Gallagher, J., Arevalo, E.D., Chen, R., Skopelitis, T., Wu, Q., Bar-
     Xue, H., Fang, C., et al. (2022). The R2R3-MYB transcription factor
                                                                                                                     tlett, M., and Jackson, D. (2021). Enhancing grain-yield-related traits by
    FaMYB63 participates in regulation of eugenol production in strawberry.
                                                                   CRISPR-Cas9 promoter editing of maize CLE genes. Nat. Plants 7,
     Plant Physiol. 188, 2146–2165. https://doi.org/10.1093/plphys/kiac014.
                                                                           287–294. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-021-00858-5.
 18. Raymond, O., Gouzy, J., Just, J., Badouin, H., Verdenaud, M., Lemain-
                                                                               34. Huang, X., Huang, S., Han, B., and Li, J. (2022). The integrated genomics
     que, A., Vergne, P., Moja, S., Choisne, N., Pont, C., et al. (2018). The
                                                                                         of crop domestication and breeding. Cell 185, 2828–2839. https://doi.
    Rosa genome provides new insights into the domestication of modern
                                                                                      org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.04.036.
     roses. Nat. Genet. 50, 772–777. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-018-
     0110-3.                                                                   35. Zhang, J., Lyu, H., Chen, J., Cao, X., Du, R., Ma, L., Wang, N., Zhu, Z.,
                                                                          Rao, J., Wang, J., et al. (2024). Releasing a sugar brake generates
 19. Hibrand Saint-Oyant, L., Ruttink, T., Hamama, L., Kirov, I., Lakhwani, D.,
                                                                            sweeter tomato without yield penalty. Nature 635, 647–656. https://doi.
     Zhou, N.N., Bourke, P.M., Daccord, N., Leus, L., Schulz, D., et al. (2018).
                                                                             org/10.1038/s41586-024-08186-2.
    A high-quality genome sequence of Rosa chinensis to elucidate orna-
     mental traits. Nat. Plants 4, 473–484. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-     36. Farre´ , D., and Alba` , M.M. (2010). Heterogeneous patterns of gene-
     018-0166-1.                                                               expression diversification in mammalian gene duplicates. Mol. Biol.
                                                                                        Evol. 27, 325–335. https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msp242.
 20. Huang, J., Zhang, Z., Song, Y., Wang, Y., and Xu, C. (2020). A rose-spe-
       cific MYB transcription factor regulates fragrance production by modu-     37. Tan, S., Cardoso-Moreira, M., Shi, W., Zhang, D., Huang, J., Mao, Y., Jia,
      lating the biosynthesis of phenylpropanoids and terpenoids. Plant Cell          H., Zhang, Y., Chen, C., Shao, Y., et al. (2016). LTR-mediated retroposi-
     32, 389–409. https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.19.00778.                                tion as a mechanism of RNA-based duplication in metazoans. Genome
                                                                            Res. 26, 1663–1675. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.204925.116. 21. Yan˜ ez-Guerra, L.A., Thiel, D., and Je´kely, G. (2022). Premetazoan Origin
      of Neuropeptide Signaling. Mol. Biol. Evol. 39, msac051. https://doi.org/     38. Tan, S., Ma, H., Wang, J., Wang, M., Wang, M., Yin, H., Zhang, Y., Zhang,
     10.1093/molbev/msac051.                                                             X., Shen, J., Wang, D., et al. (2021). DNA transposons mediate duplica-
                                                                                         tions via transposition-independent and -dependent mechanisms in 22. Yu, Y., Li, W., Liu, Y., Liu, Y., Zhang, Q., Ouyang, Y., Ding, W., Xue, Y.,
                                                                          metazoans. Nat. Commun. 12, 4280. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-     Zou, Y., Yan, J., et al. (2025). A Zea genus-specific micropeptide controls
                                                                             021-24585-9.     kernel dehydration in maize. Cell 188, 44–59.e21. https://doi.org/10.
     1016/j.cell.2024.10.030.                                                   39. Paaby, A.B., and Rockman, M.V. (2013). The many faces of pleiotropy.
                                                                           Trends Genet. 29, 66–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.2012.10.010. 23. Long, M., Betra´ n, E., Thornton, K., and Wang, W. (2003). The origin of
    new genes: glimpses from the young and old. Nat. Rev. Genet. 4,     40. Cordaux, R., Udit, S., Batzer, M.A., and Feschotte, C. (2006). Birth of a
     865–875. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg1204.                                    chimeric primate gene by capture of the transposase gene from a mobile



14    Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025


[PDF physical page 16]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

                                                                                                                       ll
Article



     element. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 8101–8106. https://doi.org/10.          scripts and isoform switching during cell differentiation. Nat. Biotechnol.
     1073/pnas.0601161103.                                                       28, 511–515. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1621.

 41. Marc¸ ais, G., and Kingsford, C. (2011). A fast, lock-free approach for     57. Haas, B.J., Salzberg, S.L., Zhu, W., Pertea, M., Allen, J.E., Orvis, J.,
      efficient parallel counting of occurrences of k-mers. Bioinformatics 27,         White, O., Buell, C.R., and Wortman, J.R. (2008). Automated eukaryotic
     764–770. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btr011.                    gene structure annotation using EVidenceModeler and the Program to
 42. Ranallo-Benavidez, T.R., Jaron, K.S., and Schatz, M.C. (2020). Genome-       Assemble Spliced Alignments. Genome Biol. 9, R7. https://doi.org/10.
    Scope 2.0 and Smudgeplot for reference-free profiling of polyploid ge-        1186/gb-2008-9-1-r7.
    nomes. Nat. Commun. 11, 1432. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-     58. Campbell, M.S., Holt, C., Moore, B., and Yandell, M. (2014). Genome anno-
     14998-3.                                                                                 tation and curation using MAKER and MAKER-P. Curr. Protoc. Bioinformat-
 43. Cheng, H., Concepcion, G.T., Feng, X., Zhang, H., and Li, H. (2021).          ics 48, 4.11.1–4.11.39. https://doi.org/10.1002/0471250953.bi0411s48.
     Haplotype-resolved de novo assembly using phased assembly graphs     59. Buchfink, B., Xie, C., and Huson, D.H. (2015). Fast and sensitive protein
     with  hifiasm.  Nat. Methods  18,  170–175.  https://doi.org/10.1038/        alignment using DIAMOND. Nat. Methods 12, 59–60. https://doi.org/10.
     s41592-020-01056-5.                                                    1038/nmeth.3176.
 44. Li, H., and Durbin, R. (2009). Fast and accurate short read alignment with     60. Xie, C., Mao, X., Huang, J., Ding, Y., Wu, J., Dong, S., Kong, L., Gao, G.,
     Burrows-Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics 25, 1754–1760. https://doi.            Li, C.-Y., and Wei, L. (2011). KOBAS 2.0: A web server for annotation and
     org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp324.                                                  identification of enriched pathways and diseases. Nucleic Acids Res. 39,
 45. van Berkum, N.L., Lieberman-Aiden,  E., Williams,  L., Imakaev, M.,       W316–W322. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkr483.
     Gnirke, A., Mirny, L.A., Dekker, J., and Lander, E.S. (2010). Hi-C: A     61. Marc¸ ais, G., Delcher, A.L., Phillippy, A.M., Coston, R., Salzberg, S.L., and
    method to study the three-dimensional architecture of genomes. J. Vis.         Zimin, A. (2018). MUMmer4: A fast and versatile genome alignment sys-
     Exp. 39, 1869. https://doi.org/10.3791/1869.                                                                             tem. PLOS Comput. Biol. 14, e1005944. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
 46. Robinson, J.T., Turner, D., Durand, N.C., Thorvaldsdo´ ttir, H., Mesirov, J.        pcbi.1005944.
      P., and Aiden, E.L. (2018). Juicebox.js Provides a Cloud-Based Visualiza-
                                                                               62. Chakraborty, M., Emerson, J.J., Macdonald, S.J., and Long, A.D. (2019).
      tion System for Hi-C Data. Cell Syst. 6, 256–258.e1. https://doi.org/10.
                                                                                        Structural variants exhibit widespread allelic heterogeneity and shape
     1016/j.cels.2018.01.001.
                                                                                           variation in complex traits. Nat. Commun. 10, 4872. https://doi.org/10.
 47. Sima˜ o, F.A., Waterhouse, R.M., Ioannidis, P., Kriventseva, E.V., and        1038/s41467-019-12884-1.
    Zdobnov, E.M. (2015). BUSCO: Assessing genome assembly and anno-
                                                                               63. Tang, H., Bowers, J.E., Wang, X., Ming, R., Alam, M., and Paterson, A.H.
      tation completeness with single-copy orthologs. Bioinformatics 31,
                                                                                         (2008). Synteny and collinearity in plant genomes. Science 320, 486–488.
     3210–3212. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv351.
                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1153917.
 48. Jurka, J., Kapitonov, V.V., Pavlicek, A., Klonowski, P., Kohany, O., and
                                                                               64. Emms, D.M., and Kelly, S. (2019). OrthoFinder: Phylogenetic orthology
     Walichiewicz, J. (2005). Repbase Update, a database of eukaryotic re-
                                                                                    inference for comparative genomics. Genome Biol. 20, 238. https://doi.
      petitive elements. Cytogenet. Genome Res. 110, 462–467. https://doi.
                                                                              org/10.1186/s13059-019-1832-y.
     org/10.1159/000084979.
                                                                               65. Edgar, R.C. (2004). MUSCLE: Multiple sequence alignment with high ac-
 49. Flynn, J.M., Hubley, R., Goubert, C., Rosen, J., Clark, A.G., Feschotte,
                                                                             curacy and high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res. 32, 1792–1797. https://
      C., and Smit, A.F. (2020). RepeatModeler2 for automated genomic dis-
                                                                                 doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkh340.
     covery of transposable element families. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
     117, 9451–9457. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1921046117.                66. Stamatakis, A. (2014). RAxML version 8: A tool for phylogenetic analysis
                                                                    and post-analysis of large phylogenies. Bioinformatics 30, 1312–1313.
 50. Tempel, S. (2012). Using and understanding RepeatMasker. Methods
                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu033.
     Mol. Biol. 859, 29–51. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-61779-603-6_2.
 51. Ou, S., Su, W., Liao, Y., Chougule, K., Agda, J.R.A., Hellinga, A.J., Lugo,     67. Mirarab, S., and Warnow, T. (2015). ASTRAL-II: Coalescent-based species
                                                                                           tree estimation with many hundreds of taxa and thousands of genes. Bio-     C.S.B., Elliott, T.A., Ware, D., Peterson, T., et al. (2019). Benchmarking
                                                                                        informatics 31, i44–i52. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv234.     transposable element annotation methods for creation of a streamlined,
     comprehensive pipeline. Genome Biol. 20, 275. https://doi.org/10.1186/     68. Li, Y., Smith, T., Liu, C.-J., Awasthi, N., Yang, J., Wang, Y.-F., and Li, C.-
     s13059-019-1905-y.                                                          S. (2011). Endocarps of Prunus (Rosaceae: Prunoideae) from the early
 52. Keller, O., Kollmar, M., Stanke, M., and Waack, S. (2011). A novel hybrid       Eocene  of Wutu, Shandong Province, China. Taxon 60, 555–564.
    gene prediction method employing protein multiple sequence align-         https://doi.org/10.1002/tax.602021.
     ments. Bioinformatics 27, 757–763. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformat-     69. de Bie, T., Cristianini, N., Demuth, J.P., and Hahn, M.W. (2006). CAFE: A
     ics/btr010.                                                                computational tool for the study of gene family evolution. Bioinformatics
 53. Lomsadze, A., Ter-Hovhannisyan, V., Chernoff, Y.O., and Borodovsky,         22, 1269–1271. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btl097.
    M. (2005). Gene identification in novel eukaryotic genomes by self-     70. Sun, P., Jiao, B., Yang, Y., Shan, L., Li, T., Li, X., Xi, Z., Wang, X., and Liu,
      training algorithm. Nucleic Acids Res. 33, 6494–6506. https://doi.org/          J. (2022). WGDI: A user-friendly toolkit for evolutionary analyses of
     10.1093/nar/gki937.                                                 whole-genome duplications and ancestral karyotypes. Mol. Plant 15,
 54. Johnson, A.D., Handsaker, R.E., Pulit, S.L., Nizzari, M.M., O’Donnell, C.        1841–1851. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2022.10.018.
       J., and de Bakker, P.I.W. (2008). SNAP: a web-based tool for identifica-     71. McKenna, A., Hanna, M., Banks, E., Sivachenko, A., Cibulskis, K., Ker-
      tion and annotation of proxy SNPs using HapMap. Bioinformatics 24,         nytsky, A., Garimella, K., Altshuler, D., Gabriel, S., Daly, M., et  al.
     2938–2939. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btn564.                       (2010). The Genome Analysis Toolkit: A MapReduce framework for
 55. Pertea, M., Kim, D., Pertea, G.M., Leek, J.T., and Salzberg, S.L. (2016).         analyzing next-generation DNA sequencing data. Genome Res. 20,
      Transcript-level expression  analysis  of RNA-seq experiments  with        1297–1303. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.107524.110.
     HISAT, StringTie and Ballgown. Nat. Protoc. 11, 1650–1667. https://     72. Cingolani, P., Platts, A., Wang, L.L., Coon, M., Nguyen, T., Wang, L.,
     doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2016.095.                                           Land, S.J., Lu, X., and Ruden, D.M. (2012). A program for annotating
 56. Trapnell, C., Williams, B.A., Pertea, G., Mortazavi, A., Kwan, G., van       and predicting the effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms, SnpEff:
     Baren, M.J., Salzberg, S.L., Wold, B.J., and Pachter, L. (2010). Transcript       SNPs in the genome of Drosophila melanogaster strain w1118; iso-2;
    assembly and quantification by RNA-Seq reveals unannotated tran-          iso-3. Fly 6, 80–92. https://doi.org/10.4161/fly.19695.




                                                                                                        Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025   15


[PDF physical page 17]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

          ll
                                                                   Article



 73. Nguyen, L.T., Schmidt, H.A., von Haeseler, A., and Minh, B.Q. (2015). IQ-         ulatory link between the showy floral traits color and scent. New Phytol.
    TREE: A fast and effective stochastic algorithm for estimating maximum-        215, 411–422. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.14504.
      likelihood phylogenies. Mol. Biol. Evol. 32, 268–274. https://doi.org/10.     90. Zhang, T., Tan, S., Tang, N., Li, Y., Zhang, C., Sun, J., Guo, Y., Gao, H.,
     1093/molbev/msu300.                                                           Cai, Y., Sun, W., et al. (2024). Heterologous survey of 130 DNA transpo-
 74. Thorvaldsdo´ ttir, H., Robinson, J.T., and Mesirov, J.P. (2013). Integrative        sons in human cells highlights their functional divergence and expands
    Genomics Viewer (IGV): High-performance genomics data visualization         the genome engineering toolbox. Cell 187, 3741–3760.e30. https://doi.
    and exploration. Brief. Bioinform. 14, 178–192. https://doi.org/10.1093/         org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.05.007.
     bib/bbs017.                                                              91. Krzywinski, M., Schein, J., Birol, I., Connors, J., Gascoyne, R., Horsman,
 75. Altschul, S.F., Madden, T.L., Scha¨ ffer, A.A., Zhang, J., Zhang, Z., Miller,          D., Jones, S.J., and Marra, M.A. (2009). Circos: An information aesthetic
     W., and Lipman, D.J. (1997). Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new gen-          for comparative genomics. Genome Res. 19, 1639–1645. https://doi.org/
     eration of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res. 25,        10.1101/gr.092759.109.
     3389–3402. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/25.17.3389.                        92. Edelman, D.W. (1975). The Eocene Germer Basin Flora of South-Central
 76. Van Kempen, M., Kim, S.S., Tumescheit, C., Mirdita, M., Lee, J., Gilchrist,         Idaho. MS thesis (University of Idaho).
     C.L.M., So¨ ding, J., and Steinegger, M. (2024). Fast and accurate protein     93. Yang, Z. (2007). PAML 4: Phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood.
     structure search with Foldseek. Nat. Biotechnol. 42, 243–246. https://         Mol. Biol. Evol. 24, 1586–1591. https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msm088.
     doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01773-0.                                                                               94. Xie, C., Zhang, Y.E., Chen, J.Y., Liu, C.J., Zhou, W.Z., Li, Y., Zhang, M.,
 77. Kozlowski, L.P., and Bujnicki, J.M. (2012). MetaDisorder: a meta-server        Zhang, R., Wei, L., and Li, C.Y. (2012). Hominoid-specific de novo pro-
      for the prediction of intrinsic disorder in proteins. BMC Bioinformatics         tein-coding genes originating from long non-coding RNAs. PLOS Genet.
     13, 111. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-13-111.                               8, e1002942. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1002942.

 78. Love, M.I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of     95. Pertea, M., Pertea, G.M., Antonescu, C.M., Chang, T.C., Mendell, J.T.,
      fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome       and Salzberg, S.L. (2015). StringTie enables improved reconstruction
      Biol. 15, 550. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8.                       of a transcriptome from RNA-seq reads. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 290–295.
 79. Langfelder, P., and Horvath, S. (2008). WGCNA: An R package for         https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.3122.
     weighted correlation network analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 9, 559.     96. Lee, Y.G., Choi, W.S., Yang, S.O., Hwang-Bo, J., Kim, H.G., Fang, M., Yi, T.
     https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-9-559.                                          H., Kang, S.C., Lee, Y.H., and Baek, N.I. (2021). Volatile profiles of five vari-
                                                                                    ants of Abeliophyllum distichum flowers using headspace solid-phase micro- 80. Wheeler, T.J., and Eddy, S.R. (2013). nhmmer: DNA homology search
                                                                                           extraction gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (HS-SPME-GC-MS)     with profile HMMs. Bioinformatics 29, 2487–2489. https://doi.org/10.
                                                                                               analysis. Plants (Basel) 10, 224. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants10020224.     1093/bioinformatics/btt403.
                                                                               97. Tohge, T., Scossa, F., Wendenburg, R., Frasse, P., Balbo, I., Watanabe,
 81. Katoh, K., and Standley, D.M. (2013). MAFFT multiple sequence align-
                                                                                M., Alseekh, S., Jadhav, S.S., Delfin, J.C., Lohse, M., et al. (2020). Ex-
    ment software version 7: Improvements in performance and usability.
                                                                                              ploiting natural variation in tomato to define pathway structure and meta-
     Mol. Biol. Evol. 30, 772–780. https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/mst010.
                                                                                          bolic regulation of fruit polyphenolics in the Lycopersicum complex. Mol.
 82. Chen, S., Zhou, Y., Chen, Y., and Gu, J. (2018). fastp: an ultra-fast all-in-                                                                                     Plant 13, 1027–1046. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2020.04.004.
    one FASTQ preprocessor. Bioinformatics 34, i884–i890. https://doi.org/
                                                                               98. Molina-Hidalgo, F.J., Medina-Puche, L., Can˜ ete-Go´ mez, C., Franco-Zor-
     10.1093/bioinformatics/bty560.
                                                                                                                               rilla, J.M., Lo´ pez-Vidriero,  I., Solano, R., Caballero, J.L., Rodrı´guez-
 83. Shang, J., Feng, D., Liu, H., Niu, L., Li, R., Li, Y., Chen, M., Li, A., Liu, Z.,        Franco, A., Blanco-Portales, R., Mun˜ oz-Blanco, J., et al. (2017). The
     He, Y., et al. (2024). Evolution of the biosynthetic pathways of terpene          fruit-specific transcription factor FaDOF2 regulates the production of
     scent compounds in roses. Curr. Biol. 34, 3550–3563.e8. https://doi.        eugenol in ripe fruit receptacles. J. Exp. Bot. 68, 4529–4543. https://
     org/10.1016/j.cub.2024.06.075.                                                doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erx257.
 84. Li, H., Handsaker, B., Wysoker, A., Fennell, T., Ruan, J., Homer, N.,     99. Shang, J., Tian, J., Cheng, H., Yan, Q., Li, L., Jamal, A., Xu, Z., Xiang, L.,
     Marth, G., Abecasis, G., and Durbin, R.; 1000 Genome Project Data Pro-         Saski, C.A., Jin, S., et al. (2020). The chromosome-level wintersweet
     cessing Subgroup (2009). The sequence alignment/map format and        (Chimonanthus praecox) genome provides insights into  floral scent
     SAMtools. Bioinformatics 25, 2078–2079. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioin-         biosynthesis and flowering in winter. Genome Biol. 21, 200. https://doi.
     formatics/btp352.                                                         org/10.1186/s13059-020-02088-y.
 85. Zhang, Y., Liu, T., Meyer, C.A., Eeckhoute, J., Johnson, D.S., Bernstein,    100. Li, L., and Wurtele, E.S. (2015). The QQS orphan gene of Arabidopsis
      B.E., Nusbaum, C., Myers, R.M., Brown, M., Li, W., et al. (2008). Model-        modulates carbon and nitrogen allocation in soybean. Plant Biotechnol.
    based analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome Biol. 9, R137. https://doi.          J. 13, 177–187. https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.12238.
     org/10.1186/gb-2008-9-9-r137.
                                                                          101. Wu, B., Chen, Z., Xu, X., Chen, R., Wang, S., Xu, H., and Lin, F. (2021).
 86. Heinz, S., Benner, C., Spann, N., Bertolino, E., Lin, Y.C., Laslo, P., Cheng,        Harnessing a transient gene expression system in Nicotiana benthami-
      J.X., Murre, C., Singh, H., and Glass, C.K. (2010). Simple combinations of        ana to explore plant agrochemical transporters. Plants (Basel) 10, 524.
     lineagedeterminingtranscription factors prime cis-regulatory elements         https://doi.org/10.3390/plants10030524.
     re-quired for macrophage and B cell identities. Mol. Cell 38, 576–589.
                                                                          102. Mao, W., Han, Y., Chen, Y., Sun, M., Feng, Q., Li, L., Liu, L., Zhang, K.,
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2010.05.004.
                                                                              Wei, L., Han, Z., et al. (2022). Low temperature inhibits anthocyanin accu-
 87. Machanick, P., and Bailey, T.L. (2011). MEME-ChIP: motif analysis of         mulation in strawberry fruit by activating FvMAPK3-induced phosphory-
     large DNA da-tasets. Bioinformatics 27, 1696–1697. https://doi.org/10.          lation of FvMYB10 and degradation of Chalcone Synthase 1. Plant Cell
     1093/bioinformatics/btr189.                                                   34, 1226–1249. https://doi.org/10.1093/plcell/koac006.

 88. Shi, J., Yan, X., Sun, T., Shen, Y., Shi, Q., Wang, W., Bao, M., Luo, H.,    103. Xie, K., Minkenberg, B., and Yang, Y. (2015). Boosting CRISPR/Cas9
     Nian, F., and Ning, G. (2022). Homeostatic regulation of flavonoid and         multiplex editing capability with the endogenous tRNA-processing sys-
      lignin biosynthesis in the phenylpropanoid pathway of transgenic to-        tem. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, 3570–3575. https://doi.org/10.
     bacco. Gene 809, 146017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2021.146017.        1073/pnas.1420294112.

 89. Ravid, J., Spitzer-Rimon, B., Takebayashi, Y., Seo, M., Cna’ani, A., Ara-    104. Xing, W., Bao, Y., Luo, P., Bao, M., and Ning, G. (2014). An efficient sys-
     vena-Calvo, J., Masci, T., Farhi, M., and Vainstein, A. (2017). GA as a reg-       tem to produce transgenic plants via cyclic leaf-originated secondary




16    Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025


[PDF physical page 18]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

                                                                                                                       ll
Article



     somatic embryogenesis in Rosa rugosa. Acta Physiol. Plant. 36, 2013–    106. Langmead, B., and Salzberg, S.L. (2012). Fast gapped-read alignment with
     2023. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11738-014-1578-9.                           Bowtie 2. Nat. Methods 9, 357–359. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1923.

105. Frangedakis, E., Yelina, N.E., Billakurthi, K., Hua, L., Schreier, T., Dickin-    107. He, C., Liang, Y., Chen, R., Shen, Y., Li, R., Sun, T., Du, X., Ni, X., Shang,
     son, P.J., Tomaselli, M., Haseloff, J., and Hibberd, J.M. (2024). MYB-           J., He, Y., et al. (2025). Boosting transcriptional activities by employing
     related transcription factors control chloroplast biogenesis. Cell 187,        repeated activation domains  in transcription factors. Plant Cell 37,
     4859–4876.e22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.06.039.                   koae315. https://doi.org/10.1093/plcell/koae315.





                                                                                                        Cell 188, 1–17, October 30, 2025   17


[PDF physical page 19]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

          ll
                                                                   Article


STAR★METHODS

KEY RESOURCES TABLE




REAGENT or RESOURCE                SOURCE                                   IDENTIFIER

Antibodies

Polyclonal GFP antibody                       Sigma-Aldrich (USA)                         Cat# G1544; RRID:AB_439690

Normal IgG antibody                           Sigma-Aldrich (USA)                         Cat# NI01; RRID:AB_490574

Bacterial and virus strains

Rosetta (DE3)                               Shanghai WEIDI (China)                         Cat#: EC1010

GV3101 (pSoup-p19)                         Shanghai WEIDI (China)                         Cat#: AC1003

DH5α                                      Shanghai WEIDI (China)                         Cat#: DL1001

Y187                                       Shanghai WEIDI (China)                         Cat#: YC1020

Y2HGold                                   Shanghai WEIDI (China)                         Cat#: YC1002

ATCC15834                                 Shanghai WEIDI (China)                         Cat#: AE1100

Biological samples

Rosa banksiae ‘White’ (RbW)               A representative rose species cultivated in      N/A
                                       Huazhong agriculture university (Wuhan,
                                                  Hubei). This study

Rosa banksiae ‘Yellow’ (RbY)               A representative rose species cultivated in      N/A
                                       Huazhong agriculture university (Wuhan,
                                                  Hubei). This study

Rosa rugosa ‘Zizhi’ (Rru)                  A representative rose species introduced       N/A
                                            from Shandong province and now
                                                    cultivated in Huazhong agriculture
                                                     university (Wuhan, Hubei). This study

Rosa rugosa ‘Bao White’                  A representative rose species cultivated in      N/A
                                       Huazhong agriculture university (Wuhan,
                                                  Hubei). This study

Rosa chinensis ‘Old Blush’                A representative rose species cultivated in      N/A
                                       Huazhong agriculture university (Wuhan,
                                                  Hubei). This study

Rosa wichuraiana ‘Basye’s Thornles’         A representative rose species cultivated in      N/A
                                       Huazhong agriculture university (Wuhan,
                                                  Hubei). This study

Petunia hybrid cv. Mitchell diploid           A species outside the Rosaceae family         N/A
                                                    cultivated in Huazhong agriculture
                                                     university (Wuhan, Hubei). This study

Fragaria × ananassa cv. Benihoppe          A species outside the Rosa genus             N/A
                                                    cultivated in Huazhong agriculture
                                                     university (Wuhan, Hubei). This study

Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins

Methyl 7(Z)-nonadecenoate                   Shanghai Yuanye, China (CAS Number:          Cat#: B76128
                                             146407-37-6)

Methanol                                   Merck, Germany (CAS Number: 67-56-1)         Cat#: 34860

Acetonitrile                                  Merck, Germany (CAS Number: 75-05-8)         Cat#: 34851

Formic acid                                 Merck, Germany (CAS Number: 64-18-6)         Cat#: 5.43804

Ferulic acid                               MedChemexpress, USA (CAS Number:          Cat#: HY-N0060B
                                              537-98-4)

Caffeyl aldehyde                             Shanghai MACKUN, China (CAS Number:        Cat#: C12492561
                                             68149-78-0)

Caffeoyl alcohol                           MedChemexpress, USA (CAS Number:          Cat#: HY-N10373
                                              3598-26-3)

                                                                                                                (Continued on next page)



e1    Cell 188, 1–17.e1–e10, October 30, 2025


[PDF physical page 20]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

                                                                                                                       ll
Article



Continued

REAGENT or RESOURCE                SOURCE                                   IDENTIFIER

Coniferaldehyde                             Shanghai MACKUN, China                      Cat#: C880628
                                        (CAS Number: 20649-42-7)

Coniferyl alcohol                                 Aladdin, China (CAS Number: 458-35-5)         Cat#: C413449

Eugenol                                 MedChemexpress, USA (CAS Number:          Cat#: HY-N0337R
                                               97-53-0)

Caffeic acid                              MedChemexpress, USA (CAS Number:          Cat#: HY-121231
                                              331-39-5)

Caffeoyl-CoA                             MedChemexpress, USA (CAS Number:          Cat#: HY-N9686
                                             53034-79-0)

Feruloyl-Coenzyme A                         Shanghai Yuanye, China (CAS Number:          Cat#: S27603
                                             30802-02-9)

NADPH                                            Beijing Solarbio, China (CAS Number:            Cat#: N8100
                                             100929-71-3)
NADP +                                     Shanghai yuanye (China)                     Cat# S2302
                                        (CAS Number: 53-59-8)

Cell Proliferation Washing (CPW) solution        Coolaber, China                                Cat#: PPT5025

Cellulase R-10                                  Yakult Pharmaceutical, Japan                   Cat#: 9012-54-8

MACEROZYME R-10                            Yakult Pharmaceutical, Japan                   Cat#: 130219-01

DO Supplement -Leu/-Trp                      Coolaber, China                                Cat#: PM2220

DO Supplement-His/-Leu/-Trp                TaKaRa, Japan                                Cat#: 630419

n-Hexane                                     Supelco, USA (CAS Number: 110-54-3)          Cat#: 1.00795

AgeI                              New England Biolabs, China                    Cat#: R3552

ApaI                                    Thermo Scientific, USA                         Cat#: FD1414

BamHI                                  Thermo Scientific, USA                         Cat#: FD0054

BsaI                                    Thermo Scientific, USA                         Cat#: ER0292

EcoRI                                   Thermo Scientific, USA                         Cat#: FD0274

KpnI                                    Thermo Scientific, USA                         Cat#: FD0524

NcoI                                    Thermo Scientific, USA                         Cat#: FD0574

StuI                               New England Biolabs, China                    Cat#: R0187V

SalI                                    Thermo Scientific, USA                         Cat#: FD0644

SacI                                    Thermo Scientific, USA                         Cat#: FD1134

SmaI                                   Thermo Scientific, USA                         Cat#: FD0663

XhoI                                    Thermo Scientific, USA                         Cat#: FD0694

XbaI                                    Thermo Scientific, USA                         Cat#: FD0684

T4 DNA Ligases                           Thermo Scientific, USA                         Cat#: 2011A

Critical commercial assays

Hipure HP Plant RNA Mini Kit                 Magen, China                                  Cat#: R416502

HiScript III Q RT SuperMix for qPCR           Vazyme, China                                 Cat#: R223-01
(+gDNA wiper)

RN09 EASYspin RNA Plant Mini Kit               Aidlab, China                                  Cat#: RN0902

Dual-luciferase reporter assay kit              Promega, USA                                 Cat#: N1531

Genomic DNA Kit                              Tiangen, China                                 Cat#: DP305

VAHTS Universal DNA Library Prep Kit          Vazyme, China                                 Cat#: NDM607

TnT® SP6 High-Yield Wheat Germ Protein      Promega, USA                                 Cat#: L3260
Expression System

VAHTS Universal DNA Library Prep Kit          Vazyme, China                                 Cat#: NDM607

TruSeq RNA Library Preparation Kit                Illumina, USA                                  Cat#: RS-122-2001

SMRTbell Template Prep Kit 1.0                   Pacific Biosciences, USA                       Cat#: 100-222-300

Sequel SMRT cells 1M v2                         Pacific Biosciences, USA                       Cat#: 101-008-000

Sequel® sequencing kit 3.0                       Pacific Biosciences, USA                    N/A

Sequel Binding Kit 2.0                             Pacific Biosciences, USA                       Cat#: 100-862-200

                                                                                                                (Continued on next page)



                                                                                               Cell 188, 1–17.e1–e10, October 30, 2025   e2


[PDF physical page 21]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

          ll
                                                                   Article



Continued

REAGENT or RESOURCE                SOURCE                                   IDENTIFIER

Bionano PrepTM Plant Tissue                 BioNano Genomics, China                      Cat#: RE-014-05
DNA Isolation Kit

Bionano Prep NLRS Labeling Kit              BioNano Genomics, China                      Cat#: RE-012-10

TnT® SP6 High-Yield Wheat Germ             Promega, USA                                 Cat#: L3260
Protein Expression System

Deposited data

RbW genome assembly                          This paper                            CNGB: CNP0007437

RbY genome assembly                          This paper                            CNGB: CNP0007437

Rch genome assembly                   Genome database for Rosaceae (GDR:         N/A
                                                https://www.rosaceae.org/)

Rwi genome assembly                   Genome database for Rosaceae (GDR:         N/A
                                                https://www.rosaceae.org/)

Rru genome assembly                   Genome database for Rosaceae (GDR:         N/A
                                                https://www.rosaceae.org/)

Fve genome assembly                   Genome database for Rosaceae (GDR:         N/A
                                                https://www.rosaceae.org/)

Roc genome assembly                   Genome database for Rosaceae (GDR:         N/A
                                                https://www.rosaceae.org/)

Mpr genome assembly                   Genome database for Rosaceae (GDR:         N/A
                                                https://www.rosaceae.org/)

Ppe genome assembly                   Genome database for Rosaceae (GDR:         N/A
                                                https://www.rosaceae.org/)

Ath genome assembly                      Phytozome (https://phytozome-next.           N/A
                                                  jgi.doe.gov/info/Athaliana_TAIR10)

Vvi genome assembly                       Phytozome (https://phytozome-next.           N/A
                                                    jgi.doe.gov/info/Vvinifera_v2_1)

Rpe genome assembly                     NCBI_Genome: https://www.ncbi.             NCBI: ASM2533114v1
                                              nlm.nih.gov/datasets/genome/

Rsp genome assembly                     NCBI_SRA: https://www.ncbi.nlm.             NCBI: ERR13304147
                                                   nih.gov/sra/

RNA-seq data                                   This paper                            CGNB: CNP0007437

Resequencing data                              This paper                            CNCB: PRJCA037498

SCREP CDS sequence                          This paper                            CNCB: GB0005751

Software and algorithms
Jellyfish (v2.2.10)                                Marc¸ ais et al.41                               https://www.cbcb.umd.edu/software/
                                                                                                                            jellyfish/
GenomeScope (v2.0)                          Ranallo-Benavidez et al.42                        https://github.com/schatzlab/
                                                                             genomescope
Hifiasm (v0.13-r308)                       Cheng et al.43                                   https://i5k.nal.usda.gov/bio_data/1394330
BWA (v.0.7.8)                                          Li et al.44                                         http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/
3D-DNA pipeline (v180922)                  Van Berkum et al.45                             https://github.com/aidenlab/3d-dna
Juicebox (v1.11.08)                          Robinson et al.46                                   https://hpc.ilri.cgiar.org/juicebox-software
BUSCO                                          Sima˜ o et al.47                                    https://busco.ezlab.org/
Repbase                                     Jurka et al.48                                  https://www.repeatmasker.org/
RepeatModeler2 (v2.0.1)                        Flynn et al. 49                                   https://github.com/Dfam-consortium/
                                                                                      RepeatModeler/blob/master/RELEASE-
                                                                    NOTES
RepeatMasker (v4.1.0 )                      Tempel 50                                      https://www.repeatmasker.org/
EDTA                              Ou et al. 51                                     https://github.com/oushujun/EDTA
Augustus (v3.2.1)                                   Keller et al.52                                   https://github.com/nextgenusfs/augustus
GeneMark-ES Suite(v4.61_lic)                Lomsadze et al.53                              https://genemark.bme.gatech.edu/

                                                                                                                (Continued on next page)




e3    Cell 188, 1–17.e1–e10, October 30, 2025


[PDF physical page 22]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

                                                                                                                       ll
Article



Continued

REAGENT or RESOURCE                SOURCE                                   IDENTIFIER
SNAP (v2013-02-16)                        Johnson et al.54                                https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/
                                                                                                  supplemental-nutrition-assistance-
                                                                                   program
HISAT2 (v2.1.0)                                Pertea et al. 55                                    http://daehwankimlab.github.io/hisat2/
Cufflinks (v2.2.1)                                  Trapnell et al.56                                      https://cole-trapnell-lab.github.io/cufflinks/
                                                                                                     releases/v2.2.1/
PASA (v.2.3.3)                            Haas et al. 57                              N/A
MAKER (v3.01.01)                           Campbell et al. 58                          N/A
Diamond ( v2.0.4.142)                          Buchfink et al. 59                                https://github.com/drostlab/rdiamond
KOBAS (v3.0)                                    Xie et al.60                                       http://kobas.cbi.pku.edu.cn
MUMmer (v.4.0.0)                            Marcais et al.61                             https://github.com/mummer4/mummer
JCVI (v1.1.7)                              Tang et al.62                                     https://github.com/tanghaibao/jcvi
Circos (v0.69)                                  Krzywinski et al.63                                https://github.com/vigsterkr/circos
Orthofinder (v2.5.4)                    Emms et al.64                                 https://github.com/davidemms/
                                                                                            OrthoFinder
MUSCLE (v.3.8.31)                          Edgar 65                                       https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/muscle/
RAxML (v.8.2.10)                              Stamatakis et al.66                                https://cme.hits.org/exelixis/web/software/
                                                                                                raxml/
ASTRAL-II (v5.7.1)                             Mirarab et al.67                               https://github.com/chaoszhang/ASTER
PAML (v4.950)                            Yang et al. 68                                   https://github.com/abacus-gene/paml
CAFE´ (v.2.1)                           De Bie et al. 69                                 https://github.com/hahnlab/CAFE
WGDI                                  Sun et al. 70                                   https://github.com/SunPengChuan/wgdi
GATK                                McKenna et al.71                                  https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc
SnpEff software                                 Cingolani et al. 72                                  https://pcingola.github.io/SnpEff/
IQ-TREE (v2.1.4)                          Nguyen et al.73                                    https://github.com/iqtree/iqtree
IGV                                             Thorvaldsdo´ ttir et al. 74                             http://software.broadinstitute.org/
                                                                                                  software/igv
PSI-BLAST                                       Altschul et al.75                                    https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast
Foldseek                                Van et al.76                                      https://search.foldseek.com/
MetaDisorder                                 Kozlowski et al. 77                                 https://iimcb.genesilico.pl/metadisorder/
Stringtie (v2.2.1)                               Pertea et al. 77                                     https://github.com/gpertea/stringtie
DESeq2 (v1.38.3)                           Love et al. 78                                   https://github.com/thelovelab/DESeq2
WGCNA                                       Langfelder et al.79                              https://www.rdocumentation.org/
                                                                                     packages/WGCNA/versions/1.51

linkET                                   N/A                                            https://github.com/Hy4m/linkET
HMMER (v3.2.1)                             Wheeler et al.80                                 http://hmmer.org/
MAFFT (v7.505)                             Katoh et al. 81                                     http://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/
Fastp                                  Chen et al. 82                                  https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp
Bowtie2 (v2.5.3)                          Langmead et al.83                             https://github.com/BenLangmead/bowtie2
SAMtools (v1.19.2)                                    Li et al. 84                                         http://www.htslib.org/
MACS (v3.0.0)                            Zhang et al. 85                                 https://github.com/macs3project/MACS
HOMMER                                    Heinz et al.86                                  http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/
                                                                                        download.html
MEME-ChIP                               Machanick et al.87                              https://memesuite.org/meme/tools/
                                                                               meme-chip

Oligonucleotides

See Table S5 for PCR primer sequences         This paper                               N/A

See Table S5 for gRNA sequences               This paper                               N/A

See Table S5 for siRNA sequences               This paper                               N/A

See Table S5 for probe sequences               This paper                               N/A

                                                                                                                (Continued on next page)




                                                                                               Cell 188, 1–17.e1–e10, October 30, 2025   e4


[PDF physical page 23]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

          ll
                                                                   Article



Continued

REAGENT or RESOURCE                SOURCE                                   IDENTIFIER
RrGAPDH-F 5 ′ -TGAAGGGTGGTG               Shi et al.88                               N/A
CCAAGAA-3 ′
RrGAPDH-R 5 ′ -AAGGGGAGCAAGACA          Shi et al.88                               N/A
GTTGG-3 ′
PhActin-F 5 ′ -TGCTGATCGTATGAGCA          Ravid et al. 89                             N/A
AGGAA-3 ′
PhActin-R 5 ′ GGTGGAGCAACAAC              Ravid et al. 89                             N/A
CTTAATCTTC-3 ′

Recombinant DNA

pET28a-RbCOMT1                              This paper                               N/A

pET28a-RbCCR1                                This paper                               N/A

pET28a-RbREF1                                This paper                               N/A

pK7FWG2-RbSCREP                            This paper                               N/A

pBD-RbSCREP                                  This paper                               N/A

pBD-RbSCREP-VP16                            This paper                               N/A

pGreenII 0800-LUC-P1                          This paper                               N/A

pGreenII 0800-LUC-P2                          This paper                               N/A

pGreenII 0800-LUC-P3                          This paper                               N/A

pGreenII 0800-LUC-P4                          This paper                               N/A

pGreenII 0800-LUC-P1RM                       This paper                               N/A

pGreenII 0800-LUC-RbCOMT1pro               This paper                               N/A

pGreenII 0800-LUC-RbADH1pro                 This paper                               N/A

pGreenII 0800-LUC-RbCCR1pro                 This paper                               N/A

pGreenII 0800-LUC-RbEGS2pro                 This paper                               N/A

pGreenII 0800-LUC-RrCOMT1pro                This paper                               N/A

pGreenII 0800-LUC-RcCOMT1pro               This paper                               N/A

pGreenII 0800-LUC-RwCOMT1pro               This paper                               N/A

pCAMBIA2300-RbSCREP                       This paper                               N/A

pCAMBIA2300-RcSCREP                        This paper                               N/A

pCAMBIA2300-RrSCREP                        This paper                               N/A

pCAMBIA2300-RwSCREP                       This paper                               N/A

pCAMBIA2300-RbREF1                         This paper                               N/A

pCAMBIA2300-RbCOMT1                       This paper                               N/A

pCAMBIA2300-RbCCR1                         This paper                               N/A

pCAMBIA2300-RbEGS2                         This paper                               N/A

pF7GWIWG2D-RNAi-RrSCREP                  This paper                               N/A

pKSE401G-CRISPR-RrSCREP                   This paper                               N/A

pTRV2-RcSCREP                               This paper                               N/A

pGADT7-RbSCREP                              This paper                               N/A

pHIS2.0-RbEGSpro                              This paper                               N/A

pHIS2.0-RbCCRpro                             This paper                               N/A

pMAL-c6T-RbSCREP                            This paper                               N/A

Other

NCBI                                   N/A                                             https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

50/30 μm DVB/CAR-PDMS fiber                Supelco, USA                           36SP05T3-SM

C18 column (HYPERSIL GOLD 3μm           Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA                 25003-102130
100×2.1 mm)

2×250 mm TSK-gel ODS 80Ts column          Tosoh, Japan                              17202

TRACE TR-5 MS column                    Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA                260F142J
(30 m × 0.25 mm × 0.25 μm film thickness)



e5    Cell 188, 1–17.e1–e10, October 30, 2025


[PDF physical page 24]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

                                                                                                                       ll
Article


EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS


Plant materials
All Rosa species, including R. banksiae var. Banksiae (white scented flower, RbW), R. banksiae f. lutescens (yellow unscented flower,
RbY), as well as R. chinensis ‘Old Blush’, Rosa rugosa ‘Bao White’, and Rosa rugosa ‘Zizhi’, were cultivated in Huazhong Agricultural
University under natural conditions. Petunia hybrid cv. Mitchell diploid, Nicotiana benthamiana and Fragaria × ananassa cv. Beni-
hoppe were grown in greenhouse with a light/dark cycle of 16 hous/8 hours at 23 ◦ C temperature for optimal growth conditions.


METHOD DETAILS


Whole-genome and transcriptome sequencing
DNAs were extracted using the CTAB method from two Rosa banksiae species, namely RbW and RbY. The raw reads were generated
using the Illumina NovaSeq sequencing platform. K-mer analysis was performed using the Jellyfish v2.2.1041 and GenomeScope2.0
with Kmer=21 42 to estimate the heterozygosity of the genome. Genomic DNAs of RbY and RbW were extracted and sequenced on
the PacBio/Oxford Nanopore platform. Corresponding Hi-C libraries were constructed and sequenced on the BGI MGISEQ-2000
platform. For transcriptome sequencing, total RNA from roots, stems, leaves, and flowers was extracted using TRIzol reagent. Sub-
sequently, an mRNA sequencing library was sequenced on an BGI MGISEQ-2000 PE150 platform.


De novo genome assembly and evaluation
Hifiasm version 0.13-r308 43 was used for de novo assembly. BWA v.0.7.8. 44 was utilized to align the Hi-C clean reads to the contig-
level assemblies of R. banksiae. The 3D-DNA pipeline v180922.45 was employed to assembly the draft genome into scaffolds, uti-
lizing the filtered Hi-C data. Juicerbox v1.11.08 46 was subsequently used to perform manual modification through visual inspection
of Hi-C interaction heatmaps. Genome completeness was assessed by BUSCO 47 based on 2,326 highly conserved eudicots
core genes.


Transposable element (TE) and gene annotation
TEs were identified utilizing both homology- and de novo-based methods. Initially, RepeatModeler v2.0.1 48,49 was utilized to
construct the de novo repeat library. RepeatMasker v4.1.0 50 was subsequently used to mask genomes with the de novo repeat li-
brary. A non-redundant TE library for the whole-genome was constructed utilizing the Extensive de-novo TE Annotator (EDTA) pipe-
line.51 The identification of transposon types, including LTR, TIR, MITE, Helitron, and other components, as well as the activity
assessment of MITE transposons in the SCREP gene promoter, were conducted as previously described. 90
  De novo gene prediction was carried out using Augustus v3.2.1, 52 GeneMark-ES Suite v4.61_lic, 53 and SNAP version 2013-02-
16. 54 Additionally, homologous sequence searches were conducted by combining the amino acid sequences of proteins from
R. chinensis, R. multiflora, F. vesca, and Malus domestica. RNA-seq data were aligned to the assemblied genome using HISAT2
v2.1.0, 55 Cufflinks v2.2.1, 56 and PASA v.2.3.3. 57 The final gene annotation was produced by MAKER v3.01.01. 58 Functional annota-
tion of coding genes was conducted by querying the NR, EggNOG, GO, KEGG, SwissProt, and TrEMBL databases using Diamond
v2.0.4.14259 with an E value cutoff of 10 -5 . Gene pathways were analyzed using KOBAS v3.0 60 for KEGG analysis.


Sequence variation and synteny analyses
The single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), insertions and deletions (indels), and structural variants (SVs) between RbY and RbW
were identified using MUMmer v.4.0.0. 61 The SVMU (structural variants from MUMmer) pipeline, which detects SV by parsing the
results from NUCmer, was utilized for this purpose. 62 Insertions or deletions longer than 1,000 bp in each genome were considered
as candidate presence and absence variation (PAV). Collinear genes were identified using MCScan (JCVI v1.1.7) 63 with default set-
tings, except for gap_penality, which was set to -3. The genomic variations and syntenic blocks were visualizd using Circos v0.69. 91


Phylogenomic analysis and WGD identification
A total of 716 single-copy genes from various species, including RbY, RbW, R. chinensis ‘Old Blush’(Rch), R. wichuraiana ‘Basye’s
Thornless’ (Rwi), R. rugosa (Rru), F. vesca (Fve), Rubus occidentalis (Roc), Malus prunifolia (Mpr), Prunus persica (Ppe), as well as two
outgroups Vitis viniferam (Vvi) and Arabidopsis thaliana (Ath) were identified using orthoFinder v2.5.4. 64 The amino acid sequences of
these single-copy genes were alignedt utilizing MUSCLE v.3.8.31. 65 Phylogenetic trees were constructed using RAxML v.8.2.1066
software with the best model and 100 replicates of bootstrapping to generate 716 phylogenetic trees which were further used to infer
a consensus species tree through ASTRAL v5.7.1. 67
  Based on the publication of two fossil nodes, Prunus wutuensis was dated to 55 Mya68 and Rosa germerensis was dated to
55.8–48.6 Mya.92 The MCMCTree pipeline of the PAML v4.950 program 93 was utilized to calculate the divergence times of the 11
Rosaceae species. Additionally, gene family contraction and expansion analysis was performed utilizing CAFE v.2.1.69 Furthermore,
the distribution of synonymous substitutions per site (Ks) of homologous gene pairs was calculated in order to predict the WGD
events according to the WGDI pipeline. 70 For the pairwise selection pressure analysis to RbSCREP homologous genes, the non-syn-
onymous (Ka) and synonymous (Ks) substation and the pairwise Ka/Ks values were calculated using PAML package. 93



                                                                                               Cell 188, 1–17.e1–e10, October 30, 2025   e6


[PDF physical page 25]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

          ll
                                                                   Article


Genome variant calling and phylogenetic analysis of the genus Rosa
A total of 107 whole-genome sequence datasets from the genus Rosa were collected (Table S2M). The read data were mapped to the
whole genome of RbY using BWA with parameters of aln -o 1 -e 63 -i 15 -L -l 31 -k 2. Variant calling and annotation were performed
separately using the UnifiedGenotyper of GATK 71 and SnpEff. 72 A maximum likelihood tree was constructed with R. persica and
R. stellata as outgroups using the GTR+I+G+ASC model in IQ-TREE v2.1.4 73 with 1,000 bootstraps. The detected mutations were
visualized and evaluated using the Integrative Genomics Viewer(IGV). 74


Identification of the de novo genes
To ascertain whether the SCREP genes originated de novo, we conducted comprehensive sequence similarity searches of candidate
coding sequences (CDSs) against the NR/NT database (https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/db/) and the Genome Database for Rosa-
ceae (GDR) (https://www.rosaceae.org) utilizing BLAST (Table S2G). Homologous sequences (alignment coverage≥70% and
sequence identity≥50%) in orthologous genomic sequences were retained. 94 To identify "common disablers", we included only
those candidates that exhibited no coding potential across all ancestral lineages prior to the initial emergence of an open reading
frame (ORF). Outgroup sequences were classified as non-coding if they contained at least one disabling mutation (e.g., frame-shifting
indels or premature stop codons) and if their longest potential peptide was shorter than 70% of the RbSCREP ORF length. In addition,
to eliminate potential remote homologs, we conducted further PSI-BLAST 75 searches against the non-redundant (nr) protein data-
base and performed Foldseek 76 (https://search.foldseek.com/) searches against AlphaFoldDB and PDBdatabases. We appled
default parameters until convergence was achieved. The regions characterized by low repeatability are identified as disordered re-
gions by MetaDisorder 77 (https://iimcb.genesilico.pl/metadisorder/). The parameters were configured in accordance with a previ-
ously established pipeline for identifying de novo protein-coding genes. 94


Metabolome and transcriptome analysis
For RNA-seq analysis, FPKM were calculated based on the HISAT2 55 alignment results mapping to the RbY genome using Stringtie
v2.2.1. 95 DEGs were identified with the thresholds of log 2 |Fold Change| > 1 and adjusted p-value < 0.05 by DEseq2 v1.38.3. 78 Coex-
pression analyses of DEGs were performed utilizing WGCNA v.3.6.2. 79 Pearson correlation analysis was performed between module
eigengene and volatile contents on eugenol biosynthesis pathway, and the data were visualized by linkET (https://github.com/Hy4m/
linkET).


Phylogenetic analyses to orthologous genes related to eugenol biosynthesis
Orthologous genes were identified using the hmmscan program of HMMER v3.2.1 80 and homology-based BLAST searches. The full
sequences from the 11 species were compared with proteins known to be involved in eugenol synthesis (PAL, C4H, 4CL, COMT,
CCoAOMT, CFAT, EGS and REF sequences) in Swissprot Database (Tables S3A–S3C). The selected putative proteins were aligned
using MAFFT v7.505 81 with –maxiterate 1000 parameters. Phylogenetic reconstruction was performed using the Neighbor-Joining
method by IQ-TREE 73 with 1,000 times of bootstrap simulations.


GC-MS analysis of volatile compounds
To analyze the volatile organic compounds in R. banksiae, R. rugosa, and P. hybrid, 1 g of fresh tissues was combined with 10 μl of
0.174 mg⋅ml -1 methyl nonoate, and volatiles were collected using a 50/30 μm DVB/CAR-PDMS fiber (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA, USA) at
37 ◦ C for 40 minutes after a 15-minute equilibration period. The extraction of volatile compounds from strawberry fruit followed a pre-
viously described method. 17 For internal volatile, 0.1 g of tissue powder was added to an extraction buffer containing 300 μL ultrapure
water and 300 μL n-hexane with 4.35 ng⋅ml -1 methyl nonoate and then incubated at 4 ◦ C for 40 minutes. After centrifugation, the su-
pernatant (200 μL) was collected. The fiber and supernatant were separately analysed using TSQ8000 Evo GC-MS/MS and TRACE
DSQII, both equipped with the TRACE TR-5 MS column (30 cm × 0.25 mm × 0.25 μm). Helium was utilized as the carrier gas, main-
taining a flow rate of 1.0 mL⋅min -1 with a split ratio of 1:10. The mass spectrometry (MS) scan range was set between 45 and 600 m/z
in electron ionization (EI) mode, with a transfer line temperature maintained at 260 ◦ C and an ion source temperature of 280 ◦ C. The
gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) program varied depending on the specific species being analyzed: for strawberry,
the oven temperature was initially set to 40 ◦ C for 5 minutes, then ramped up at a rate of 5 ◦ C⋅min -1 until reaching 250 ◦ C, where it was
held for an additional 5 minutes; for R. banksiae, R. rugosa, and P. hybrid, the temperature started at 50 ◦ C for 5 minutes before un-
dergoing a ramping process at a rate of 2 ◦ C⋅min -1 to reach 130 ◦ C over another period of 5 minutes. Subsequently, the temperature
was further increased to reach 170 ◦ C at a rate of 4 ◦ C⋅min -1 and then raised to 300 ◦ C at a speed of 50 ◦ C⋅min-1 while being held for
7 minutes for the volatile analysis of R. banksiae and R. rugosa; meanwhile the temperature rose to 250 ◦ C at a rate of 30 ◦ C⋅min -1 and
was maitained for 3 minutes in the case of P. hybrid. Xcalibur 3.1 and NIST2.0 were the tools used to identify the volatile compounds.
Retention indices and quantification were calculated as previously described, 17,96 with five biological replicates.


LC-MS analysis of eugenol substances
The determination of the substances related to the eugenol biosythesis was conducted through LC-MS analysis, as described by
previously report. 97 In brief, 0.1 g of tissue powder was combined with 1 mL of chloroform/methanol/water (1:2.5:1) solution. The
resulting supernatant was then transferred to a fresh tube and dried using nitrogen blowing. The dried samples were resuspended



e7    Cell 188, 1–17.e1–e10, October 30, 2025


[PDF physical page 26]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

                                                                                                                       ll
Article


in 200 μL of 50 % acetonitrile-0.1% formic acid for LC-MS analysis on a UPLC-Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen,
Germany). Chromatographic separation was carried on a C18 column (HYPERSIL GOLD 3μm 100×2.1 mm, Thermo) with the mobile
phases consisting of 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B). A gradient profile at a flow rate of
0.35 ml⋅min -1 flow rate was applied as follows: starting with 99% A at 1 minute, transitioning to 65% A at 12 minute, further to
30% A at 13.5 minute, then down to 1% A at 14.5 minute before returning to 99% A at 17 minute and holding for an additional minute.
Spectra were acquired in the positive ion mode using the full scan mode over a range of m/z 100 to 1500. Molecular masses, retention
times, and associated peak areas were extracted from the raw files using Xcalibur software (ThermoQuest). Additionally, further
testing involved the use of standards such as ferulic acid, coniferaldehyde, and coniferalcohol utilizing the same program.


HPLC assay
For R. chinensis petal, 0.1g of powder was added to 1 ml of methanol and ground at 30 Hz for 3 minutes. The mixture was subse-
quently subjected to centrifugation, and 200 μl of the supernatant was carefully collected in an injection vial for HPLC analysis. This
analysis was performed using a Waters Acquity UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), which included a 2×250 mm TSK-gel ODS
80Ts column (Tosoh Corporation, Tokyo, JapanTosoh). The mobile phases consisted of methanol (A) and deionised water (B), with
the following gradient profile: starting at 90% B from 0 to 5 min, decreasing from 90% to 45% B from 5 to10 min, maintaining at 45% B
from 10 to 25 min, reducing from 45% to 25% B from 25 to 35 min, dropping to 5% B from 35 to 40 min, increasing from 5% to 90% B
from 40 to 41 min, and finally returning to 90% B from 41 to 45 min. The flow rate was 0.8 ml⋅min -1 . Eugenol was monitored at 280 nm.
  For the in vitro enzyme activity analysis, the enzyme reaction was injected into HPLC with acetonitrile as mobile phases A and 0.1%
formic acid in water as mobile phases B. Separations were carried out using the following solvent gradient: 90% B at 0 min, 30% B at
30 min, 50% B at 35 min, 70% B at 40 min, and back to 90% B at 45 min. The mobile phase flow rate was kept constant at 1 mL⋅min -1 .
Compounds present in the elution were monitored within a wavelength range of 200–500 nm utilizing a UV-vis detector. Peaks were
identified by comparing their retention time and UV absorption spectra with established standards.


qRT-PCR analysis
RNA was extracted utilizing the RN09 EASYspin RNA Plant Mini Kit (Aidlab, Beijing, China) and Hipure HP Plant RNA Mini Kit (Magen,
Guangzhou, China). 1 μg of RNA was utilized for cDNA synthesis with Hiscript III RT SuperMix for qPCR (+gDNA wiper) (Vazyme
Biotech, Nanjing, China). The qRT-PCR analysis was conducted on the Lightcycler 480 platform (Roche Applied Sciences, Basel,
Switzerland; Table S5), following previously established protocols. 88 To normalize expression levels in R. banksiae, R.chinensis,
R. rugosa, P. hybrid and F. ananassa species respectively, RbGAPDH and RcGAPDH from Shi et al.,88 PhActin from Ravid et al.89
and F. ananassa interspacer 26S-18S from Molina-Hidalgo et al.98 were employed utilizing the delta-delta Ct method. For a compre-
hensive list of all qRT-PCR primers used in this study please refer to Table S5.


Function evalution of eugenol biosynthesis enzymes in vitro
The substrates used for characterizing RbCOMT1, RbCCR1 and RbREF1 were caffeic acid & S-adenosylmethionine, feruloyl-CoA &
NADPH, and coniferaldehyde & NADP respectively. The coding sequences were subcloned into pET28a vector. The obtained plas-
mids were transformed into E. coli BL21 (DE3). The purification of recombinant protein and the assessment of enzyme activity were
conducted as previously described. 83,99 Briefly, 10 μg of purified protein was added to a mixture of 5 mM DTT, 30 mM HEPES, 25 mM
MgCl 2 and 60 μM of the corresponding substrates. The reaction mixtures were incubated at 30 ◦ C for 1 hour and then submitted to
HPLC analysis.


Subcellular localization and transcriptional activation assays
The coding sequence of RbSCREP, lacking a termination codon, was amplified, fused with GFP, and subsequently incorporated into
pK7FWG2 vector. The obtained construct was then transformed into Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain GV3101 for transient assays
in 4-week-old N. benthamiana leaves. 100,101 For transient gene expression in rose protoplasts, young petals of Rosa chinensis ’Old
Blush’ meticulously sliced into fine strips and subsequently incubated in a 20% Cell Proliferation Washing (CPW) solution (Coolaber,
China) for a durattion of 2 hours. Following this incubation, the strips were transferred to an enzyme solution composed of 2.0% Cellu-
lase R-10, 1.5% Macerozyme R-10 (Yakult Pharmaceutical Ind. Co., Ltd., Japan), and 0.6 M mannitol (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO,
USA). The mixture was then subjected to vacuum infiltration at a pressure of 0.7 atm for 30 minutes. Enzymatic digestion was con-
ducted at 25 ◦ C in the dark on a horizontal shaker (40 rpm) for 10 h. Protoplasts were harvested by centrifugation at 1000 rpm for 300 s
and washed three times with W5 solution. Finally, Protoplasts were resuspended in pre-chilled MMG solution (4 mM MES, 0.4 M
mannitol, 15 mM MgCl₂) at a density of 2 × 10⁵/g FW. A mixture of 100 μL protoplast suspension and 10 μg plasmid DNA was incu-
bated for 5–10 min, followed by the addition of 100 μL PEG 4000 solution. After incubation at 28 ◦ C in the dark for 20 min, add 440 μL
W5 solution to terminate the transformation. Protoplasts were collected by centrifugation and resuspended in 500 μL pre-chilled W5
before being incubated at 28 ◦ C in the dark for another 12–16 h. Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) was utilized to visualize
GFP fluorescence, employing an excitation wavelength of 488 nm and an emission wavelength of 510 nm.
  For the transactivation assay in tobacco, the coding sequence of RbSCREP was inserted into the pBD-EAQ vector driven by the
35S promoter. The positive control pBD-VP16 and negative control pBD-empty were co-infected with reporter constructs into
N. benthamiana leaves via Agrobacterium tumefaciens GV3101. Assays included ≥3 biological replicates.



                                                                                               Cell 188, 1–17.e1–e10, October 30, 2025   e8


[PDF physical page 27]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

          ll
                                                                   Article


Luciferase transient assay
The promoters of RbCOMT1, RbREF1, RbCCR, RbEGS2, RrCOMT1, RcCOMT1 and RwCOMT1, as well as four fragments from
RbSCREP promoter (P1,  − 1712 to  − 1; P2,  − 1355 to  − 1; P3,  − 911 to  − 1; P4,  − 435 to  − 1), and the MITE-removed fragment
(P1RM) were amplified using specific primers (Table S5) and ligated into pGreenII 0800-LUC in order to drive the LUC gene as repoter
constructs. The resulting reporter vectors were then transformed into Agrobacterium GV3101 and injected into N. benthamiana leaves in
combination with strains harboring either the control vector or the various pCAMBIA2300-SCREP effector vector. For each combina-
tion, a total of 6 leaves from three plants were injected. Luciferase images was captured using a Night SHADE LB 985 living plant mo-
lecular imaging system, and activities were assessed utilizing a dual-luciferase reporter assay kit (Promega, USA) 3 days after injection.


Transient expression analysis in strawberry fruit and petunia petal
To assess the functions of these SCREP homologs, we cloned RbSCREP from the RbY, RcSCREP from the R. chinensis, RrSCREP
from R. rugosa and RwSCREP from R. wichuraiana. The coding sequences of SCREP homologs and four eugenol biosynthesis genes
(RbREF1, RbCOMT1, RbCCR1, RbEGS2) were inserted into pCAMBIA2300 vector to generate the overexpression vector. Following
culture, agrobacterium GV3101 containing the construct was resuspended in a transient infiltration buffer (10 mM MgSO 4 , 200 μM
acetosyringone and 10 mM MES, pH 5.6) with OD 600 of 0.6-0.8. The injection into strawberry fruits and petunia petals were carried out
as previously described. 17,29,102 For each vector, ten fruits and petals were employed. The fruits after 5 days injection and the petunia
petals after 3 days injection were ground in liquid nitrogen and subjected to qRT-PCR and metabolite profiling.


Virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) assay
392 base pairs of RcSCREP from R. chinensis ‘Old Blush’ were cloned and ligated into the VIGS TRV2 vector. The pTRV2-RcSCREP
construct was then transformed into Agrobacterium strain GV310. The Agrobacterium cultures were adjusted to an OD 600 1.0 with
the infiltration buffer and used for rose transformation. For the infiltration process, pTRV1 was mixed with either pTRV2-RcSCREP or
the negative control pTRV2 at a ratio of 1:1 (v/v), and then co-infiltrated into expanded and unpollinated rose flowers under a vacuum
of -1 kg/m 2 twice for 60 seconds each time. After infiltration, the flowers were washed with distilled water and grown in glass bottles in
a 15 ◦ C incubator. At 5 days pos-infection (dpi), petals were collected for qRT-PCR and HPLC analysis.


Vector construction
The full-lengthcoding sequences of RbSCREP, RcSCREP and RrSCREP were cloned into the pCAMBIA2300 or pK7FWG2 vector for
overexpression. In addition, a specific fragment of RrSCREP was inserted into the pF7GWIWG2D vector for RNA interference.
  CRISPR/Cas9 constructs were generated as previously described.103 A binary vector containing a CRISPR cassette with functional
Cas9, regulated by the CaMV 35S promoter, along with four gRNAs (Table S5), was constructed according to the endogenous tRNA-
processing system. In brief, eight unique gRNA target sites targeted the coding seqense of RrSCREP were selected to constructing two
quad-target PTG (polycistronic tRNA-gRNA) expression cassettes. The detailed experimental procedures are outlined as follows:
Initially, primers specific to each gRNA target sequence (Table S5) were designed. Using the pGTR plasmid containing tRNA-gRNA
fusion units as a template, single-module units (tRNA-gRNA scaffolds) encoding unique designed gRNAs were PCR-amplified. Subse-
quently, a hierarchical Golden Gate assembly strategy was employed to sequentially concatenate four single-module units into quad-
target PTG expression cassettes, using type IIS restriction enzymes (Bsa I) for ligation. Following this, restriction adapter primers were
designed to flank the PTG cassettes with recognition sites compatible with the multiple cloning site (MCS) of the destination vector
pKSE401G. After PCR amplification, the cassettes were digested with restriction enzymes (Fok 1) and directionally cloned into the line-
arized vector pKSE401G. Finally, the ligation products were transformed into competent E. coli DH5αcells, and positive clones were
selected and validated by Sanger sequencing to ensure vector integrity. Primer sequences are listed in Table S4O.


Stable transformation in rose plants and roots
The overexpressing or RNAi construct was introduced into rose plants as described by us.104 After 6-8 months of tissue culture, the
transgenic germinated shoots were subjected to qRT-PCR analysis to detect transcript levels, followed by downstream gene expres-
sion and metabolite analysis.
  Additionally, to achieve stable transformation in the roots of Rosa rugosa ‘Zizhi’, the pK7FWG2-RrSCREP, RNAi-RrSCREP and
CRISPR/Cas9 constructs were introduced into rose roots using an optimized transformation protocol. This protocol combined Agro-
bacterium-mediated infection with Agrobacterium rhizogenes and air layering propagation, as illustrated in Figure S6E. Briefly, the
bark was removed from the midsection of a branch to expose the underlying xylem, which was subsequently inoculated with Agro-
bacterium rhizogenes strain K599 containing the respective overexpression or RNA interference constructs. The inoculation site was
then enclosed with a black plastic wrap containing moist moss. The plants were kept at 26 ◦ C under a photoperiod of 16 hours light
and 8 hours dark until root formation occurred within the moss. Putative transgenic roots exhibiting GFP fluorescence were selected
for further characterization.


DAP-seq sampling and data analysis
DAP-seq analysis was performed as previously described 105 at SeqhealthTechnology Co., Ltd., located in Wuhan, China. Genomic
DNA (gDNA) was extracted utilizing Genomic DNA Kit (TiangenBiotech, Beijing, China, cat. #DP305). The gDNA was subjected to



e9    Cell 188, 1–17.e1–e10, October 30, 2025


[PDF physical page 28]
  Please cite this article in press as: Li et al., A de novo-originated gene drives rose scent diversification, Cell (2025), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  cell.2025.08.011

                                                                                                                       ll
Article


sonication on ice for 16 minutes at an amplitude of 20%, employing a cycle of 2 seconds on and 8 seconds off to achieve an average
fragment size ranging from 300 to 500 bp. The fragmented DNA constructed into a gDNA library utilizing the VAHTS Universal DNA
Library Prep Kit (Vazyme, China, cat. #NDM607). The RbYSCREP coding sequence was amplified using PCR, incorporating an SP6
promoter and 3×FLAG tag. Protein synthesis was conducted using the TnT® SP6 High-Yield Wheat Germ Protein Expression Sys-
tem (Promega, catalog #L3260), in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. The purified protein obtained was incubated with
the obtained gDNA library. The DNA that bound to the protein was extract from 3 technical replicates, as well as from the gDNA library
that was incubated without any added protein, which served as a negative control. The captured DNA were amplified and then
sequenced on on a DNBSEQ-T7 (MGI) platform using the PE150 sequencing mode.
  Sequencing data were processed using Fastp82 for filtering, followed by alignment to the RbY genome with bowtie2 version
2.5.3.106 The aligned reads were then sorted and converted to BAM format utilizing Samtools version 1.19.2. 84 Mapped reads
were visualized with IGV_2.17.2, 74 and peaks calling was performed using MACS377 version 3.0.0.85 Annotation of the identified
peaks was conducted with HOMER. 86 Conserved motifs within the peak regions were detected employing both HOMER and
MEME software.87


Yeast One-Hybrid (Y1H) Assay
The full-length coding sequence of RbSCREP was cloned into pGADT7 to produce AD-RbSCREP. Additionally, promoter fragments
of RbEGS and RbCCR, which contain predicted binding motifs for RbSCREP, were inserted into the pHIS2.0 vector upstream of the
HIS3 reporter gene. The empty pGADT7 vector served as a negative control. The yeast strain Y187 was co-transformed with pHIS2.0
promoter constructs and either AD-RbSCREP or AD using the lithium acetate method, followed by selection on SD/-Trp/-Leu me-
dium. The optimal concentration of 3-aminotriazole (3-AT) was determined by spotting colonies on SD/-Trp/-Leu/-His supplemented
with varying concentrations of 3-AT (0 - 100 mM) to inhibit background growth. Co-transformants were subsequently plated on SD/-
Trp/-Leu/-His with the optimized concentration of 3-AT, and growth observed after 3–5 days at 30 ◦ C indicated a putative interaction.


Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs)
EMSAs were conducted as described previously by us.107 The coding sequence of RbSCREP was cloned into the pMAL-c6T vector
and subsequently transformed into Escherichia coli Rosetta (DE3) cells. Recombinant protein expression was induced with 0.1 mM
isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) at 16 ◦ C for a duration of 16 hours, followed by purification through affinity chromatog-
raphy. Fluorescently labeled DNA probes, tagged with a 5′ 5(6)–carboxyfluorescein (FAM), were synthesized by Sangon Biotech
(Shanghai, China). The corresponding unlabeled oligonucleotides, which are identical to the labeled ones, served as cold compet-
itors. Maltose-binding protein (MBP) was utilized as a negative control. The sequences of the probes are detailed in Table S5.


ChIP-qPCR analysis
The ChIP assay was performed using rose 35S::SCREP-GFP transgenic roots. Chromatin was crosslinked with 1% formaldehyde,
subsequently sheared into fragments ranging from 200 to 500 bp through sonication, and then immunoprecipitated with anti-GFP
antibody or normal IgG as a negative control. DNA was purified from immunoprecipitates and input samples. qPCR was conducted
using primers listed in Table S5.


QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS


All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 8 software. One-way ANOVA coupled with Tukey’s test was used for
multiple comparisons, (*p < 0.05). Student’s t test was used for pairwise comparisons (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01).





                                                                                               Cell 188, 1–17.e1–e10, October 30, 2025  e10


[PDF physical page 29]
                                                                                                                       ll
Article

Supplemental figures





                                                                                                                                  (legend on next page)


[PDF physical page 30]
          ll
                                                                   Article





Figure S1. Analysis of volatile compounds and related phenylpropanoid metabolites in R. banksiae white and R. banksiae yellow, related to
Figure 1
(A) Different tissues of R. banksiae for volatile detection. WS1–WS5 represent the S1–S5 stages of floral development in RbW, and YS1–YS5 represent the S1–S5
stages in RbY.
(B) Gas chromatograms of endogenous and released volatiles in the WS1 flower, YS1 flower, leaf, stem, and root.
(C) Volatile compounds in RbW and RbY represented in an upset plot.
(D) Volatile content in different tissues of R. banksiae.
(E) Line charts were plotted for K-means clustering analysis of differential volatiles and visualized in a clustering heatmap.
(F) Score plot of partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) for GC-MS data.
(G) Validation of the PLS-DA model. The R 2 and Q 2 values indicate strong predictive and explanatory capabilities of the PLS-DA model.
(H) Differential floral metabolites were analyzed using Variable Importance in Projection (VIP) values ≥1 in the PLS-DA analysis. Eugenol was identified as the most
significant differential floral volatile between RbW and RbY.
(I) Content of caffeic acid, ferulic acid, coniferyl aldehyde, coniferyl alcohol, and eugenol in the flowers of RbW and RbY.


[PDF physical page 31]
                                                                                                                       ll
Article





                                                                                                                                  (legend on next page)


[PDF physical page 32]
          ll
                                                                   Article





Figure S2. Genome assembly and comparative genome analysis of R. banksiae white and R. banksiae yellow, related to Figure 1
(A and B) Evaluation of the size and complexity of RbW (A) and RbY (B) through K-mer frequency distribution analysis. The K-mers were counted using Jellyfish
with the parameters ‘‘-C -m 21 -s 10000000000.’’
(C and D) Hi-C maps of RbW (C) and RbY (D) genome assemblies. The Hifiasm assembly draft genome was organized into scaffolds using the filtered Hi-C data
and the 3D-DNA pipeline.
(E) The density distribution of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site (Ks) for syntenic genes in R. banksiae, R. chinensis, R. occidentalis, P. persica, and
V. vinifera.
(F) Comparison of the numbers of gene families identified via Orthofinder. The Venn diagram illustrates the shared homologous gene families among genomes of
R. banksiae white (RbW), R. banksiae yellow (RbY), R. chinensis ‘‘old blush’’ (Rch), R. wichuraiana ‘‘Basye’s thornless’’ (Rwi), and R. rugosa (Rru).
(G) Phylogenetic analysis of eleven plant species and collinearity between their chromosomes. Lines of different colors between chromosomes represent gene
collinearity (minimum 10 syntenic gene pairs) between the tested species. The light gray lines indicate a low level of collinearity between outgroups. Red blocks
mark the position of homologous genes of RbSCREP, while black blocks mark the position of homologous sequences of exon 2 of RbSCREP.


[PDF physical page 33]
                                                                                                                       ll
Article





                                                                                                                                  (legend on next page)


[PDF physical page 34]
          ll
                                                                   Article





Figure S3. Origin of the SCREP gene in the genus Rosa, related to Figure 2
(A) Microsynteny analysis of the homologous sequences of RbSCREP. The syntenic relationships of the RbSCREP region, encompassing ∼10 flanking genes,
were analyzed. Syntenic blocks are connected by lines. RbSCREP homologous genes were marked in red.
(B) Phylogenetic relationships, gene structure, and mRNA coverage of the RbSCREP homologous sequences. These sequences were marked on this region
using corresponding-colored blocks. If the identity is between 70% and 80%, there is a white gap on the corresponding color square. If the identity is between
80% and 90%, the width of the white gap is halved. If the identity is > 90%, there is no gap on the corresponding color square. The collected transcriptomes of
different tissues (Table S2K) were aligned with the genomes of corresponding species using Hisat2. The chart was manually assembled from alignment results for
better understanding (Table S2J; Data S2).
(C) De novo origin of SCREP.
(D) Sequence alignment of SCREP and its homologous sequences within the genus Rosa. Divergent sites were highlighted in various colors.


[PDF physical page 35]
                                                                                                                       ll
Article





                                                                                                                                  (legend on next page)


[PDF physical page 36]
          ll
                                                                   Article





Figure S4. Transcriptomic and phylogenetic analysis of genes associated with eugenol biosynthesis in R. banksiae, related to Figure 3
(A and B) Venn diagram depicting genes exhibiting elevated and low transcript levels in five flower developmental stages of RbY. The cutoff criteria used were
log 2FC > 1.0 and false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05.
(C) WGCNA analysis of 21,504 filtered genes identified from R. banksiae (FPKM > 1 in at least one sample). The different colors under the dendrogram represent
co-expressed modules.
(D) Expression patterns of 24 weighted gene co-expression network modules in 13 samples. The color scale represents module-sample correlation ranging from
− 1 (blue) to 1 (orange).
(E) MEred module containing 1 4CL, 3 CCRs, 3 CFATs, and 1 EGS.
(F) MEdarkslateblue module containing 1 COMT.
(G) MEpalevioletred3 module containing 1 COMT, 1 CCRs, and 1 CFAT.
(H) MEantiquewhite4 module containing 1 REF and RbYSCREP.
(I–L) Phylogenetic tree of RbCOMTs, RbCCRs, RbREFs, and RbEGSs and functionally characterized COMT, CCR, REF, and EGS from other species (shown in
blue). These RbCOMTs, RbCCRs, RbREFs, and RbEGSs that exhibit high correlation to eugenol are highlighted in red.
(M) Gene expression profile of the eugenol biosynthesis pathway based on RNA-seq data of R. banksiae. Red dots mean key candidate genes. PAL, phenyl-
alanine ammonia-lyase; C4H, trans-cinnamate 4-monooxygenase; C3H, p-coumarate 3-hydroxylase; 4CL, 4-coumarate-CoA ligase; COMT, caffeic acid 3-O-
methyltransferase; CCR, cinnamoyl-CoA reductase; CAD, cinnamyl-alcohol dehydrogenase; CFAT, coniferyl alcohol acyltransferase; EGS, eugenol synthase;
REF1, coniferyl-aldehyde dehydrogenase.
(N) qRT-PCR analysis of RbCOMT1, RbCCR1, RbREF1, and RbEGS2 in R. banksiae.


[PDF physical page 37]
                                                                                                                       ll
Article





Figure S5. Functional characterization of eugenol biosynthesis genes through transient overexpression in strawberry fruits and petunia
petals, related to Figure 3
(A) Fluorescence microscopic observation of transiently injected nucleus-localized gene-RFP in strawberry fruits.
(B) Expression analysis of RbCOMT1, RbREF1, RbCCR1, and RbEGS2 in transiently transformed strawberry fruits by qRT-PCR. EV indicates the strawberry fruits
transformed with an empty vector. OE represents the strawberry fruits overexpressing various genes.
(C) Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) chromatogram of caffeic acid in strawberry fruit overexpressing RbCOMT1 and RbREF1.
(D) LC-MS chromatogram of coniferyl aldehyde in strawberry fruit overexpressing RbREF1 and RbCCR1.
(E) GC-MS chromatogram of eugenol in strawberry fruit overexpressing RbCOMT1, RbREF1, RbCCR1, and RbEGS2.

                                                                                                             (legend continued on next page)


[PDF physical page 38]
          ll
                                                                   Article





(F) Fluorescence microscopic observation of transiently injected nucleus-localization gene-RFP in petunia petals.
(G) Expression analysis of RbCOMT1, RbREF1, and RbEGS2 in transformed petunia petals by qRT-PCR.
(H–J) Eugenol content in petunia petals overexpressing RbCOMT1 (H), RbREF1 (I), and RbEGS2 (J).
(K–M) GC-MS chromatogram of eugenol in petunia petals overexpressing RbCOMT1 (K), RbREF1 (L), and RbEGS2 (M).
(N) Mass spectrometry (MS) profiles of eugenol.


[PDF physical page 39]
                                                                                                                       ll
Article





Figure S6. Functional characterization of SCREP in regulating the eugenol biosynthesis pathway in Rosa species, related to Figure 5
(A) Schematic diagram of VIGS (Virus-Induced Gene Silencing) in the petals of R. chinensis old blush.
(B and C) Expression analysis of RcSCREP, RcCOMT1, RcREF1, RcCCR1, and RcEGS2 in RcSCREP-silenced rose petals.

                                                                                                             (legend continued on next page)


[PDF physical page 40]
          ll
                                                                   Article





(D) The levels of coniferyl aldehyde, coniferyl alcohol, and eugenol in RcSCREP-silenced rose petals. The control group consisted of rose petals transformed with
an empty TRV vector (TRV). Significant differences compared with the TRV were determined by the unpaired Student’s t tests: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
(E) Schematic diagram of the Agrobacterium rhizogenes-mediated genetic transformation system for R. rugosa Zizhi roots.
(F) Genetic transformation in the roots of R. rugosa Zizhi.
(G) Phenotypic characteristics of hairy roots in R. rugosa Zizhi that overexpress RbSCREP (OE) and exhibit silencing of RrSCREP (RNAi).
(H and I) Expression analysis of RrSCREP, RrCOMT1, RrCCR1, and RrEGS2 in roots overexpressing RbSCREP and wild-type (WT).
(J and K) Expression analysis of RbSCREP, RrCOMT1, RrCCR1, and RrEGS2 in roots subjected to RbSCREP-RNAi silencing compared with WT.
(L) Levels of coniferyl aldehyde and coniferyl alcohol in RbSCREP-overexpressing roots and WT.
(M) Levels of coniferyl aldehyde and coniferyl alcohol in roots silenced by RrSCREP-RNAi compared with WT.
(N) Schematic representation of the generation of CRISPR-Cas9 constructs.
(O) Sequences of the four knockout (KO) lines are presented below the sequence of SCREP from the WT. The sgRNA (Single-guide RNA) targets and the
protospacer-adjacent motif (PAM) are highlighted in red and green font, respectively, while deletions are represented by red hyphens.
(P) Phenotypic characteristics of SCREP KO roots.
(Q) Expression analysis of RrCOMT1, RrCCR1, and RrEGS2 in SCREP KO root lines and WT.
(R) Levels of coniferyl aldehyde and coniferyl alcohol in SCREP KO root lines compared with WT.
(S) Schematic representation of the genes involved in the eugenol biosynthesis pathway. The genes that exhibited SCREP binding are highlighted in red.
(T and U) Four structural genes and two MYB TFs that exhibited SCREP binding. The notation [0–200] refers to the height of the peak.
(V and W) Y1H assays demonstrated that RbSCREP directly interacted with the promoters of RbCCR1 and RbEGS2. The notation (3×) indicates that the promoter
fragments are repeated 3 times.
(X and Y) EMSA confirms the direct binding of RbSCREP to RbCCR1pro (3×) and RbEGS2pro.


[PDF physical page 41]
                                                                                                                       ll
Article





                                                                                                                                  (legend on next page)


[PDF physical page 42]
          ll
                                                                   Article





Figure S7. Functional conservation of SCREP homologs in regulating eugenol biosynthesis across Rosa species, related to Figure 6
(A–D) Expression analysis of RbSCREP, RrSCREP, RwSCREP, and RcSCREP in transformed strawberry fruits by qRT-PCR.
(E–H) Expression analysis of FaCCR, FaREF, and FaEGS2 in strawberry fruits overexpressing RbSCREP, RrSCREP, RwSCREP, and RcSCREP by qRT-PCR.
(I) Phenotype of transiently transformed petunia petals.
(J) qRT-PCR analysis of RbSCREP, RcSCREP, and RwSCREP in transformed petunia petals.
(K–M) qRT-PCR analysis of eugenol biosynthesis structural genes PhCFAT, PhCCR, and PhEGS in petunia petals transiently expressed various SCREPs.
(N) Eugenol content in petunia petals overexpressing various SCREPs. Data represent the means ± SD (n = 3). Significant differences compared with the EV were
determined by the unpaired Student’s t tests: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.