C. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                         Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 12 (2026) 284–292





Fig. 1. Regulation of glycosyltransferase enhances the synthesis of taxadiene in S. cerevisiae. tHMG1, N-terminally truncated HMG-CoA reductase 1; GGPP,
geranylgeranyl diphosphate; ERG20, bifunctional (2E,6E)-farnesyl diphosphate; BST1, farnesyl transferase; TS, taxadiene synthase; and GGOH, geranylgeraniol.

2.4. Protein expression analyses                                          Subsequently, the membrane was incubated with the secondary anti­
                                                              body at 25 ◦C for 1 h at 20 rotations/min. The PVDF membrane was
   Western blot assay was used to detect the expression levels of the    washed with pre-cooled TBST buffer (Solarbio, China) three times, and
target protein in S. cerevisiae. The procedure for protein extraction and     incubated with the EasySee Western Blot Kit (TransGen Biotech Com­
Western blot analysis is based on our previous research plan, with some     pany, China) for 50 s. Subsequently, protein expression was detected
modifications. First, based on the fermentation conditions in the shake     using the Azure Biosystems C280 Chemiluminescence Western Blot
flask, the engineered strain was cultured at 20 ◦C, 220 rpm for 72 h, with    Imaging System (USA). The gray value of the protein band was quanti­
an optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of approximately 10. Nearly 1.0 mL     tatively analyzed using ImageJ software.
of the fermentation broth (cultured for 72 h) was centrifuged for 5 min
at 4 ◦C at 3000×g to remove the supernatant, and the cell pellet was                                                                                 2.5. N-glycosylated proteomics analysiswashed 3 times with pre-cooled 0.01 M phosphate-buffered saline. The
cell pellet was then placed on ice and incubated for 30 min with 500 μL                                                                The seed culture of the proteome detection strain was consistent withof lysis buffer. The lysate was centrifuged to remove the lysis buffer, and                                                                        the culture conditions described. The cell samples was harvested bythe cell lysate was washed three times with 1.0 mL of sterile water.                                                                            centrifugation at 72 h. Subsequently, the harvest samples were quicklyFinally, the collected cell lysate was suspended in 100 μL of sodium                                                                         frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 ◦C. An Orbitrap Fusiondodecyl sulfate sample buffer and boiled at 100 ◦C for 10 min. The su­                                                          Lumos mass spectrometer was used in this project. The mass spec­pernatant obtained after centrifugation was the prepared target protein                                                                      trometry data were identified using the Andromeda Search Engine in­sample. The protein concentration of the prepared sample can be                                                                          tegrated into the MaxQuant environment, followed by filtering at thequantified using a protein assay kit compatible with detergent (Coo­                                                                  spectrum level and then further filtering at the protein level [28]. Thismassie; Solarbio, China).                                                                    experiment uses MaxQuant to quantify the identified peptides and   After diluting the total protein concentration of each experimental                                                                           proteins in each sample for determining the specific quantitative valuesgroup to the same level, 40 μg of total protein (approximately 40 μL, 25                                                                              of each peptide in each sample. Based on the quantitative values of each% sample buffer) was loaded onto a 15 % SurePAGE gel (GenScript Inc.,                                                                    modified peptide obtained from the repeated analyses of differentChina). The electrophoresis voltage was 140 V, and the trans-membrane                                                                       samples, we used Welch's t-test to test the preset comparison groups andvoltage was 110 V. The gel was incubated at 25 ◦C for 1 h with 1 × Tris-                                                                             calculate the fold change (FC). Furthermore, the significant differentialbuffered saline with Tween-20 (TBST) buffer containing 3 % non-fat                                                                         peptides were filtered based on the criteria of FC ≥1.5 and p-valuemilk to block. Subsequently, the sample was incubated with the anti­                                                                   ≤0.05. The data mining and figure presentation processes were con­body. As the target protein has two His tags at both ends, the primary                                                                    ducted using the network platform of Beijing Genomics Institute [29].and secondary antibodies used were anti-His mouse monoclonal anti­
body (diluted 1:2000) and HRP-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (diluted
1:3000;  TransGen  Biotech  Company,  China),  respectively.  The     2.6. Fermentation conditions
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) protein (36 kDa)
was used as an internal reference protein for normalization and was       Shake flask fermentation: The engineered strains were first inocu­
detected with an anti-GAPDH mouse monoclonal antibody (1:2000;     lated into 4.0 mL of YPD or SC medium in test tubes and cultured for 24 h
TransGen Biotech Company, China). Next, the poly (vinylidene fluoride)    (30 ◦C, 220 rpm). The overnight cultures were then inoculated into 4.0
(PVDF) membrane was immersed in the primary antibody dilution so­   mL of fresh YPD or SC medium in test tubes, with an initial OD600 of 0.2,
lution and  incubated  overnight  at 4 ◦C and 20  rotations/min.    and further cultured for 14–16 h. The initial YPD or SC seed suspension
                                                                  (OD600 = 0.2) was then transferred to 250 mL shake flasks containing 50

                                                                       286