C. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                         Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 12 (2026) 284–292

that has pushed this valuable species toward endangered status [4,5].     geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP) strain by implementing a compre­
Currently, paclitaxel production primarily relies on extracting pre­     hensive strategy, establishing an excellent foundation for taxadiene
cursors, such as 10-deacetylbaccatin III, from yew plants in addition to     biosynthesis [23,24]. In the present study, we investigated the effects of
production  using  chemical   semi-synthesis  methods.  Although     N-glycosylation modification on taxadiene synthesis in S. cerevisiae by
semi-synthetic approaches enable relatively more efficient utilization of     disrupting endogenous glycosyltransferase activity (Fig. 1). Initially, we
plant resources, they necessitate considerable consumption of yew trees,     disrupted the mnn11 glycosyltransferase gene, which  substantially
failing to address the fundamental issues of resource scarcity or the    enhanced taxadiene production. Subsequent N-glycosylation proteomics
protection of rare plant species [6].                                         analysis provided relatively more in-depth insights into the mechanisms
   Heterologous reconstruction based on synthetic biology offers an    through which the disruption  of the  activity of mnn11 glycosyl­
effective strategy for overcoming challenges associated with obtaining     transferase promotes taxadiene synthesis. Subsequently, the enhanced
complex plant natural products [7]. Recent years have witnessed sig­     expression of the key enzyme TS through multi-copy expression and the
nificant advances, with researchers mapping the Taxus genome and    adequate supply of its precursor GGPP further increased the yield of
identifying previously missing key enzymes in the paclitaxel biosyn­     taxadiene. Ultimately, under optimized fed-batch fermentation condi­
thetic pathway, including baccatin III biosynthase (T9αH) and taxane     tions in a bioreactor, taxadiene titers up to 1.26 g/L were achieved. Our
oxetanase 1 (TOT1) [8,9], both of which are essential for baccatin III     research demonstrates how the strategic regulation of glycosylation
biosynthesis. These breakthroughs  will  accelerate the design and     modifications can improve compatibility between heterologous proteins
development of heterologous synthetic platforms for paclitaxel pro­    and the microbial chassis, with potentially far-reaching implications for
duction, facilitating its synthetic biological manufacturing [10,11]. As a     the biological synthesis of other terpenes in eukaryotic systems.
crucial precursor compound for paclitaxel, taxadiene represents a crit­
ical target. Given the length and complexity of the paclitaxel biosyn­     2. Materials and methods
thesis pathway, achieving high taxadiene yields is essential for the
successful biosynthesis of paclitaxel [12].                                     2.1.  Strains and culture media
   With advancements in synthetic biology, taxadiene biosynthesis has
been successfully implemented in various microbial chassis platforms         S. cerevisiae strain strain CEN.PK2–1C (MATa; ura3-52; trp1-289;
[11,13,14]. S. cerevisiae, a widely utilized eukaryotic host for metabolic     leu2-3112; his3Δ1; MAL2-8c; SUC2) was chosen as the background
engineering, serves as a valuable platform for taxadiene production     strain for this work, and Escherichia coli strains TOP10 and DH5α were
[15]. However, taxadiene production in S. cerevisiae remains compara­    used as the host strains for the recombinant DNA manipulations [25].
tively low. Nowrouzi et al. elevated taxadiene titers in S. cerevisiae to    The yeast strains used in this study are listed in Table 1. The E. coli
129 mg/L by employing solubility-enhancing tags to improve the     strains TOP10 and DH5α (Beijing Biomed Co., Ltd.) were used for the
expression and solubility of taxadiene synthase (TS) [14]. Furthermore,     construction of plasmids and were cultivated in Luria–Bertani medium
within the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway, numerous steps involve     (0.5 % yeast extract, 1 % tryptone, and 1 % NaCl) supplemented with 50
P450 enzymes, including T5αOH, T9αOH, and C4β-C20 epoxidase [8].    μg/mL kanamycin or 100 μg/mL ampicillin at 37 ◦C.
The heterologous expression of these plant-derived P450 enzymes and       The S. cerevisiae strains devoid of plasmids were cultured in yeast
terpene synthases in S. cerevisiae is often hampered by limitations in the     extract–peptone–dextrose (YPD) medium (1 % yeast  extract, 2 %
host's protein expression system and post-translational modification     peptone, and 2 % glucose) at 30 ◦C. Yeast strains with one or two
machinery, frequently creating rate-limiting steps for the synthesis of     plasmids were grown in synthetic complete (SC) drop-out medium (2 %
the  target  natural  compounds  [16].  Therefore,  modulating  the     dextrose, 0.67 % yeast nitrogen base, 0.2 % amino acid mix lacking the
compatibility between exogenous enzymes and S. cerevisiae represents a     corresponding amino acids). All media formulations were prepared as
critical strategy for enhancing the synthesis of taxadiene and its down­     described in a previous study [26].
stream derivatives.
   Eukaryotic cells, such as S. cerevisiae, possess complex and diverse                                                                                 2.2. Plasmid and strain constructionprotein post-translational modification systems. Particularly, protein
glycosylation constitutes a prevalent post-translational modification in                                                                                   All the plasmids used in this study are listed in Table S1. The primersS. cerevisiae [17,18]. Heterologous proteins are subjected to extensive                                                                   used in this study were synthesized by Tsingke Biotechnology Co., Ltd.glycosylation modifications in S. cerevisiae, which may significantly                                                                                 (Beijing, China) and are listed in Table S2. The yeast expression plasmidscompromise  their  expression  levels and  functional  activity  [19].                                                           pRS416 and pRS426, obtained from ADDGENE (USA), were used for theThrough machine learning analysis, Li et al. discovered that N-glyco­                                                                          construction of all the cassettes used in this study. The coding sequencesylation exerts a more significant negative impact on exogenous protein                                                                              of the TS gene (ACCESSION Q41594) was codon-optimized (Table S3)expression than  that  of amino  acid composition  in  S.  cerevisiae.                                                              and synthesized by GenScript Inc. (China).Furthermore, as N-glycosylation occurs during the unfolded state of a                                                                The yeast strains were transformed with plasmids using the LiAc/protein, it substantially affects the correct folding and stable expression                                                                           single-stranded carrier DNA/polyethylene glycol-3350 method [27].of proteins [20]. Therefore, the regulation of glycosylation modifica­                                                                       Yeast genome modification was conducted through the CRISPR/Cas9tions may be a key step for enhancing the efficiency of heterologous                                                                        system. The target gene sequence of the gRNA target was designed usingprotein expression. Many studies have focused on the issue of protein                                                          CRISPOR  (http://crispor.tefor.net/crispor.py) and  is  presented  inN-hyperglycosylation in S. cerevisiae. Danguole et al. reported that dis­                                                                     Table S2. The S. cerevisiae strains used in the present study are listed inrupting the activity of MNN10 or MNN11, or both simultaneously,                                                                     Table 1.enhanced transferase secretion in S. cerevisiae mutants by approximately
80, 50, and 120 %, respectively [21]. Moreover, studies have shown that
three heterologous proteins—β-glucosidase, endoglucanase, and cello­     2.3. Knockout of yeast endogenous glycosyltransferases
biohydolase—exhibit N-hyperglycosylation in S. cerevisiae. Tang et al.
enhanced both the yield and activity of these three heterologous pro­       Based on the gene sequences of the glycosyltransferases alg3, alg6,
teins in S. cerevisiae by deleting the och1 and mnn9 glycosyltransferase    mnn11, and och1 in S. cerevisiae, 500 bp fragments were taken from both
genes [22]. Consequently, the strategic regulation of glycosylation    ends of these genes as homologous arms, and a Leu2 nutritional marker
modifications can considerably improve the stable expression of heter­    was used to replace the related protease genes in the genome. Subse­
ologous proteins in S. cerevisiae.                                           quently, monoclonal strains were screened in SC-Leu nutritive defi­
   In our previous studies, we successfully engineered a high-yielding     ciency medium.

                                                                       285