C. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                         Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 12 (2026) 284–292





Fig. 6. Fed-batch fermentation of strain yZCL146 in a 5-L bioreactor. Fed-batch fermentations were performed at a 2.0 L scale using yeast extrac­
t–peptone–dextrose (YPD) medium and the engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain yZCL146. Optical density at 600 nm (OD600) was measured, and calibration
curves were drawn for glucose, ethanol, and taxadiene during the fed-batch fermentation. Black arrows indicate the addition of n-dodecane and galactose to the
medium. Error bars represent the means ± standard deviation from three biological replicates.

rapid biomass accumulation. The taxadiene strain entered its exponen­    CRediT authorship contribution statement
tial growth phase and reached the stationary phase after 38 h, achieving
an OD600 of 160. Following the consumption of the initial glucose (20 g/       Chenglong Zhang: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Method­
L), we implemented a carbon source limitation strategy, maintaining     ology, Investigation, Conceptualization. Jia Wang: Validation, Meth­
glucose concentration below 1.0 g/L through precise feed rate adjust­     odology,  Investigation.  Longfei  Zhao:  Validation,  Methodology,
ments. The second phase represented the taxadiene production stage,     Investigation. Nan Wu: Validation, Investigation. Yi Shi: Validation,
during which fermentation temperature was reduced from 30 to 20 ◦C,    Methodology. Xia Li: Supervision. Changqiang Ke: Validation, Meth­
and n-dodecane was introduced as a two-phase extraction agent at 20 %     odology. Jia Liu:  Validation, Methodology. Yang Ye:  Validation,
of the culture volume. Owing to the glucose-mediated repression of GAL    Methodology. Ying Wang:  Supervision. Bingzhi  Li:  Supervision.
promoter expression, we transitioned the supplementary carbon source    Wenhai Xiao: Writing – review &  editing, Supervision, Funding
to ethanol at 46 h, which gradually increased OD600 to 156 by the     acquisition, Conceptualization. Mingdong Yao: Writing – review &
conclusion of fermentation. Taxadiene production increased steadily     editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Yingjin
throughout the fermentation process, ultimately reaching a titer of 1.26    Yuan: Supervision.
g/L after 180 h (Fig. 6), representing a 4.3-fold improvement over that
obtained in shake flask cultivation.                                Funding

4. Conclusions                                                            This work was supported by the National Key Research and Devel­
                                                            opment Program of China (2024YFA0917100); National Key R&D Pro­
   In summary, we  significantly enhanced taxadiene synthesis  in    gram “Strategic Scientific and Technological Innovation Cooperation”
S. cerevisiae by strategically disrupting the activity of endogenous gly­    Key Project (2022YFE0203600); Central Government's Guidance Fund
cosyltransferase mnn11  to  modulate  glycosylation  modifications.     for   Local   Science  and  Technology  Development   of  China
Sequentially, the multi-copy  integration  of the TS gene and the    (24ZYCGSY00030).
enhancement of the precursor supply pathway resulted in a high-yield
taxadiene strain, yZCL146, with a titer of 420.4 mg/L. Under opti­    Declaration of interest statement
mized 5.0-L fed-batch fermentation conditions, we achieved a peak
taxadiene titer of 1.26 g/L, the highest taxadiene titer reported in het­       The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
erologous host system to date and representing a 63-fold improvement     interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
over the titer obtained using our initial strain. This efficient taxadiene     the work reported in this paper.
synthesis platform provides a robust supply of precursors for paclitaxel
biosynthesis, thereby reducing the dependence on and depletion of    Appendix A. Supplementary data
natural Taxus plant resources for paclitaxel production. Moreover, our
research strategy of improving compatibility between the key enzymes       Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
and host chassis offers a valuable paradigm for enhancing the yield of     org/10.1016/j.synbio.2025.12.012.
other high-value terpene compounds in yeast.




                                                                       291