                                                   Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 12 (2026) 284–292

                                                  Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
                       Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology


                      journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/synthetic-and-systems-biotechnology

Original Research Article
Regulating protein glycosylation modification enhances the synthesis of
taxadiene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Chenglong Zhang a,b,c,1, Jia Wang a,c,d,1, Longfei Zhao a,c,1, Nan Wu a,c,
Yi Shi a,c, Xia Li a,c, Changqiang Ke e, Jia Liu e, Yang Ye e, Ying Wang a,c, Bingzhi Li a,c,
Wenhai Xiao a,c,d,*, Mingdong Yao a,c,**, Yingjin Yuan a,c
a State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Frontiers Science Center for Synthetic Biology (Ministry of Education), School of Synthetic Biology and Biomanufacturing,
Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China
b School of Life Sciences, Henan Institute of Science and Technology, Xinxiang, China
c Frontier Research Institute for Synthetic Biology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China
d School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China
e China-Serbia “Belt and Road” Joint Laboratory for Natural Products and Drug Discovery, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zu-
Chong-Zhi Road, Shanghai, 201203, China


A R T I C L E  I N F O                  A B S T R A C T

Keywords:                                             Utilizing synthetic biology techniques to construct recombinant engineered cells for the synthesis of paclitaxel
Taxadiene                                   and its key precursors has emerged as an effective method to address the supply–demand imbalance and protect
Glycosylation modifications                           rare plant resources. Taxadiene, a critical precursor of paclitaxel, exhibits limited yield in eukaryotic systems,Taxadiene synthase                                                  constraining its biosynthetic potential. Previous research has demonstrated that glycosylation modifications inmnn11                                               Saccharomyces cerevisiae substantially impact the regulation of exogenous protein expression. In this study, weSaccharomyces cerevisiae
                                             found that knocking out endogenous protein glycosylation genes in the chassis significantly improved the
                                                 expression of heterologous proteins, especially the key taxadiene synthase (TS), and thereby increased the yield
                                                     of taxadiene. In particular, we identified that the deletion of the glycosyltransferase gene mnn11 increased
                                                taxadiene production levels by 65.2 %. The subsequent multi-copy integration of the key enzyme taxadiene
                                                synthase further elevated taxadiene production levels in shake flasks by more than 3-fold, reaching 113.5 mg/L.
                                              Moreover, the enhancement of geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthesis-related expression modules resulted in a
                                                   2.69-fold increase in taxadiene yield, to 420.4 mg/L. Following the optimization of fed-batch fermentation
                                                    conditions, taxadiene production levels of up to 1.26 g/L were achieved, representing a 63-fold improvement
                                               over that obtained with the initial strain. Our findings provide valuable insights into enhancing heterologous
                                                taxadiene production efficiency by blocking endogenous protein glycosylation modifications in S. cerevisiae,
                                                    establishing a critical precedent for improving compatibility between natural product synthesis and microbial
                                                           cell factories.


1. Introduction                                                    Taxus  brevifolia, remains an effective and widely used therapeutic
                                                          compound with extensive pharmacological activities [3]. Taxus species
   Terpenes exhibit a wide range of biological activities and are utilized     contain minimal amounts of paclitaxel, comprising only 0.001–0.06 %
in pharmaceuticals, health supplements, food additives, and cosmetics     of the dried bark's weight. Producing only 1 kg of paclitaxel requires
[1,2]. Paclitaxel, a diterpene alkaloid first isolated from the bark of     harvesting 2000–2500 yew trees, resulting in extensive deforestation


 Peer review under the responsibility of Editorial Board of Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology.
 * Corresponding author. State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Frontiers Science Center for Synthetic Biology (Ministry of Education), School of Synthetic
Biology and Biomanufacturing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China.
 ** Corresponding author. State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Frontiers Science Center for Synthetic Biology (Ministry of Education), School of Synthetic
Biology and Biomanufacturing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China.
    E-mail addresses: wenhai.xiao@tju.edu.cn (W. Xiao), mingdong.yao@tju.edu.cn (M. Yao).
  1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2025.12.012
Received 21 October 2025; Received in revised form 10 December 2025; Accepted 17 December 2025
2405-805X/© 2025 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co.  Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).