C. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                         Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 12 (2026) 284–292

of the control strain, indicating impacted strain growth (Fig. 2B). Such     intensity analysis revealed that the expression of the intact TS protein in
results have been reported in previous studies [22]. Subsequently, we     the mnn11-disrupted chassis increased by 126 % compared with that in
employed N-glycosylated proteomic analysis to elucidate the mecha­     the control strain (Fig. S6), resulting in substantially enhanced taxadiene
nism through which mnn11 glycosyltransferase regulates glycosylation     production. In conclusion, through our global regulatory strategy of
modification and enhances taxadiene synthesis in S. cerevisiae.              disrupting the activity of glycosyltransferase mnn11, we observed sig­
                                                                                nificant enhancement in protein expression capacity and improved cell
3.2. N-glycosylated proteomic analysis of the effect of disrupted           membrane permeability in the chassis  cells, ultimately leading to
glycosyltransferase mnn11 on taxadiene synthesis pathway                   increased taxadiene production.

   N-glycosylation represents one of the most complex and abundant     3.3. Multi-copy integration enhanced TS expression improves taxadiene
post-translational modifications in eukaryotic cells [33]. Recent studies      yield
have demonstrated that the targeted inhibition of the activities of spe­
cific  glycosyltransferases  can   effectively  reduce  the  N-hyper­        Previous research has indicated that TS expression and activity in
glycosylation  of  exogenous  proteins  in  S.  cerevisiae  [22].  Thus,      S. cerevisiae remain relatively low. Consequently, numerous studies have
N-glycosylation proteomics analysis provides crucial insights for eluci­     focused on increasing taxadiene yield through TS copy number ampli­
dating the regulatory mechanisms underlying the enhancement of tax­      fication. Nevertheless, plasmid-based systems require expensive selec­
adiene synthesis in response to the disruption of glycosyltransferase     tive media, limiting their industrial applicability. Furthermore, plasmid-
mnn11.                                                            based gene expression systems exhibit poorer stability than that of
   To further investigate the impact of glycosyltransferase activity in­    chromosomal  integration,  offer  limited  selectable  markers,  and
hibition on taxadiene synthesis, we performed a comprehensive N-     demonstrate  lower  homologous  recombination  efficiency  [39].
glycosylation  proteomics  analysis  in  the  mnn11-disrupted  strain     Multi-copy integration strategies are frequently employed to enhance
yZCL105 and the control strain yZCL080. Based on quantitative values     the expression and stability of proteins. Ty, the most abundant retro­
of each modified peptide obtained from multiple sample replicates, we     transposon family in the S. cerevisiae reference strain S288c, facilitates
employed Welch's  t-test to analyze preset comparison groups and     multi-copy genomic integration [40].
calculate FC values. Significantly differential proteins were identified       To further enhance GGPP precursor utilization and improve tax­
using stringent criteria of FC ≥1.5 and p-value ≤0.05 (Fig. 3A). The     adiene synthesis, we implemented a high-copy screening system. The
differential protein volcano plot revealed 14 up-regulated and 21 down-     G418-resistance gene screening module was co-expressed with the TS
regulated  N-glycosylated  proteins  in  the  mnn11-disrupted  strain     expression module and integrated into the multi-copy Ty2 site of the
yZCL105 compared with that in the control group (Fig. 3B).                yeast genome (Fig. 4A). Subsequently, the strains carrying multi-copy
   As shown in Fig. 3C, we analyzed the functions of the up-regulated     integration of the TS gene were screened using varying concentrations
and down-regulated proteins to elucidate the regulatory mechanism     of G418. As illustrated in Fig. 4B, taxadiene production progressively
through which the disruption of mnn11 glycosyltransferase activity     increased with increasing G418 screening concentrations. The strain
enhances taxadiene synthesis in S. cerevisiae. The analysis revealed that    (yZCL143) screened at 400 mg/L concentration of G418 achieved the
the up-regulated proteins predominantly participated in promoting     optimal production levels of 113.5 mg/L, representing a 5.73-fold in­
protein folding, enhancing cellular metabolism, and increasing energy     crease compared with that in the mnn11 knockout strain with single-
supply, all of which contribute to up-regulating the taxadiene synthesis    copy plasmids (yZCL105). Moreover, the Western blot assay revealed
pathway in S. cerevisiae. Specifically, P17967 (protein disulfide isom­     significantly improved expression  levels of the TS protein in the
erase, PDI) and Q99316 (PDI MPD2) facilitate disulfide bond formation,    yZCL143 strain carrying multi-copy integration of the TS gene (Fig. 4C).
thereby promoting proper protein folding [34]. The previous studies     Relative intensity analysis revealed that the expression levels of the TS
have found that expression level of α-synuclein without disulfide bonds     protein increased by 485 % in the yZCL143 strain compared with those
was also effectively enhanced by overexpressing the gene of PDI [35]. In     in the control strains (Fig. 4D), resulting in enhanced TS protein
addition, A6ZN46/formate dehydrogenase 1, a component of cellular     expression and significantly increased taxadiene production. Subse­
energy production and metabolic processes, oxidizes the reduced form     quently, we employed real-time, fluorescence-based quantitative poly­
of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, thereby enhancing ATP produc­    merase chain reaction to determine the copy number of the TS gene
tion through oxidative phosphorylation [36]. The up-regulation of    module in the G418-resistant multi-copy strain (yZCL143) (Figs. S7 and
protein folding-related factors correlates with the elevated expression     S8). The high-producing strain yZCL143 contained approximately nine
levels of the TS protein.                                                  copies (Fig. S9). These findings demonstrated that the multi-copy inte­
   Conversely, the down-regulated proteins were predominantly asso­     gration screening system significantly increases the copy number of the
ciated with cell membrane functions in S. cerevisiae (Fig. 3C). This    TS protein in S. cerevisiae, thereby enhancing TS protein expression and
alteration potentially modifies cell membrane permeability, facilitating    improving taxadiene synthesis.  It's worth noting that the glycosyl­
taxadiene secretion into the organic phase and preventing its intracel­     transferase disruption strategy is a global regulation approach rather
lular accumulation, thus reducing its toxicity to S. cerevisiae. Previous     than for the targeting specific proteins. Therefore, while the expression
studies have demonstrated that the deletion of genes encoding certain     of the TS protein has improved,  it did not resolve the issue of TS
glycosyltransferases, such as OCH1, reduces protein glycosylation in     cleavage. Further research and improvement will be conducted on the
yeast cells, leading to the direct rearrangement of cell wall components     cleavage of the TS enzyme in future.
[37]. Alterations in cell wall integrity and cell membrane permeability
in S. cerevisiae frequently result in cellular growth defects [38].              3.4. Enhancing GGPP precursor synthesis to improve taxadiene
   Subsequently, we selected the up-regulated TS protein for further     production
analysis and assessed its expression levels via western blotting. This
approach enabled us to investigate the impact of mnn11 disruption on        Further enhancement of the synthesis of taxadiene precursor, GGPP,
the heterologous expression of TS, a key enzyme in the taxadiene syn­      is essential to ensure sufficient substrate availability for subsequent
thesis pathway. We evaluated the expression levels of the TS protein in     bioconversion stages. The 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase
the Δmnn11 strain yZCL105 and the control strain yZCL1080 using    encoded by HMG1 has been identified as the rate-limiting enzyme in the
Western blotting (Fig. 3D). Following the disruption of the activity of    mevalonate (MVA) pathway [41]. Consequently, the N-terminal trun­
endogenous glycosyltransferase mnn11 in S. cerevisiae, the expression     cated HMG1 (tHMG1) is frequently employed to optimize the MVA
levels of the intact TS protein increased significantly (Fig. 3D). Relative    pathway and increase terpene production in S. cerevisiae. Song et al.

                                                                       289