
[PDF physical page 1]
 Tribute to Founders: Jay Bailey. AIChE Letter: Biomolecular Engineering,
 Bioengineering, Biochemicals, Biofuels, and Food

       Identiﬁcation of the Pyranonigrin A Biosynthetic Gene
        Cluster by Genome Mining in Penicillium thymicola
                           IBT 5891


                           Man-Cheng Tang    , Yi Zou, and Danielle Yee
              Dept. of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095

                                               Yi Tang
              Dept. of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095

                    Dept. of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095


                                     DOI 10.1002/aic.16324
                      Published online June 27, 2018 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Signiﬁcance

A polyketide synthase and nonribosomal peptide synthetase hybrid gene cluster from the genome of Penicillium thymicola
was identiﬁed through genome mining. Heterologous expression of this cluster leads to the production of pyranonigrin A.
A series of experiments established that only four genes are sufﬁcient to biosynthesize pyranonigrin A. Based on the results
from the current study, a biosynthetic pathway of pyranonigrin A is proposed. © 2018 American Institute of Chemical
Engineers AIChE J, 64: 4182–4186, 2018
Keywords: pyranonigrin A, biosynthesis, genome mining, heterologous expression



Introduction                                             nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) hybrid enzyme may
                                                          be involved.
      yranonigrins are a family of antioxidative compounds     PKS-NRPS are bimodular megasynthases that make a vari-
       that are reported to be secondary metabolites produced     ety of bioactive natural products in fungi.9 The PKS module is
     by Aspergillus  niger,  all  featuring a unique pyrano     typically a highly reducing PKS that functions iteratively toP
[2,3-c]pyrrole  bicyclic  skeleton, which  is  rarely found  in    produce  a  polyketide  chain  with  mixed  degrees   of
nature.1-4 Of this family, pyranonigrin A (Figure 1) was shown     α-methylation and β-reduction during each chain elongation
to have the activity as a 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl radical     cycle. The NRPS module captures the completed polyketide
scavenging reagent.5 Previously, a biosynthetic gene cluster     chain in the form of a thioester and condenses with a speciﬁ-
from A. niger ATCC 1015 was transcriptionally activated by     cally activated amino acid (by the adenylation domain) to
overexpressing the pathway-speciﬁc transcriptional regulator,    form an amide bond. This product can then be released by a
leading to the identiﬁcation of a new member of this family,     reductive domain followed by Knoevenagel condensation to
pyranonigrin E.6 Although the biosynthetic pathway of pyra-     yield a pyrrolinone product or undergo a Dieckmann cyclization
nonigrin E was well  established based on gene knockout    (DKC) to afford a tetramic acid product.9 Subsequent oxidative
studies,6,7 the biosynthesis of pyranonigrin A remains unclear.    and other tailoring steps can lead to a mature product. Because
Recent isotope labeling studies showed that the backbone of     of the large number of structural diversity that is achievable
pyranonigrin A is derived from four units of acetate and one     through the PKS and NRPS modules, fungal PKS-NRPS can
unit of glycine,8 suggesting a polyketide synthase (PKS) and    make  diverse compounds, including  cytochalasins,  decalins,
                                                                  long-chain N-acyl amides, pyridones, and so forth.9,10 Genome
                                                              sequencing  efforts  have  identiﬁed  that  ﬁlamentous  fungi
                                                             encodes a signiﬁcant number of PKS-NRPS containing gene
  Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this      clusters, many of which have unknown function or are not tran-
article.
  Man-Cheng Tang and Yi Zou contributed equally.                               scriptionally  active  under  standard  cultivation  conditions.11
                                                               Consequently, there is of signiﬁcant interest to mine these clus-
  Correspondence  concerning  this  article  should be  addressed  to Y. Tang  at      ters for the production of encoded natural products, using either
yitang@ucla.edu.
                                                                    genetic methods in the natural host or heterologous expression
© 2018 American Institute of Chemical Engineers                         techniques in model hosts.12,13 Here, we demonstrate a cryptic


4182                                    December 2018 Vol. 64, No. 12                        AIChE Journal


[PDF physical page 2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15475905,                                               Results and Discussion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2018,
                                                                 Recently, we sequenced the genome of P. thymicola IBT 5891              12,
                                                         and characterized the biosynthetic gene cluster of penigequino-
                                                                      lones.14 Bioinformatic analysis of the genome revealed that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Downloaded
                                                                     there are a total of 99 secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        from
                                                                        clusters  predicted  by  antiSMASH,  including  23  PKSs,
                                                      17 NRPSs, 6 PKS-NRPSs, and 13 terpenes, which far exceeds
                                                                    the number of reported natural products isolated from  this
                                                                           strain to date. In an effort to map the products of these second-
                                                                 ary metabolite clusters, we focused on the PKS-NRPS clusters
                                                                       in particular due to structural and functional diversity of the
                                                                   products. One such gene cluster, named pyr cluster, was found
Figure 1. Structures of the natural products containing    on scaffold 581 (Figure 2A) and contains an interesting combi-
        a pyrano[2,3-c]pyrrole core. Previously, the     nation of biosynthesis genes. A putative boundary was assigned
          biosynthetic gene clusters of pyranonigrin E    based on  the  likelihood  of  biosynthetic enzymes encoded.
        and curvupallide C were characterized from    Within the boundary are genes encoding a PKS-NRPS (pyrA),                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          https://aiche.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/aic.16324          A.   niger   and   Curvularia   pallescens,      its  partner α/β  hydrolase (pyrD)  that may be involved  in
           respectively.6,7,9                                          cyclization,7  multiple  redox enzymes  such  as  cytochrome         by                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ocean                                                      P450 (pyrB), two ﬂavin-dependent enzymes (pyrC and orf2),
                                                                 glucose-methanol-choline (GMC) oxidoreductase (orf3), and an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            University                                                               inosine-50-monophosphate  dehydrogenase  (IMPDH)   (orf1).         Of
                                                                           Interestingly, the P. thymicola genome encodes two copies of                            China,PKS-NRPS pathway in the plant endophyte Penicillium thymi-   IMPDHs (a housekeeping copy and orf1). This is similar to the
cola can produce pyranonigrin A when reconstituted in a heter-    genomes of mycophenolic acid (MPA)-producing strains.15-17                       Wiley
ologous host. This allowed us to perform media optimization   MPA is a known inhibitor of IMPDH, and previous studies                            Online
with the native host to activate the cluster.                           established that the IMPDH-encoding gene found in the MPA                                Library
                                                                                                                                                            on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [03/04/2024].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Conditions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                                                                                                                            on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rules
                                                                                                                                                            of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        use;
                                                                                                                                                            OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                articles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                governed
Figure 2. The pyr cluster is responsible for the biosynthesis of pyranonigrin A.                                                          by
            (A) The pyr cluster identiﬁed from P. thymicola IBT 5891. orf1 encodes IMPDH, pyrA encodes PKS-NRPS, pyrB encodes P450, pyrC              the
           encodes ﬂavin-dependent monooxygenase, pyrD encodes hydrolase, orf2 encodes ﬂavin-binding oxidoreductase, and orf3 encodes
       GMC oxidoreductase. (B) Characterization of pyrA in A. nidulans A1145. Shown are chromatograms of extracts from: (i) A. nidulans                                              applicable
            expressing pyrA and (ii) A. nidulans containing the control vector. (C) Reconstitution of pyr cluster in A. nidulans A1145. Shown are
          chromatograms of extracts from: (i) A. nidulans expressing the putative pyr cluster and (ii) A. nidulans containing control vectors.                                                      Creative
AIChE Journal      December 2018 Vol. 64, No. 12       Published on behalf of the AIChE     DOI 10.1002/aic      4183                                Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  License


[PDF physical page 3]
pathway confers resistance of MPA.15-17 This observation sug-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15475905,
gests   that  the  compound  produced  by  pyr  cluster  in                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2018,
P. thymicola may have similar IMPDH-inhibiting bioactivities.                                                                                                                                  12,
  Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST)18  search
results indicated that PyrA exhibits moderate sequence similar-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Downloaded
ity to PynA (50% identity/67% similarity) and An18g00520                                                                                                                                                                           from
(61%  identity/75%  similarity),  both  of  which  are  from
A. niger A1179. All three enzymes contain the same domain
organizations. In the PKS modules are ketosynthase, acyltrans-
ferase, dehydratase, enoylreductase, ketoreductase, and acyl
carrier protein domains. In the NRPS domains are the canoni-
cal condensation (C), adenylation (A), and thiolation (T). The
last domain in the PKS-NRPS is a reductase/DKC (R/DKC)
domain. Previously, PynA was shown to be responsible for
the biosynthesis of pyranonigrin  J, which  is a precursor to
pyranonigrin E.7 An18g00520 was shown to be responsible    Figure 3. Production    of    pyranonigrin   A   from
for the production of tetramic acid compound 1 (structure               P. thymicola.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          https://aiche.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/aic.16324
shown in Figure 2), which is proposed to be a precursor to                 (A) P. thymicola cultured in the medium supplemented         by
pyranonigrin S.19 Based on this information, we proposed that                 with starch; (B) the ΔpyrA mutant strain cultured in the                       Ocean
PyrA may similarly produce a tetramic acid compound that is             medium supplemented with starch; (C) P. thymicola cul-
structurally similar to the compounds produced by PynA and                 tured in the medium without starch.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            University
An18g00520. To conﬁrm the function of PyrA, we introduced                                                                                     Of
pyrA into the heterologous host A. nidulans A1145 using an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                China,
episomal vector with that expresses pyrA under the control of    numerous other fungal culture media, but production of pyra-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      WileygpdA promoter. Following 4 days of growth, the metabolites     nonigrin A was  still not detected (data not shown). Fortu-
were extracted and analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass     itously,  the  production  (3 mg/L)  of  pyranonigrin A was                            Online
spectrometry (LC-MS). Compared with the host containing a     detected when we added starch into the culture medium that                                Library
control  vector, A. nidulans expressing PyrA showed  clear   we used for production of alantrypinone, an unrelated alkaloid         on
accumulation of a new metabolite with the molecular weight     synthesized by this strain (Figure 3). To establish the link
(MW) of 193 (Figure 2B). Structural analysis (Supporting    between the production of pyranonigrin A and the pyr clusterInformation Table S3 and Figures S5–S9) revealed that this     in P. thymicola, the PKS-NRPS gene pyrA was deleted to                                                            [03/04/2024].
compound  is a  tetramic  acid  cyclized from a  tetraketide-     yield  the  mutant   strain  ΔpyrA  by  gene  replacement              Seethe
glycine adduct (Figure 2B) and is identical to the product of     (Supporting Information Figure S1). LC-MS analysis showed                       Terms
An18g00520. This result indicated that the unknown natural     that deletion of pyrA completely abolished the production of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and
product encoded by pyr cluster shares the same biosynthetic     pyranonigrin A (Figure 3). Real-time polymerase chain reaction
precursor with pyranonigrin S.                                      analysis of the wild-type strain grown in the presence of starch                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Conditions
  As the function of PyrA was characterized, we then turn to     indicated that only orf1 and pyrA–D were transcribed under
identify the natural product encoded by the entire pyr gene     conditions for pyranonigrin A production (Supporting Informa-
cluster. All the genes, orf1–3 and pyrA–D, from the pyr cluster     tion Figure S2), suggesting that orf2 and orf3 are not involved
were introduced into the A. nidulans host on three vectors.     in the biosynthesis of pyranonigrin A. However, these results
Analysis of the extract showed that a new metabolite with the    cannot rule out the possibility that Orf2 and Orf3 may act as tai-
MW of 223 was accumulated (Figure 2C), though the yield is     loring enzymes to modify pyranonigrin A to more complex
relatively low (0.1 mg/L). Structural elucidation was carried     structures under other conditions. To test this hypothesis, we
out after sufﬁcient amount of this compound was puriﬁed.     expressed Orf2 and Orf3 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae BJ5464
Based on the NMR data (Supporting Information Table S4    and tested their function through biotransformation using pyra-
and Figures S10 and S11), the carbon skeleton of this com-     nonigrin A as the substrate. LC-MS analysis results indicated                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
pound is identical to the known natural product, pyranonigrin     that neither Orf2 nor Orf3 could catalyze the conversion of pyra-         on
A. The  optical  rotation of  this compound  is [α]D26 + 20     nonigrin A   to  other  products  (Supporting  Information                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Wiley
(c =  10.0 mg/dL, MeOH), which  is  consistent with  the     Figure S3). These results strongly suggest that pyranonigrin A is
reported value of pyranonigrin A ([α]D 25 + 38, c = 1.0 mg/dL,     the end product of the pyr cluster and narrowed down the gene                            Online
MeOH).3 Thus, we assigned this new metabolite to be pyrano-     cluster to ﬁve genes, orf1 (encoding IMPDH) and pyrA–D.                                                       Library
nigrin A. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time a     IMPDH, encoded by orf1, is a key enzyme involved in              for
biosynthetic gene cluster was identiﬁed for the biosynthesis of     the de novo biosynthesis of guanine nucleotides, which cata-                       rules
pyranonigrin A. On the basis of the biosynthetic pathway of     lyzes  the  oxidation  of  inosine monophosphate (IMP)  to         of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        use;
pyranonigrin  E,6,7 we proposed  that  three  or  four  genes,    xanthosine monophosphate (XMP).21 IMPDH is widely con-         OA
instead of all the introduced genes, are sufﬁcient for the pro-     sidered to be an attractive target for the discovery of drugs                                     articlesduction of pyranonigrin A. However, the low yield in the     in antiviral, antibacterial, and anticancer therapeutic areas.22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          are
A. nidulans host impaired further functional analysis.             Discovery of novel, small-molecule IMPDH inhibitors may
  To clarify the minimal number of genes required for biosyn-     lead to the development of new drugs in these clinical areas                                     governed
thesis of pyranonigrin A, we sought to activate the production    with enhanced performance. Genome sequenced ﬁlamentous         by
of pyranonigrin A in the original host, P. thymicola. When we     fungi typically contain only a single IMPDH-encoding gene              the
cultured the strain in the medium reported for high production     (the housekeeping copy). However, the genomes of MPA-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            applicableof fumiquinazoline F and alantrypinone,20 we could not detect    producing strains and some fungal species belonging to Pen-
the production of pyranonigrin A (Figure 3). We then screened     icillium  subgenus  Penicillium  contain  two  copies  of                                     Creative
4184     DOI 10.1002/aic       Published on behalf of the AIChE      December 2018 Vol. 64, No. 12     AIChE Journal                                Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  License


[PDF physical page 4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15475905,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2018,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          https://aiche.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/aic.16324
                                                                                                                                                            by
Figure 4. The proposed biosynthetic pathway of pyranonigrin A.                                                                                                                                                                                             Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            University
                                                                                                                                                            Of
IMPDH-encoding genes.16 In the genome of P. thymicola,    remaining enzyme, P450 PyrB, may catalyze the  last two                            China,
we found two copies of IMPDH-encoding genes including    modiﬁcation  steps, dehydrogenation and  hydroxylation,  to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Wileyorf1,  which  is  encoded  alongside  pyrA. A  reasonable    complete the biosynthesis of pyranonigrin A.
hypothesis is that the natural product encoded by pyr gene                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Online
cluster could have potent bioactivity targeting IMPDH as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Libraryexempliﬁed by the MPA biosynthetic gene cluster. To test   Conclusion                                                               on
this hypothesis, we expressed orf1 in S. cerevisiae and the
                                                                  In summary, we have identiﬁed the biosynthetic gene cluster
housekeeping copy of the IMPDH gene from P. thymicola                                                                  of pyranonigrin A from the genome of P. thymicola IBT 5891,                                                            [03/04/2024].(named as IMPDH-g) in Escherichia coli. Then we puriﬁed
                                                        which was not known to be a producer of pyranonigrin family              See
the enzymes and tested their activities. The results from the                                                                                                                                the                                                        compounds. A BLAST  search  in  the  sequenced  fungal
in vitro assays demonstrated that both enzymes can catalyze                                                      genomes using the pyr gene cluster as a query indicated that                       Terms
the  conversion  of IMP  to XMP  (Supporting  Information
                                                       homologous clusters are present in numerous different fungal              and
Figure S4). However, the presence of pyranonigrin A, even at a
                                                                      species, suggesting the opportunity to discover new natural
high concentration (30 μM, 10 times of the enzyme concentra-                                                                products belonging to the pyranonigrin family.                                                                                                                                         Conditions
tion used)  in  the  reaction  mixtures, had no  effect on  the
enzymatic activities with Orf1 and IMDPH-g (Supporting Infor-
mation Figure S4). Thus, we validated that pyranonigrin A has   Acknowledgments
no IMPDH inhibition bioactivity and orf1 is not a self-resistant                                                                            This  work   is  funded  by   the  NIH  (1DP1GM106413  and
gene. The emergence of two copies of IMPDH-encoding genes    1R35GM118056). Chemical characterization studies were supported by
in P. thymicola may be due to gene duplication, as reported in     shared instrumentation grants from the National Science Foundation (NSF)
other MPA nonproducing fungal species.16                         (CHE-1048804) and the National Center for Research Resources, National
  On the basis of the ﬁndings from both in vivo and in vitro      Institutes of Health (NIH NCRR) (S10RR025631).
studies, we concluded that the pyr cluster encoded the biosyn-
thesis of pyranonigrin A and only four genes, pyrA–D, are    Literature Cited                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
required. A comparison with the biosynthetic pathways of                                                                                     on                                                                                        1. Miyake Y, Mochizuki M, Ito C, Itoigawa M, Osawa T. Antioxidativeother known pyranonigrin family members, such as pyranoni-                                                                                pyranonigrins in rice mold starters and their suppressive effect on the                       Wileygrin E6,7 and curvupallides,19 can lead to a similar proposal
                                                                                expression of blood adhesion molecules. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem.                            Onlinefor the biosynthesis of pyranonigrin A (Figure 4). The PKS-         2008;72:1580-1585.
NRPS (PyrA) incorporates one unit of acetyl-CoA, three units        2. Hiort J, Maksimenka K, Reichert M, et al. New natural products from the                                Library
of malonyl-CoA, and one unit of glycine to assemble the com-         sponge-derived fungus Aspergillus niger. J Nat Prod. 2004;67:1532-1543.               for
bined backbone. Considering the similarities between the bio-        3. Schlingmann G, Taniguchi T, He H, et al. Reassessing the structure of                       rules
                                                                                                                                                            ofsynthesis of pyranonigrin A and curvupallides, the R/DKC         pyranonigrin. J Nat Prod. 2007;70:1180-1187.
                                                                                        4. Kishimoto S, Tsunematsu Y, Sato M, Watanabe K. Elucidation of bio-                  use;
domain of PyrA is likely to catalyze the product release via                                                                                        synthetic pathways of natural products. Chem Rec. 2017;17:1095-1108.          OA
DKC  to  afford  tetramic  acid  1.  Nevertheless, we cannot        5. Miyake Y, Ito C, Itoigawa M, Osawa T. Isolation of the antioxidant                                     articlesexclude the alternative that the hydrolase PyrD functions simi-         pyranonigrin-A from rice mold starters used in the manufacturing process
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          are
larly to PynI, an α/β hydrolase from the biosynthetic pathway          of fermented foods. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2007;71:2515-2521.
of pyranonigrin E, which was proposed to be involved in tetra-        6. Awakawa T, Yang XL, Wakimoto T, Abe I. Pyranonigrin E: a PKS-                                     governed
mic acid formation.7 An epoxidation-mediated cyclization of      NRPS hybrid metabolite from Aspergillus niger identiﬁed by genome         by
                                                                              mining. Chembiochem. 2013;14:2095-2099.                                                    the
1 to form the pyrano[2,3-c]pyrrole core could then be per-
                                                                                        7. Yamamoto T, Tsunematsu Y, Noguchi H, Hotta K, Watanabe K. Elu-
formed by the ﬂavin-dependent monooxygenase PyrC, as a          cidation of pyranonigrin biosynthetic pathway reveals a mode of Tetra-                                              applicable
similar reaction was proposed to be catalyzed by  its homo-        mic acid, fused γ-pyrone, and exo-methylene formation. Org  Lett.
logue, PynG,  in  the  pyranonigrin E pathway.7 The  only         2015;17:4992-4995.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Creative
AIChE Journal      December 2018 Vol. 64, No. 12       Published on behalf of the AIChE     DOI 10.1002/aic      4185                                Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  License


[PDF physical page 5]
 8. Riko R, Nakamura H, Shindo K. Studies on pyranonigrins-isolation of      16. Hansen BG, Genee HJ, Kaas CS, et al. A new class of IMP dehydro-                                          15475905,
    pyranonigrin E and biosynthetic studies on pyranonigrin A. J Antibiot         genase with a role in self-resistance of mycophenolic acid producing                       2018,
    (Tokyo). 2014;67:179-181.                                                       fungi. BMC Microbiol. 2011;11:202.                                                              12,
 9. Boettger D, Hertweck C. Molecular diversity sculpted by fungal PKS-      17. Del-Cid A, Gil-Durán C, Vaca  I, et al. Identiﬁcation and functional
   NRPS hybrids. Chembiochem. 2013;14:28-42.                                   analysis of the mycophenolic acid gene cluster of Penicillium roque-10. Hai Y, Tang Y. Biosynthesis of long-chain N-acyl amide by a trun-            forti. PLoS One. 2016;11:e0147047.                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Downloaded
    cated  polyketide  synthase-nonribosomal  peptide  Synthetase  hybrid      18. Johnson M, Zaretskaya  I, Raytselis Y, Merezhuk Y, McGinnis S,                   from
   Megasynthase in fungi. J Am Chem Soc. 2018;140:1271-1274.             Madden TL. NCBI BLAST: a better web interface. Nucleic Acids Res.
11. Li YF, Tsai KJS, Harvey CJB, et al. Comprehensive curation and anal-        2008;36:W5-W9.
    ysis of fungal biosynthetic gene clusters of published natural products.      19. Yokoyama  M,  Hirayama  Y,  Yamamoto   T,  Kishimoto   S,
   Fungal Genet Biol. 2016;89:18-28.                                      Tsunematsu Y, Watanabe K. Integration of chemical, genetic, and bio-
12. He Y, Wang B, Chen W, Cox RJ, He J, Chen F. Recent advances in         informatic approaches delineates fungal polyketide-peptide hybrid bio-
    reconstructing microbial secondary metabolites biosynthesis in Asper-          synthesis. Org Lett. 2017;19:2002-2005.
    gillus spp. Biotechnol Adv. 2018;36:739-783.                              20. Larsen TO, Frydenvang K, Frisvad JC, Christophersen C. UV-guided
13. Wiemann P, Keller NP. Strategies for mining fungal natural products.          isolation of alantrypinone, a novel Penicillium alkaloid. J Nat Prod.
    J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2014;41:301-313.                               1998;61:1154-1157.
14. Zou Y, Zhan Z, Li D, et al. Tandem prenyltransferases catalyze iso-      21. Hedstrom L. IMP dehydrogenase: structure, mechanism, and inhibi-
    prenoid elongation and complexity generation in biosynthesis of quin-           tion. Chem Rev. 2009;109:2903-2928.
    olone alkaloids. J Am Chem Soc. 2015;137:4980-4983.                     22. Shu Q, Nair V. Inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) as a15. Regueira TB, Kildegaard KR, Hansen BG, Mortensen UH, Hertweck C,          target in drug discovery. Med Res Rev. 2008;28:219-232.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  https://aiche.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/aic.16324
    Nielsen  J.  Molecular  basis  for  mycophenolic  acid  biosynthesis  in                                                                                     by
    Penicillium brevicompactum. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2011;77:3035-3043.      Manuscript received May 3, 2018, and revision received May 29, 2018.                                                   Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            University
                                                                                                                                                            Of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    China,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Library
                                                                                                                                                            on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [03/04/2024].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Conditions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                                                                                                                            on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rules
                                                                                                                                                            of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        use;
                                                                                                                                                            OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                articles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                governed
                                                                                                                                                            by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            applicable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Creative
4186     DOI 10.1002/aic       Published on behalf of the AIChE      December 2018 Vol. 64, No. 12     AIChE Journal                                Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  License