
[PDF physical page 1]
Understanding Programming of Fungal Iterative Polyketide
Synthases: The Biochemical Basis for Regioselectivity by the
Methyltransferase Domain in the Lovastatin Megasynthase
Ralph A. Cacho,†,§ Justin Thuss,‡,§ Wei Xu,† Randy Sanichar,‡ Zhizeng Gao,‡ Allison Nguyen,†
John C. Vederas,*,‡ and Yi Tang*,†
†Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los
Angeles, California 90095, United States
‡Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2G2, Canada
*
S Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Highly reducing polyketide synthases (HR-
PKSs) from fungi synthesize complex natural products
using a single set of domains in a highly programmed,
iterative fashion. The most enigmatic feature of HR-PKSs
is how tailoring domains function selectively during
diﬀerent iterations of chain elongation to aﬀord structural
diversity. Using the lovastatin nonaketide synthase LovB as
a model system and a variety of acyl substrates, we
characterized the substrate speciﬁcity of the LovB
methyltransferase (MT) domain. We showed that, while
the MT domain displays methylation activity toward
diﬀerent β-ketoacyl groups, it is exceptionally selective
toward its naturally programmed β-keto-dienyltetraketide
substrate with respect to both chain length and
functionalization. Accompanying characterization of the
ketoreductase (KR) domain displays broader substrate
speciﬁcity toward diﬀerent β-ketoacyl groups. Our studies
indicate that selective modiﬁcations by tailoring domains,
such as the MTs, are achieved by higher kinetic eﬃciency
on a particular substrate relative to the rate of trans-
formation by other competing domains.
F
ungal highly reducing polyketide synthases (HR-PKSs) are
multidomain megasynthases that are involved in the
biosynthesis of diverse polyketide natural products, highlighted
by the cholesterol lowering agent lovastatin and the protein
transport inhibitor brefeldin A.1,2 HR-PKSs contain a linearly
juxtaposed set of domains that iteratively build the polyketide
chain through decarboxylative condensation and β-ketoacyl
functionalization. In each HR-PKS, a single set of domains is
repeatedly and permutatively used through chain elongation
cycles to yield the ﬁnal product. These programmed tailoring
steps are precisely executed by the HR-PKSs to aﬀord richly
functionalized polyketide chains that set up post-PKS
modiﬁcations and aﬀord diverse biological activities. For
example, during the synthesis of dihydromonacolin L (DML),
the precursor to lovastatin, the lovastatin nonaketide synthase
LovB performs eight cycles of chain extension and tailoring
(Figure 1).3,4 The orchestration of diﬀerent tailoring activities
sets up key structural features in DML, including the decalin core
that is proposed to derive from a triene hexaketide intermediate
through Diels−Alder cyclization;5 and the terminal β-hydroxy
acid moiety that is important for inhibition of HMG-CoA
reductase.6 Compared to bacterial counterparts that function in a
well-understood assembly line-like fashion,7 these complex
biochemical features of fungal HR-PKSs remain unresolved.
Knowledge of how tailoring domains function will enable both
rational manipulation of the megasynthases,8,9 and product
prediction from the vast number of HR-PKSs uncovered through
genome sequencing eﬀorts.
The α-methylation of β-ketoacyl-S-ACP intermediate is a
commonly observed modiﬁcation during selected cycles of HR-
PKSs.1,10−12 The reaction is catalyzed by an in-line methyl-
Received:
November 11, 2015
Published: December 2, 2015
Figure 1. Programed steps of LovB in the synthesis of dihydromona-
colin L (DML). (A) The catalytic steps by LovB; LovB is a HR-PKS and
LovC is the dissociated enoylreductase. (B) The tetraketide
modiﬁcation steps shown in detail highlighting the timing of the MT
domain. Domain abbreviations: ketosynthase (KS), malonyl-CoA:ACP
acyltransferase (MAT), α-methyltransferase (MT), β-ketoreductase
(KR), dehydratase (DH), α−β enoylreductase (ER), acyl carrier protein
(ACP, ) and NRPS-like condensation (CON).
Communication
pubs.acs.org/JACS
© 2015 American Chemical Society
15688
DOI: 10.1021/jacs.5b11814
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 15688−15691
Downloaded via QINGDAO INST BIOMASS ENERGY & TECH on September 10, 2019 at 12:07:55 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.



[PDF physical page 2]
transferase (MT) domain using S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) as
a cofactor immediately following ketosynthase (KS)-catalyzed
chain elongation and occurs prior to β-reductive modiﬁcations
performed by ketoreductase (KR), dehydratase (DH), and
enoylreductase (ER) domains. During the eight chain elongation
and tailoring iterations catalyzed by LovB, the MT domain is
apparently only active during the conversion of tetraketide 2-
ACP to the on-pathway intermediate 6-ACP, with the α-methyl
3-ACP being the product of the MT. Curiously, no methylation
modiﬁcation occurs on other β-ketoacyl-S-ACP substrates in the
other catalytic cycles of LovB (Figure 1). However, α-
methylation of the tetraketide is essential for the remaining
steps of the pathway shown in Figure 1A, as the dissociated ER
LovC is unable to recognize the α-desmethyl version of 5-ACP
and the entire catalytic cascade subsequently derails.3,13 The
importance of methylation modiﬁcation on the ﬁdelity of other
iterative HR-PKSs has also been observed, in which bypassing
programmed MT function results in production of shunt
products.14 Therefore, the HR-PKSs have clearly evolved to
optimize the timing and regioselectivities of the MT domains.
We hypothesize that two possible mechanisms of substrate
processing can account for LovB MT selectivity. First, the HR-
PKS may adopt an assembly line-like model in which each
substrate is passed through the way stations sequentially in the
order of MT →KR →DH →ER. In the case of LovB, the MT
domain only recognizes 2-ACP while excluding all of the other
substrates completely. Alternatively in a kinetically controlled
mechanism, we propose that once formed and released from the
KS, the β-ketoacyl-S-ACP substrate can sample all potential
modifying domains, including the MT, KR, and KS. The
outcome of the tailoring steps is determined by the relative
activities of each domain toward the substrate. The MT domain
is primarily in competition with the KR domain for the substrate:
if a substrate is readily reduced by the KR domain ﬁrst, then no
methyl transfer will be possible. Conversely, a higher MT activity
relative to the KR will lead to methylation prior to reduction. To
understand the basis for the MT selectivity, individual rates of the
MT and KR domain toward the diﬀerent β-ketoacyl-S-ACP
substrates need to be measured and compared.
We synthesized a panel of acyl-S-N-acetylcysteamine (SNAC)
compounds as substrates for the MT and KR assays. The
majority of the β-ketoacyl-SNAC compounds (Figure 2) were
prepared using titanium-catalyzed aldol chemistry to synthesize
β-hydroxy-carbonyl species that were further functionalized and
oxidized to provide the desired β-carbonyl SNAC esters
(Supporting Information).15,16 Access to shorter, saturated
SNAC esters was achieved using acylated Meldrum’s acid.17,18
The acyl portions of the substrates vary in chain length from
diketide (C4) to pentaketide (C10) as well as functionalization.
Compounds 7, 8, and 2 represent the natural β-ketoacyl
intermediates in the LovB catalytic cycle, while compounds 9−
11 are model, simpliﬁed substrates. We also synthesized the
corresponding α-methyl-β-ketoacyl products 12−17 as stand-
ards for quantifying the methylation product amount (Support-
ing Information). The synthetic strategy outlined above was
expanded to include the α-methylated SNAC esters. Rapid
keto−enol interconversion excluded the need for stereoselective
methylation (Supporting Information). Furthermore, a number
of β-hydroxylacyl-SNAC compounds were synthesized and used
as standards for the ketoreduction assay (Supporting Informa-
tion). These standards were conveniently obtained as
intermediates in the synthesis of compounds 2 and 7−17. Intact
LovB was expressed and puriﬁed from Saccharomyces cerevisiae
strain BJ5464-NpgA as previously described and used in the
assays at ﬁnal concentrations between 0.01 and 1 μM.4 To allow
for quantiﬁcation and prevent further tailoring reactions of the
KR products in the assay, we constructed a point mutation
H985A in the DH domain of LovB to yield LovB-DHo (Figure
S1).19 LC−MS based product quantiﬁcation was employed for
both the methylation (containing SAM) and ketoreduction
(containing NADPH) assays, using standard curves constructed
from the mass signals of synthesized standards.
We ﬁrst assayed the activity of the MT domain toward the
natural tetraketide 2. Overnight incubation of 2 mM of 2 in the
presence of SAM led to complete consumption of the substrate
and the appearance of 14. Michaelis−Menten saturation kinetics
assay gave a robust kcat of 196 min−1 and KM of 170 μM (Figures 2
and S8). The KM value was surprisingly low considering acyl-
SNAC mimic of the ACP-bound substrates can suﬀer from
signiﬁcant penalties in KM due to loss of protein−protein
interactions and are typically in the millimolar range.11,20,21
Hence the kinetic parameters of 2 suggest that the natural
tetraketide can bind exceptionally well to the active site of the
MT domain of LovB. Having demonstrated the MT domain
activity can be conﬁrmed with 2, we then tested MT catalysis
toward β-ketoacyl-SNAC substrates of varying chain lengths. No
signiﬁcant (<1%) methylation can be observed with either the
natural diketide 7 or the model pentaketide substrate 11. The
failure to methylate 7 is in contrast to that of the chaetoviridin
HR-PKS MT domain, which naturally methylates β-ketobutyryl-
ACP intermediate as well as 7 in the same assay.22 The MT
domain showed noticeable activity toward converting triketide 8
to 13, albeit signiﬁcantly attenuated compared to that toward 2.
Kinetic analysis showed the MT displays a 2500-fold drop in
catalytic eﬃciency toward 8 compared to 2, which resulted from
∼50-fold attenuation in both the kcat and KM values (Figure S10).
Figure 2. Full kinetic analysis of LovB MT domain toward diﬀerent β-
ketoacyl-SNAC substrates. Compound 2 is the natural tetraketide
substrate based on DML structure. Compound 8 is the on-pathway
triketide substrate of LovB. No reaction toward diketide 7 or
pentaketide 11 was observed.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
Communication
DOI: 10.1021/jacs.5b11814
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 15688−15691
15689



[PDF physical page 3]
We next assayed the substrate preference of LovB MT toward
more simpliﬁed substrates such as the saturated 10 and 9. While
conversion of 10 to 16 was conﬁrmed by using a standard of 16, a
surprising penalty to the catalytic eﬃciency (0.3% of 2) was
observed including a 10-fold decrease in kcat and nearly 40-fold
increase in KM (Figure S9). A 7.5-fold drop in catalytic eﬃciency
compared to 8 was also observed when the γ−δ double bond was
saturated in the triketide 9 (Figure S11). Collectively, our
methylation assays with LovB MT domain point to exceptional
substrate speciﬁcity toward the natural 3-oxo-oct-4,6-dienyl acyl
group. Changes to chain length and functionalization both
resulted in signiﬁcant decreases in the methylation rate. The
requirement of correct substrate functionalization further
suggests that the MT domain itself can act as a gatekeeping
domain in the programming of LovB. In the event that other
tailoring domains malfunction in the previous cycles and present
an alternative substrate, the MT domain activities will be
signiﬁcantly attenuated. This would likely result in enzyme
stalling or ketoreduction (bypassing the MT function) of the
substrate, which will eventually result in oﬀ-loading of the
polyketide product as previously demonstrated.4
Having established the substrate scope and kinetic properties
of the MT domain, we next assayed the properties of the KR
domain toward the tri- and tetraketide substrates. Since the KR is
functional in every iteration of the HR-PKS, we expect the
substrate speciﬁcities toward diﬀerent β-ketoacyl thioesters to be
more relaxed. We used the MS-based quantiﬁcation of substrate
conversion, similar to that used in the MT assay. However,
signiﬁcant diﬃculties were encountered when working with the
conjugated β-ketoacyl substrates such as 2 and 8, due to (i)
broadening of the peak as a result of enolization of the β-keto
group; (ii) retention time overlap; (iii) MS signal overlap due to
isotopic abundance of the substrate and the actual mass of the
product; and (iv) spontaneous dehydration of the β-hydroxyl
product (see Figure 3B). Therefore, we used model substrates 9,
15, 10 and 16 to perform the kinetics assays. The α-methyl
compounds 15 and 16 were chosen to examine the eﬀect of
methylation of substrate speciﬁcity. Following overnight
incubation in the presence of NADPH and conﬁrmation of
product formation using synthesized standards, we performed
time-course analysis using single substrate concentration of 1
mM and enzyme concentration of 5 μM to obtain the apparent
turnover rates as shown in Table 1. We also attempted to obtain
saturation kinetics of the KR domain toward the substrates;
however, we were not able to reach saturation at solubility limits
of the substrate with the exception of 9, which gave kcat of 34.3
min−1 and KM of 2 mM (kcat/KM = 18.5 min−1 mM−1) (Figure
S12). Fitting the linear region of the kinetics data of 10 yielded a
kcat/KM value of 5.4 min−1 mM−1 (Figure S13). Although we
were not able to obtain full kinetic data on all of the substrates of
interest, one can still conclude based on Table 1 that the KR
domain does not diﬀerentiate between diﬀerent substrates
signiﬁcantly (within an order of magnitude). The activity of KR is
also not signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the presence of the α-methyl
group, suggesting that KR does not exert any signiﬁcant kinetic
penalty towards a noncognate substrate. This further suggests the
importance of substrate speciﬁcity at the MT step to determine
the ﬁrst tailoring reaction of the β-ketoacyl substrate.
While the acyl-SNAC substrates enabled a relative measure of
the domain speciﬁcity toward diﬀerent acyl groups, these remain
a much-simpliﬁed model of the actual ACP-bound intermediates
that are in cis with all the tailoring domains. To determine if there
is indeed competitive catalysis between the KR and MT domains
toward the β-ketoacyl substrates, we performed a combined
MT/KR assay in which each substrate (2, 8−10) was added to
LovB DHo mutant in the presence of both SAM and NADPH,
and the amounts of each product was compared. The MT-ﬁrst
products can be both the α-methyl-β-keto (+14 mu) and the α-
methyl-β-hydroxyl (+16 mu) compounds, the latter represent
the products of ketoreduction following methylation. The KR-
ﬁrst products are the β-hydroxyl compounds (+2 mu) of which
the MT domain can no longer methylate.
We ﬁrst analyzed the competitive modiﬁcation of model
substrates 9 and 10 since all the products can be quantiﬁed using
standards. As shown in Figure 3A and Figures S14−15, when 9
was used in the assay in the presence of equimolar amounts of
SAM and NADPH, the amount of KR products are signiﬁcantly
more than the MT products (MT/KR product ratio of 1:4) when
quantiﬁed after 3 h. This is consistent with the individually
determined kinetic parameters of which the KR is more active
toward triketide 9. Increasing the amount of SAM led to higher
amount of the MT products. Conversely, using 10 led to the
reversal of product distribution with MT/KR product ratio of
4:1. This is in spite of the kinetic assays showing comparable kcat/
KM for both domains toward 10. However, the KM of the KR
domain toward 10 is very high as we were not able to reach
saturation in the assay. Hence under assay conditions of 1 mM
10, the binding of the SNAC substrate by the KR is likely
substantially weaker compared to the MT.
The competition assays were then performed using the natural
substrates 2 and 8 and analyzed by selected ion monitoring as
shown in Figures 3B,C. When LovB DHo was added to 8 in the
presence of both SAM and NADPH, we observed a 10:1 ratio of
KR to MT-catalyzed products consistent with the natural
programming rules of LovB. Most of the KR products were
found to contain the m/z 214 ion and split into two major peaks.
The earlier peak at TR ≈4 min is the β-hydroxyl compound
(parent m/z 232 also observed) and has undergone dehydration
during ionization. A standard of the β-hydroxyl compound gave
an identical ionization pattern. The second peak at TR ≈6 min is
the actual dehydrated dienyl-SNAC, which forms readily in
aqueous solution. When the natural tetraketide 2 was used in the
Figure 3. KR and MT competition assays using model and natural tri-
and tetraketide substrates. (A) Quantiﬁcation of product distribution of
model substrates 9 and 10. (B,C) Product distributions of natural
substrates 8 and 2, respectively. Shown are the extract ion chromato-
grams of diﬀerent products as indicated.
Table 1. Apparent Turnover Rate of LovB KR Domaina
substrate
9
15
10
16
turnover (min−1)
16.1 ± 0.5
5.1 ± 0.4
2.1 ± 0.02
2.4 ± 0.1
aSubstrate concentration at 1 mM, enzyme concentration at 5 μM.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
Communication
DOI: 10.1021/jacs.5b11814
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 15688−15691
15690



[PDF physical page 4]
competition assay, only the methylated product 14 was observed.
Selected ion monitoring revealed that no reduced products can
be found in the assay, thereby conﬁrming the much higher
catalytic eﬃciency of the MT domain toward 2 compared to that
of KR. Interestingly, no further β-ketoreduction of 14 can be
detected in the assay. Directly using 14 in a KR-only assay also
did not yield any ketoreduced products. This observation is
unexpected as the acyl portion of 14 is the natural substrate of KR
in the predicted programmed steps of LovB (Figure 1). Although
the exact reason for this result is unresolved, one possible
explanation may be recognition of the acyl portion of 14 (in the
β-keto form) requires interactions with the ACP as observed in
other PKS systems by NMR studies.23
Our assays using both natural and model substrates provide an
explanation for the programmed methylation step observed in
the iterative cycles of LovB. We suggest the MT and KR domains
compete for each of the β-ketoacyl substrates released by the KS
domain, and the relative rates determine the outcome of the
immediate tailoring domain choice. The MT domain of LovB has
been precisely tuned to be highly selective for the natural
tetraketide 2 and to outcompete the KR at this particular step
only. Both chain length and functional variation in the acyl
substrate can lead to substantial penalties in catalytic eﬃciency
for the MT domain. In contrast, the KR domain appears to be less
substrate-dependent in terms of catalytic eﬃciency. As a
reﬂection of the competition between MT and KR, a 30-fold
drop in the catalytic eﬃciency of MT toward 10 (as compared to
2) can lead to ∼20% of the substrate being ketoreduced without
being ﬁrst methylated. As the correct methyl substitution is
essential for recognition in some (but not all) downstream
steps,4 this may pose a signiﬁcant barrier to some precursor-
directed biosyntheses of polyketides using HR-PKSs. Particular
structural variations in precursors can derail the programmed
steps of the domains and lead to production of shunt products
instead. However, it is clear from previous work that late steps
catalyzed by LovB can proceed without methylation to make a
des-methyl dihydromonacolin L.4
Our ﬁndings with the LovB MT domain poses intriguing
questions as to how substrate speciﬁcity is achieved at the
molecular level, how other MT domains in HR-PKSs have
alternative substrate speciﬁcities, and the possible inﬂuence of
the HR-PKS quaternary structure in the intrinsic biosynthetic
programming rules of these megasynthases. For example, in the
fusarielin HR-PKS,24 the MT domain is functional on the di-, tri-,
and pentaketide intermediates, while inactive on the tetraketide.
This is a complete reversal of speciﬁcity compared to LovB, and
structural comparisons between the two MT domains will
provide insights into their diﬀerences.
■ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
S
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the
ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/jacs.5b11814.
Experimental details and synthetic procedures (PDF)
■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
*yitang@ucla.edu
*john.vederas@ualberta.ca
Author Contributions
§These authors contributed equally to this work.
Notes
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
■ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
These investigations were supported by the by NIH
(1R01GM085128 and 1DP1GM106413) to Y.T.; and the
Natural Sciences & Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC) and by the Canada Research Chair in Bioorganic &
Medicinal Chemistry to J.C.V.
■REFERENCES
(1) Chooi, Y. H.; Tang, Y. J. Org. Chem. 2012, 77, 9933.
(2) Cox, R. J. Org. Biomol. Chem. 2007, 5, 2010.
(3) Kennedy, J.; Auclair, K.; Kendrew, S. G.; Park, C.; Vederas, J. C.;
Richard Hutchinson, C. Science 1999, 284, 1368.
(4) Ma, S. M.; Li, J. W.-H.; Choi, J. W.; Zhou, H.; Lee, K. K. M.;
Moorthie, V. A.; Xie, X.; Kealey, J. T.; Da Silva, N. A.; Vederas, J. C.;
Tang, Y. Science 2009, 326, 589.
(5) Auclair, K.; Sutherland, A.; Kennedy, J.; Witter, D. J.; Van den
Heever, J. P.; Hutchinson, C. R.; Vederas, J. C. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2000,
122, 11519.
(6) Istvan, E. S.; Deisenhofer, J. Science 2001, 292, 1160.
(7) Khosla, C.; Herschlag, D.; Cane, D. E.; Walsh, C. T. Biochemistry
2014, 53, 2875.
(8) Kakule, T. B.; Lin, Z.; Schmidt, E. W. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136,
17882.
(9) Fisch, K. M.; Bakeer, W.; Yakasai, A. A.; Song, Z.; Pedrick, J.; Wasil,
Z.; Bailey, A. M.; Lazarus, C. M.; Simpson, T. J.; Cox, R. J. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 2011, 133, 16635.
(10) Winter, J. M.; Sato, M.; Sugimoto, S.; Chiou, G.; Garg, N. K.;
Tang, Y.; Watanabe, K. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 17900.
(11) Xie, X.; Meehan, M. J.; Xu, W.; Dorrestein, P. C.; Tang, Y. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 8388.
(12) Eley, K. L.; Halo, L. M.; Song, Z.; Powles, H.; Cox, R. J.; Bailey, A.
M.; Lazarus, C. M.; Simpson, T. J. ChemBioChem 2007, 8, 289.
(13) Ames, B. D.; Nguyen, C.; Bruegger, J.; Smith, P.; Xu, W.; Ma, S.;
Wong, E.; Wong, S.; Xie, X.; Li, J. W.-H.; Vederas, J. C.; Tang, Y.; Tsai,
S.-C. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2012, 109, 11144.
(14) Zou, Y.; Xu, W.; Tsunematsu, Y.; Tang, M.; Watanabe, K.; Tang,
Y. Org. Lett. 2014, 16, 6390.
(15) Mikami, K.; Matsukawa, S. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1993, 115, 7039.
(16) Ge, H.-M.; Huang, T.; Rudolf, J. D.; Lohman, J. R.; Huang, S.-X.;
Guo, X.; Shen, B. Org. Lett. 2014, 16, 3958.
(17) Oikawa, Y.; Sugano, K.; Yonemitsu, O. J. Org. Chem. 1978, 43,
2087.
(18) Piasecki, S. K.; Taylor, C. A.; Detelich, J. F.; Liu, J.; Zheng, J.;
Komsoukaniants, A.; Siegel, D. R.; Keatinge-Clay, A. T. Chem. Biol.
2011, 18, 1331.
(19) Keatinge-Clay, A. J. Mol. Biol. 2008, 384, 941.
(20) Wu, N.; Tsuji, S. Y.; Cane, D. E.; Khosla, C. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2001, 123, 6465.
(21) Yin, Y.; Lu, H.; Khosla, C.; Cane, D. E. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2003,
125, 5671.
(22) Winter, J. M.; Chiou, G.; Bothwell, I. R.; Xu, W.; Garg, N. K.; Luo,
M.; Tang, Y. Org. Lett. 2013, 15, 3774.
(23) Evans, S. E.; Williams, C.; Arthur, C. J.; Płoskoń, E.; Wattana-
amorn, P.; Cox, R. J.; Crosby, J.; Willis, C. L.; Simpson, T. J.; Crump, M.
P. J. Mol. Biol. 2009, 389, 511.
(24) Sørensen, J. L.; Hansen, F. T.; Sondergaard, T. E.; Staerk, D.; Lee,
T. V.; Wimmer, R.; Klitgaard, L. G.; Purup, S.; Giese, H.; Frandsen, R. J.
N. Environ. Microbiol. 2012, 14, 1159.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
Communication
DOI: 10.1021/jacs.5b11814
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 15688−15691
15691
