
[PDF physical page 1]
                                                    i An update to this article is included at the end




                                                    Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178


                                                  Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

                       Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology


                                  journal homepage: http://www.keaipublishing.com/synbio



Activation of microbial secondary metabolic pathways: Avenues and                                                                              T
challenges

Bikash Baral, Amir Akhgari, Mikko Metsä-Ketelä∗

Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku, FIN-20014, Turku, Finland




A R T I C L E  I N F O                   A B S T R A C T


Keywords:                                         Microbial natural products are a tremendous source of new bioactive chemical entities for drug discovery. Next
Biosynthesis                                       generation sequencing has revealed an unprecedented genomic potential for production of secondary metabo-
Chemical diversity                                           lites by diverse micro-organisms found in the environment and in the microbiota. Genome mining has further led
Genome mining                                      to the discovery of numerous uncharacterized ‘cryptic’ metabolic pathways in the classical producers of natural
Metabolic engineering
                                                products such as Actinobacteria and fungi. These biosynthetic gene clusters may code for improved biologically
Synthetic biology
                                                     active metabolites, but harnessing the full genetic potential has been hindered by the observation that many of
                                                 the pathways are ‘silent’ under laboratory conditions. Here we provide an overview of the various biotechno-
                                                       logical methodologies, which can be divided to pleiotropic, biosynthetic gene cluster speciﬁc, and targeted
                                           genome-wide approaches that have been developed for the awakening of microbial secondary metabolic path-
                                              ways.




1. Microbes: promising and proliﬁc source of new drug leads         therapeutic areas comprise the anticancer agent doxorubicin, the im-
                                                                   munosuppressants rapamycin and cyclosporine and the anthelmintic
   Natural products (also referred to as secondary metabolites or spe-    drug avermectin B1 (Fig. 1).
cialized metabolites; SMs) represent a group of low-molecular weight       The chemical entities described above (Fig. 1) were discovered
structurally diverse and complex bioactive compounds occupying an     several decades ago, most during the “Golden Era of Antibiotics” in the
unusual chemical property space [1]. Microbes in particular are proliﬁc    1950s and 1960s. Starting from the 1980s and 1990s, traditional
antibiotic factories [2], and have proven to be a bountiful source of SMs     bioactivity-based screening of microbial culture extracts became se-
that have been successfully developed as crucial drug leads [3,4]. To     verely aﬀected by diminishing returns due to high probability of dis-
date, more than 5000 antibiotics have been identiﬁed from the genus     covering previously known metabolites [17]. Structure elucidation of
Actinobacteria, while 500 natural products have been isolated from      hit molecules is time consuming and ultimately the high rediscovery
Myxobacteria [5–7]. Soil-dwelling Streptomyces bacteria are particularly     rate of known molecules led to decreased interest of pharmaceutical
proﬁcient producers with 7600 SMs identiﬁed until 2005 [8], while    companies in natural products [2], which turned their attention to
computational predictions have estimated that these bacteria may have     structure-based drug  design and  combinatorial  chemistry  instead
the capability to produce 150,000 chemically distinct antimicrobial     [18,19]. However, despite very strong investments into this ﬁeld in the
agents [5–7]. In addition to classical antibiotics, microbial cultures      last 15 years, these eﬀorts have not provided a single novel synthetic
have been a source for immune-suppressive agents [9], lantibiotics,     antimicrobial agent that has proceeded beyond preliminary clinical
anti-proliferative [10], cytotoxic [11], anti-hypertensive [12], antiviral      trials [20]. One key problem has been that while many synthetic
compounds [13,14] and various enzyme inhibitors [15]. Circa 35% of    compounds with high eﬃcacies towards their molecular targets have
drugs approved by the FDA/EMA are estimated to be either natural    been successfully developed, it has become apparent that these com-
products or their derivatives [16], and > 50% of clinical antibiotics are    pounds have diﬃculties in reaching their target site in vivo and in pe-
of Actinomycetes origin  [8]. Widely used  antibiotics include ery-     netrating bacterial cell membranes [17].
thromycin A, penicillin G and streptomycin, while examples of micro-       However, recent technological advancements have created a re-
bial  metabolites  that have been  successfully launched  for  other     naissance of interest in natural products and new chemical entities with




  Peer review under responsibility of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd.
  ∗Corresponding author.
    E-mail address: mianme@utu.ﬁ(M. Metsä-Ketelä).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2018.09.001
Received 13 July 2018; Received in revised form 28 August 2018; Accepted 4 September 2018
2405-805X/ © 2018 Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).


[PDF physical page 2]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178





                                                 Fig. 1. Chemical structures of selected microbial natural products.



                                                                       164


[PDF physical page 3]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178


novel mode of action [21,22]. The foundation was laid in the 2000s by     characterization of pathways thus facilitating future research eﬀorts.
the diligent work of the Academic sector in elucidating the biosynthetic
logic of the main classes of microbial natural products made by poly-     3. Metabolic gene clusters in microbes
ketide  synthase  (PKS)  [23,24],  non-ribosomal  peptide  synthetase
(NRPS) [25] and ribosomally synthesized and  post-translationally       The genome mapping approaches are facilitated by the fact that all
modiﬁed peptide (RiPP) pathways [26]. The classical pre-genomics     genes required for the biosynthesis of the metabolite, its regulation,
view was that an individual microbial strain could produce only a     resistance and transport are typically located in within the BGCs
limited number of SMs, but the ﬁrst genome sequences of Streptomyces     [47–49]. The size of metabolic gene clusters varies greatly depending
[27] and Aspergillus [28] published in the 2000s and the subsequent    on the complexity of the end product of the pathway. As an example,
explosion of genome sequencing data in the 2010s has demonstrated     the gene cluster responsible for biosynthesis of the glycosylated an-
that these micro-organisms have the genetic capability to produce a     thracycline nogalamycin encodes 32 enzymes [50]. In addition, the
signiﬁcantly larger number of compounds with great strain-to-strain     type of biosynthetic machinery has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence to the size of
variations. These unknown metabolic pathways are likely to encode     the BGC with large diﬀerences noted between the 30-kb thiostrepton
numerous bioactive molecules, which could be used to solve the current    and 128-kb daptomycin gene clusters [51,52], even though both are
problems with drug resistant pathogens and to obtain improved che-    assembled from amino acid building blocks and are of similar com-
motherapy agents with reduced side eﬀects. The key question re-     plexity. The diﬀerence can be explained with the fact that thiostrepton
maining to answer in the ﬁeld is how to access this hidden potential,      is RiPP [51], whereas daptomycin is made through a NRPS pathway.
since it would appear that the most of these cryptic pathways are silent    Wide variation may also be found within the same classes of biosyn-
or poorly expressed under laboratory conditions. In our current dis-     thetic machineries, since the chemically simple NRP showdomycin is
course, we attempt to provide crucial insights into methodologies that    encoded within a 12-kb fragment of DNA, while the pristinamycin su-
have been developed in an attempt to harness this tremendous chemical     percluster, which encodes two complex hybrid PK-NRP molecules,
diversity.                                                             spans as large as 210-kb [53].
                                                                The onset of SMs production typically occurs during the early sta-
2. Genomics-driven natural products discovery                        tionary phase, and involves complex metabolic changes within the or-
                                                                ganism [54]. Pleiotropic (or global) regulators are localized distantly
   The paradigm shift to genomics-based discovery of microbial SMs    from the biosynthetic cluster, and control the expression of secondary
may be considered to be initiated by the sequencing of the genomes of    metabolism by responding to diverse signals [55]. These pleiotropic
S. coelicolor and S. avermitilis, which led to the discovery of 22 [27] and     regulators have wider coverage, simultaneously controlling the ex-
25 [29] putative biosynthetic gene clusters (BGC), respectively, that     pression of several BGCs. Events of nitrogen or phosphate starvation or
could code for secondary metabolic pathways. The genome of the ﬁ-     distinct  signaling compounds  like  N-acetylglucosamine  (GlcNAc),
lamentous fungi Aspergillus nidulans harbored an even greater potential     stressors like heat, pH and damage to the cell wall provide proper sti-
with 56 putative pathways, as observed by genome mining [30].    muli for triggering the expression of these regulatory genes [56,57].
However, recent next generation sequencing eﬀorts have vastly ex-    The production is also guided by regulatory genes present in the bio-
panded this phenomenon in an unparalleled scale to diverse microbial     synthetic clusters, which are pathway-speciﬁc and may either be acti-
genus that have not typically been associated with natural products     vators or repressors [58].
such as Burkholderia, Clostridium and Pseudomonas [31,32]. In addition,       The genes responsible for providing resistance and for transporting
probing microbial communities in various ecological niches such as the    SMs outside of the cells are also typically clustered within BGCs. In
human microbiota [33] and environmental samples [34] have revealed     particular, if the end product of the pathway has biological activity
exceptional metabolic diversity. Many lactic acid bacteria, including     against the producing host, then the resistance genes for that particular
species of Enterococcus, Lactobacillus and Streptococcus associated with     metabolite may be encoded in the genomic locus. Similarly, genes en-
the gastrointestinal tract have been reported to produce bioactive     coding eﬄux pumps (for instance, ATP-binding cassette (ABC) and
modiﬁed peptides [33], in particular those synthesized via RiPP path-    Major Facilitator Superfamily proteins) have also been traced along the
ways [35,36]. The marine sponge Theonella swinhoei has been shown to    BGCs [59] and are responsible for the reduction of both toxicity [60]
host many uncultivated bacterial symbionts, which harbor pathways for    and feedback inhibition eﬀects. For instance, in S. avermitilis, the ABC
production of exotic SMs [37]. It should also be noted that the potential     transporter AvtAB responsible for the exporting avermectin is found
of soil microbes for production of SMs remains elusive, since ca. 99% of     within the biosynthesis gene cluster [61].
environmental microbes are un-cultured under laboratory settings. In
order to circumvent this barrier, environmental DNA isolated directly     4. Strategies for the activation of unknown metabolic pathways
from soil samples may be used for cloning and expression of BGCs, as in
the case of the malacidins pathway [38]. In another approach, the      A growing body of evidence has indicated that the activation of
broad spectrum antibiotic teixobactin was discovered from an un-    gene clusters has the potential to greatly facilitate discovery of new
cultured soil bacteria ‘Eleftheria terrae’ by growing the microbe directly     natural products of high-therapeutic leads. Several methods have been
in situ in the soil using a bacterial iChip [39].                           developed for the activation of silent or poorly expressed cryptic gene
   The development of bioinformatics software for analysis of se-      clusters, which can be broadly classiﬁed to three major categories
quencing data for the presence of BGCs has been instrumental in      (Fig. 2). In one group, there are methodologies that aim to modify the
genomics-driven  natural  products  discovery.  Programs  such  as    whole metabolome of the target strain and generate pleiotropic eﬀects
antiSMASH [40,41], SMURF [42], BAGEL3 [43] and PRISM [44,45] are     to activate randomly any pathway residing in the strain. These methods
able to detect and decipher all of the most common biosynthetic types.     are generally technically simple and are therefore suitable for scaling
In some instances, such as type I polyketides and NRPSs and RiPPs,    up to high-throughput systems. Unfortunately, these techniques gen-
these programs are able to even provide predictions for the chemical     erally forfeit the advantages provided by next-generation sequencing
scaﬀolds of the metabolites [45], but for other compound classes such    and genome mining, since they are not able to target the most inter-
as type II PKSs and glycosylated natural product, the information ac-     esting gene clusters for activation. They also suﬀer from the same
quired through computational studies is limited. Linking genomic data     metabolite rediscovery issues as traditional natural products discovery.
to chemistry has also been aided by community standards such as     In contrast, the methodologies lying under the second category are able
MIBiG (Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic Gene cluster) [46],     to focus on desired pathways, but are technically challenging and suﬀer
which deﬁne standardized annotation and metadata procedures for    from low throughput. Finally, the techniques in the third group aim to

                                                                       165


[PDF physical page 4]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178





Fig. 2. Methodologies for the activation of silent gene clusters to obtain new natural products. Petals within the circle represents diﬀerent techniques that have been
developed with three major categories, viz., pleiotropic, BGC-speciﬁc and targeted-genome wide approaches highlighted. Abbreviations: OSMAC, One strain many
compounds; P, Promoters; PPtases, Phosphopantetheinyl transferases; RGMS, Reporter-Guided Mutant Selection.





                                                                       166


[PDF physical page 5]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178


gain the beneﬁts of both of the approaches mentioned above, usually by     clustered at subtelomeric regions and are co-regulated [86], where
combining pleiotropic activation methods to gene cluster speciﬁc re-     histone acetylation and methylation largely impact transcription [87].
porter systems. The diversity of these methodologies oﬀer many tools        For activation of SMs, the state of chromatin packaging has been
for the research community, but to date no single superior method for    inﬂuenced by artiﬁcial expression of histone modiﬁcation genes and by
activation of biosynthetic pathways has been presented.                     utilizing small molecule inhibitors against histone deacetylase enzymes.
                                                                           In A. nidulans, inactivation of the histone deacetylase (HDAC) hdaA
4.1. Genome-wide pleiotropic methods                                   down-regulated secondary metabolic pathways [88], while  loss-in-
                                                                         function of cclA (an ortholog of bre2 involved in histone H3 lysine 4
4.1.1. Ribosome engineering and its applicability                            methylation) activated the expression of the cryptic secondary meta-
   One of the most important adaptations in bacteria to environmental     bolic clusters generating monodictyphenone, emodin and its derivatives
stresses, e.g. depletion of amino acids,  is the ‘‘stringent response’’     [89]. The use of the HDAC inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid
governed by an intracellular transient accumulation of guanosine tet-    (SAHA) led to stimulation of production of new cladochromes and
raphosphate (ppGpp) [62]. The bacterial alarmone ppGpp is synthe-     calphostin B in Cladosporium cladosporioides [90] and histone deacety-
sized by the ribosomal enzyme ppGpp synthetase (relA) and is initiated     lase (HDAC) inhibitors have also caused over-expression of SM genes in
by the binding of an uncharged tRNA molecule to the aminoacyl     A. nidulans [88,91].
binding  site (A-site) on the ribosome [63]. Subsequent binding of        Unlike in fungi and other eukaryotes, prokaryotes are entirely de-
ppGpp to the RNA polymerase (RNAP) modulates transcription by up-     prived  of  histones. However, the  bacterial genome,  for  instance,
regulating and downregulating various promoters [64,65] through     Streptomyces sp. comprises their own versions of HDAC [92] and the
mechanisms that can vary between species [66]. Investigations into the     structure of the nucleoid may have a role in the global regulation of
RNA polymerase/ppGpp complex in a thermophilic bacterium Thermus    metabolism [93]. Access to chromosomal DNA may be restricted by
thermophilus revealed three modes of transcriptional regulation by     nucleoid-associated  proteins, various RNAs and  diﬀerential super-
ppGpp depending on the nucleic acid composition of the promoter,     coiling in the nucleoid, which may prevent aberrant transcription of
which inﬂuenced the conformation of the RNAP [64]. Therefore it is    many gene clusters [94]. In Streptomyces, a bifunctional nucleoid-as-
unsurprising that ppGpp has also been linked to secondary metabolism     sociated protein (DdbA) has also been characterized that comprises of
and initiation of antibiotic production [67]. In Streptomyces, relA/relC    an N-terminal DNA-binding histone H1-like domain and a C-terminal
mutants with signiﬁcantly decreased ppGpp contents display lowered     DksA-like domain, which could modulate the RNA polymerase activity
production of SMs when transferred to a media with nutritional shift-     along with ppGpp to induce transcription [95].
down [68–70] (Fig. 3A and B). It has been revealed that mutations
conferring resistance to rifampicin in the rpoB gene, which encodes the     4.1.3. OSMAC approach and environmental cues
RNA polymerase β-subunit, alter the conformation of the RNAP to re-      One strain many compounds “OSMAC” is a relatively simple and
semble ppGpp bound status. Therefore, the requirement for ppGpp for     versatile approach that allows activation of diverse-metabolic pathways
the expression of silent or poorly expressed gene clusters is bypassed in     [96]. The biosynthesis of SMs is stimulated through alterations in cul-
these mutants in various actinomycetes [71–73].                            tivation parameters [97,98], e.g. media composition, aeration rate, type
   In an analogous manner, the acquisition of mutations in ribosomal     of culturing vessel or a combination of these factors. In some cases,
proteins conferring resistance to antibiotics targeting the ribosome has    even subtle changes may result in drastic changes, as demonstrated in
also been reported to promote the expression of silent genes. However,     fermentations of Paraphaeosphaeria quadriseptata, where switching from
the molecular mechanism of this phenomena remains obscure. The     the use of tap water to distilled water lead to the isolation of six new
introduction of streptomycin-resistance mutations in rel mutants of S.    SMs [99]. These experiments aim to mimic more precisely the natural
coelicolor and S. griseus reinstated actinorhodin production without the    growth conditions found in the environment to trigger the onset of
requirement of ppGpp [74,75]. On the contrary, elevated concentra-     secondary metabolism, and has been successfully applied to both bac-
tions of ppGpp (30-fold) and actinorhodin (180-fold) has been detected      teria and fungi, as reviewed elsewhere [97,98].
in S. coelicolor, when the strain was exposed to eight antibiotics in a       The classical OSMAC approach may be extended to more drastic
successive manner, where  all of the antibiotics were targeting the    measures by modulating the culture conditions with stress or chemicals.
translational machinery with the exception of rifampicin [76]. In ad-    Heat shock has been shown to induce jadomycin production [100] and
dition, relA disruption resulted in the total loss of ppGpp accumulation     increase the yields of validamycin [101], whereas limitation of nu-
as well as a signiﬁcant decrease in actinorhodin production, indicating      trients such as alanine and/or an acidic pH shock led to methyleno-
the key role of ppGpp in the activation of biosynthesis. Cluster-acti-    mycin production in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) [102]. In particular,
vated strains resulting from mutations in the ribosome have been re-    numerous SMs have been shown to be regulated negatively by in-
ported in Streptomycetes and other bacteria including Bacillus spp.,     organic phosphate concentrations  [57], while GlcNAc appears  to
Mycobacterium spp. and Pseudomonas spp. [74,77,78]. Strikingly, two     function as an important sensory molecule for the onset of secondary
single rpoB mutants, an rpoB+rpsL double mutant, and a single gen-    metabolism [103]. Both biotic (microbial lysates or soil extracts) and
tamicin-resistant mutant induced the production of piperidamycins in     abiotic (antibiotics, synthetic compounds) chemical elicitors have been
S. mauvecolor, whereas the wild-type does not produce these metabo-    proved to be eﬀective strategies for the induction of silent gene clusters.
lites at any detectable level in various media [79].                 Two small molecule elicitors have been particularly successful; ARC2, a
                                                                            synthetic compound discovered through large scale screening [104],
4.1.2. Chromatin remodeling                                       and goadsporin [105,106], a natural product that promotes secondary
   Chromatin remodeling is a vital mechanism for the modulation of    metabolism in Streptomyces. Sub-inhibitory concentrations of other xe-
transcription of eukaryotic genomes [80]. Chromatin is composed of     nobiotic antibiotics, such as jadomycin B [107] and monensin [108]
repeating nucleosome units, which consist of histones (2 copies each of    have been shown to induce endogenous production of SMs. Interest-
H2A, and H2B, H3 and H4 [80]) wrapped around chromosomal DNA     ingly, it has been shown that the addition of rare earth elements, e.g.
and linked together through a linker histone (H1) (Fig. 3C) [81,82].    scandium and lanthanum, at low concentrations resulted in the acti-
Histones cause dynamic variations to packaging and accessibility of     vation of the cryptic secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters
DNA in response to physiological and developmental cues [83,84].     [78,109].
These are mediated via post-translational modiﬁcations such as dea-         Co-cultivation, mimicking the ecological habitats of micro-organ-
cetylation and methylation of histone tails, which ultimately regulate     isms, has been emerged as an eﬀective strategy to increase the chemical
gene expression [85]. Gene clusters for secondary metabolism are     diversity of secondary metabolites (Fig. 4A).  It is believed that the

                                                                       167


[PDF physical page 6]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178





Fig. 3. Pleiotropic approaches for activation of silent gene clusters: A) Events that occur in the RNAP when an organism is grown in alternative conditions: (i)
Nutrient rich-medium, where the conditions suppress secondary metabolism and transcription levels from BGCs are low; (ii) Microbe subjected to nutritional down-
shift (depletion of amino-acids) conditions, which leads to the production of ppGpp (Guainosine tetraphosphate), that ultimately binds to RNAP, giving rise to high
transcription levels from the BGC; (iii) Addition of antibiotics like rifampicin induces a mutation in the β-subunit of the polymerase, which in turn increases the
transcription level of the BGC. B) A mutation in the 30S subunit of ribosome stabilizes the 70S ribosomal complex and causes upregulation of protein synthesis in the
stationary phase. C) Packaging of DNA around histones prevents gene transcription and is regulated through post-translational modiﬁcations of histone tails. In
chromatin remodeling, enzymes responsible for histone modiﬁcations are manipulated to allow histone release, which enables expression of BGCs from the un-
covered stretch of DNA.


social networking in ecological environment is mediated by diﬀusible     antibiotic production in another strain by cross-feeding [114]. Inter-
low-molecular-weight signaling molecules that are secreted from and     estingly, dialysis experiments and electron microscopy have revealed
received by cells [110,111]. For example, co-cultivation of the marine-     that not only diﬀusible signals, but also intimate physical interactions
derived fungal isolate A. fumigatus MR2012 with S. leeuwenhoekii strain     contribute to the networking and induction of silent clusters during co-
C34 led to induction of metabolite production in both organisms, while     cultures of A. nidulans with S. hygroscopicus [115] or A. fumigatus with S.
co-cultivation of the fungus with bacterial strain C58 resulted in the     rapamycinicus [116].
detection of pentalenic acid from the bacteria [112]. Another marine-
derived fungus Emericella sp. was induced to produce emericellamides A
                                                                                 4.1.4. Phosphopantheteine transferases
and B upon co-culture with Salinispora arenicola [113], whereas pro-
                                                                The biosynthesis of polyketides and nonribosomal peptides only
momycin produced by one Streptomyces strain led to initiation of
                                                                        occurs if the essential acyl - and peptidyl carrier proteins, respectively,

                                                                       168


[PDF physical page 7]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178





Fig. 4. Pleiotropic approaches for the activation of the silent gene clusters: Global regulators, PPTases and the OSMAC approach. A) In the OSMAC approach,
cultivation conditions are manipulated to uncover the environmental signal required for activation of biosynthesis. As an example, co-cultivation of two or more
microbes may induce microbial chemical communication, where one or even both participants produce novel compounds. Abbreviations: A, Activator; BGC,
Biosynthetic gene cluster; P, Promoter. B) PPTases catalyze the post-translational modiﬁcation of carrier proteins, which is essential for the biosynthesis of poly-
ketides and nonribosomal peptides. Overexpression of PPTases may inﬂuence the production of SMs under conditions where the native PPTase may be down-
regulated. Abbreviations: A, Adenylation domain; ACP, Acyl-carrier protein; AT, Acyltransferase; C, Condensation domain; KS, Ketosynthase domain; NRPS, Non-
ribosomal peptide synthetase; PCP, Peptidyl-carrier protein; PKS, Polyketide synthases; TE, Thioesterase domain. C) Pleiotropic regulators control many aspects in
the life cycle of microbes. Manipulation of these regulatory networks may lead to the activation of BGCs.

                                                                       169


[PDF physical page 8]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178


are post-translationally modiﬁed into active holo-form [117]. This re-     transcription factors. Eighty families of transcription factors were re-
action  is  catalyzed by phosphopantetheinyl  transferases  (PPtases)     vealed through a whole-genome analysis of more than 200 fungal
through covalent attachment of a 4′-phosphopantetheine group to a    genomes [134]. For example, the ﬁlamentous fungi A. nidulans and N.
highly conserved serine residue (Fig. 4B). Microbial genomes may     crassa contain 81 and 58 transcription factors, respectively [135]. These
contain up to three PPtases, which harbor speciﬁcity to various bio-     aforementioned mechanisms enable alterations in transcription pat-
synthetic pathways [118], but these genes are typically not found     terns in response to environmental cues.
within BGCs. Since PPtases regulate primary metabolism that leads to       The σ-factors inﬂuence the expression of larger groups of genes,
physiological changes and metabolic ﬂux alterations, overexpression of     therefore σ-factor-based engineering methods have been utilized to
PPtases may also inﬂuence secondary metabolism [119]. Indeed, ex-     activate gene expressions associated with secondary metabolite bio-
pression of two PPtase genes sfp and svp resulted in activation of silent     synthesis. For example, overexpression  of the  σ-factor  ‘Orf21’  in
pathways with a success rate of 70% in a study using 33 Actinomycetes     Streptomyces clavuligerus NRRL3585 resulted in a slight increase of
strains [120]. The sfp and svp gene products, from Bacillus subtilis and     clavulanic acid production through the induction of early biosynthetic
Streptomyces verticillus, respectively, exhibit broad substrate speciﬁcity     genes (ceas2, cas2) and the activator gene ccaR [136]. Moreover, the
to guarantee suﬃcient phosphopantetheinylation of diverse biosyn-     overexpression of σ-factors led to the accumulation of higher level of
thetic enzymes. Recently, PPtase-based activation also led to the iden-    FK506, a hybrid polyketide-nonribosomal peptide and carotenoid pro-
tiﬁcation of three nucleosides including puromycin A and two new     ductions in Streptomyces sp. KCCM 11116P [137] and Corynebacterium
congeners in S. alboniger NRRL B-1832 [121]. Interestingly, the bio-     glutamicum, respectively [138]. Successful expression of a polyketide
synthetic pathways of nucleosides do not contain carrier proteins,     biosynthetic pathway (oxytetracycline) was achieved for the ﬁrst time
suggesting that the result was achieved indirectly via modulation of     in a surrogate host E. coli by overexpressing the host σ54-factor [139].
cellular regulatory networks by the PPtase.                          The deletion of σ-factor ‘Sig6’ caused over-production of avermectin by
                                                                    2–2.7 fold in S. avermitilis, while overexpression of an extra copy lead to
4.1.5. Manipulation of global regulatory systems                             signiﬁcant decrease in yields [140]. In addition, S. avermitilis hrdB
   The engineering of global regulatory genes aims to inﬂuence the    mutants lacking σhrdB exhibited higher levels of avermectin production
same regulatory networks as the OSMAC approach, but instead of     than the parental strain [141].
trying to ﬁnd the environmental cues, it does it at a more reﬁned mo-       The promoter sequences residing in BGCs do not typically promote
lecular level through over-expression or inactivation of the genes con-     transcription in all growth conditions and are highly inﬂuenced by in-
trolling the cellular response to these phenomena (Fig. 4C). Investiga-     tracellular regulation networks. Manipulation of promoter sequences by
tions into pleiotropic regulatory networks in bacteria and fungi have    exchanging native silent promoters with functionally active ones di-
revealed that production of SMs is linked to morphological develop-     rectly in the producing organism has proven to be a useful strategy to
ment and nutrient availability (carbon and nitrogen sources, phosphate     drive expression of the silent genes by circumventing the complexity of
starvation, amino acid and iron availability) [55]. Other examples in-     the regulatory genes (Fig. 5B). The methodology requires advanced
clude response to pH stress in fungi mediated by the PacC zinc ﬁnger    genome editing tools that might not be available for the target organ-
transcription factor [122] and the master regulator DasR in Strepto-     isms and is best suited for small BGCs that are composed of very few
myces, which responds to the presence of N-acetylglucosamine that may     operons. The activation of a silent polycyclic tetramate macrolactam
be considered as a signal for autolytic degradation of the vegetative    (PTM) gene cluster in Streptomyces albus has been achieved by the in-
mycelium [103]. An important distinction to cluster situated regulatory    dependent introduction of ermEp* upstream of ftdA and ftdB encoding
genes is that the global regulatory systems also control the transcription     putative  desaturase and  hybrid  polyketide  synthase-nonribosomal
of many other genes not related to secondary metabolism. In fungi,     peptide synthetase, respectively, and led to the identiﬁcation of 6-epi-
pathway-speciﬁc regulatory genes have been discovered only in about     alteramides A and B. Furthermore, the biosynthesis of a blue pigment
60% BGCs [123], which indicates that the production of many SMs is     ‘indigoidine’, which is not typically produced in standard laboratory
modulated strictly by global regulatory networks. Similarly, the moe-     conditions, has been induced in S. albus by expressing the NRPS gene
nomycin biosynthetic gene cluster does not harbor a pathway-speciﬁc    bpsA under ermEp* promoter [142]. The introduction of strong en-
regulator and is under the control of pleiotropic regulators in Strepto-     gineered promoter kasOp* also resulted in successful activation of silent
myces ghanaensis [124].                                               lycopene biosynthetic cluster in S. avermitilis [143]. Recently, replace-
   In Streptomyces, manipulation of regulatory elements that respond    ment  of  the  native  promoters  of  the  silent  actinorhodin,  un-
to butyrolactone hormones such as adpA [125] have been particularly     decylprodigiosin and PTM clusters with kasOp* produced targeted
successful with cryptic oviedomycin [126] and germicidin [127] gene    compounds in S. albus, S. lividans and S. roseosporus, respectively [144].
clusters recently activated. Disruption of whiB-like regulatory genes,         In Aspergillus nidulans, replacing the native promoter of the non-
which are associated with control of morphological development [128],     ribosomalpeptide synthetase, acvA, with a promoter from the ethanol
have also led to the discovery novel violapyrones [129] and antimycin-     dehydrogenase, alcAp, from the same host led to a 30-fold increase in
type depsipeptides [130].                                                      penicillin production [145]. In addition, sequential exchange of pro-
                                                                   moters for six genes in the silent fellutamide B gene cluster (inp) with
4.2. Biosynthetic gene cluster speciﬁc approaches                          alcAp enabled the activation of the cluster and led to the production of
                                                                        the target compound in A. nidulans [146].
4.2.1. Transcription factors and promoter exchange experiments
   In eukaryotes, each gene  is transcribed from  its own promoter,     4.2.2. Manipulation of pathway-speciﬁc regulatory genes
whereas in prokaryotes (e.g., Streptomyces sp.) several genes are often        Pathway-speciﬁc  transcriptional  regulatory  genes  are  typically
clustered together to form operons (Fig. 5A). In all bacterial species, the    found within the BGCs and they may either repress or activate the
promoter sequences residing within BGCs are typically associated with     biosynthesis of the corresponding SM. These genes represent the lowest
speciﬁc sigma factors (σ-factors) that are vital for binding of the RNA     organizational level in the cellular regulatory networks and are typi-
polymerase (RNAP) in the formation of the translation initiation com-     cally tightly regulated by environmental sensors and pleiotropic reg-
plex [131]. The various σ-factors confer promoter selectivity and are     ulators. However, in reality the regulatory circuits are likely to be even
thereby responsible for switching on speciﬁc regulons [132]. For in-    more complex with cross-talk between distinct pathways [147] and
stance, the ﬁlamentous prokaryotes, S. albus J1074, S. coelicolor and S.    even between global and BGC speciﬁc regulatory genes reported [148].
avermitilis comprise 35, 65 and 60 σ-factors, respectively [27,133]. On    The co-localization of pathway-speciﬁc regulatory genes oﬀers a pos-
the other hand, promoter recognition in fungi relies on more diverse      sibility for targeted activation of the desired BGC either by inactivation

                                                                       170


[PDF physical page 9]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178





Fig. 5. Gene cluster speciﬁc approaches for activating silent biosynthetic pathways. A) The target gene cluster is silent under laboratory conditions and no tran-
scription or product formation can be observed. B) The gene cluster may be activated by exchanging the promoters from the silent gene cluster to constitutively active
promoters. C) In instances where the gene cluster is controlled by a repressor, inactivation of the regulatory element may lead to expression of the biosynthetic genes.
D) Overexpression of cluster situated activator regulatory genes may also lead to activation of biosynthesis. E) Cloning of the whole biosynthetic gene cluster and
heterologous expression in a surrogate host can be used for artiﬁcial activation of the BGC. Abbreviations: AntR, Antibiotic selection marker; BGC, Biosynthetic gene
cluster; Ori, Origin of replication; P, Promoters. F) Synthetic approaches include refactoring of the gene cluster and the use of constitutive or strong promoters to
drive expression of the silent gene cluster.


of the repressor or over-expression of the activator genes (Fig. 5C and    domain and a receptor domain that responds to the presence of a small
D). The caveat is that for many families of transcriptional regulators it is     molecule ligand [150]. In the absence of the speciﬁc signaling mole-
not possible to identify whether the gene is a repressor or an activator     cule, TetR dimers bind to DNA and prevent transcription of downstream
based on sequence information alone. The diversity of microbial reg-     genes. Binding of the ligand induces a conformational shift that re-
ulatory proteins is expansive [149], and only two systems are described     positions the helix-turn-helix motifs of the dimer far apart in such a way
here to demonstrate the functional diﬀerences.                             that the proteins lose their ability to bind DNA [151]. Interestingly,
   The TetR family repressors consist of a helix-turn-helix DNA binding    some TetR proteins have been proven to respond to γ-butyrolactone


                                                                       171


[PDF physical page 10]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178


autoinducers during the onset of secondary metabolism [152], while    PPTase genes [176]. Finally, cloning genes in S. albus is facilitated by a
others bind directly to both endogenous and exogenous SMs [107,153].     defective restriction modiﬁcation system and the naturally minimized
Inactivation of TetR family repressors have led to the activation of ja-    genome may help increasing product titres [177]. In ﬁlamentous fungi,
domycin [153,154], kinamycin [155], auricin [156] and ceoelimycin      Aspergillus species have been widely used as heterologous hosts. An
biosynthesis [157,158].                                                    early example includes the transfer of the entire penicillin gene cluster
   Another predominant class of regulators is homologous to LuxR     to A. nidulans, while more recently geodin has been heterologously
from Vibrio ﬁscheri, which is a transcription factor involved in quorum    produced in this host [178–180]. A. oryzae has gained interest for
sensing [159]. The protein consists of an α/β/α sandwich domain that     heterologous expression, as it has traditionally been used in the food
binds the activator ligand and a DNA binding response domain. In     industry and has been given the status of GRAS (generally regarded as
contrast to the TerR family, most characterized LuxR proteins are     safe) organism. Selected recent examples of SMs produced in this host
transcriptional  activators,  where  ligand  binding  induces  homo-     include paxilline [181], alfatrem [182] and pleuromutilin [183]. The
dimerization, which enables binding of the protein to DNA in so-called     heterologous expression of A. terreus asperfuranone cluster in the model
tra box sequences and initiate transcription [160]. An important sub-     ascomycete, A. nidulans, resulted in awakening of the asperfuranone
family of LuxR regulators in Actinobacteria are LAL–proteins (Large     biosynthetic pathway when several non-reducing polyketide synthase
ATP-binding regulators of the LuxR family) [161], originally discovered     genes were placed under the control of alcAp [184].
in the regulon for maltose utilization, that contains an additional ATP-      An ideal host for heterologous expression would provide suﬃcient
binding domain at the N-terminus responsible for the interaction with     metabolic building blocks for the synthesis of SMs, but would not have
the inducers, maltotriose and ATP [162]. In a recent example, LuxR-     native pathways that could interfere with the biosynthesis or generate
type activators were over-expressed and TetR-type repressors were in-     background. To this end, several strains have been genome minimized
activated to initiate production of totopotensamides [163].                 to function better as expression chasses. Four gene clusters have been
                                                                         deleted from the genomes of S. coelicolor M1152 and M1154, which
4.2.3. Heterologous expression in surrogate hosts                         have been further improved for metabolite production by ribosome
   Many microbes that have the capability to produce natural pro-     engineering [185]. Extensive manipulation, including deletion of a
ducts, such as strains of Cyanobacteria and ﬁlamentous fungi, are ge-     1.5 Mb subtelomeric region and 78% of putative transposase genes of
netically intractable [164]. Heterologous expression provides an op-     wild type S. avermitilis led to high success rates and product yields in the
portunity to access the genomic potential these organisms harbor in a     expression of exogenous biosynthetic pathways [186]. These ongoing
genetically compliant host. The capture of target BGCs was classically     eﬀorts are likely to result in a handful of “superhosts” for the hetero-
done through screening of cosmid gene libraries, which was both time-     logous expression of diverse metabolic pathways.
consuming and could not accurately clone the desired DNA fragment,
but advances in direct cloning strategies and DNA assembly tools have     4.2.4. Refactoring of gene clusters
provided attractive alternatives. These methodologies are described in       The emergence of new metabolic engineering methods and the
more detail in Section 4.2.4., since changing the expression host may     continually decreasing costs of DNA synthesis have enabled complete
require manipulation of control elements such as promoter sequences to     refactoring of entire BGCs, which typically includes three distinct
ensure suﬃcient transcription levels (Fig. 5E).                               stages. The ﬁrst step involves the architectural design of the synthetic
   The choice of expression host is far from trivial and many factors    gene cluster from biological part libraries to obtain desired promoter,
need to be considered. The genetically malleable Escherichia coli and    gene and terminator sequences, which may be ordered synthetically or
Saccharomyces  cerevisiae provide attractive hosts for production of    ampliﬁed using PCR. In the next step, the pathway is assembled to-
bacterial and fungal SMs, respectively, but since neither is naturally     gether with advanced cloning methods such as recombineering or TAR-
equipped for production of complex chemicals, issues with metabolic     cloning typically in E. coli or Sacc. cerevisiae. TAR cloning takes ad-
ﬂux, codon usage, self-resistance and activation of biosynthetic acyl/     vantage of the high eﬃciency natural homologous recombination in
peptidyl carrier proteins need to be resolved. E. coli seems to be well-     yeast that allows for both direct capture of BGCs and simultaneous
suited for expression of pathways originating from Cyanobacteria that     cloning of multiple DNA fragments [187]. In contrast, recombineering
are challenging to modify genetically, with production of microcystin      utilizes recombination systems from phages to enable homologous re-
[165] and lyngbyatoxin reported [166]. Several fungal terpene syn-    combination to occur in E. coli [188]. In addition, the combination of
thases have also been expressed in E. coli, but multi-gene clusters are     long-amplicon PCR and DNA recombination (DiPaC) has recently been
much more challenging due to the requirement to remove introns and     utilized for the direct cloning of the anabaenopeptins and erythromycin
modify promoter regions. E. coli has had less success with BGCs origi-    pathways [189]. The ultimate step involves the transfer of the artiﬁcial
nating from high-GC Actinobacteria, even though the  entire  ery-    BGC to the expression host selected for the production of SMs (Fig. 5F).
thromycin pathways has been expressed in this host [167–169]. The        Reports on fully synthetic refactoring of BGCs have still been scarce
titres of SMs produced in E. coli have been generally low. Other pro-    due to the signiﬁcant costs associated with the method. Even though
mising heterologous hosts for production of prokaryotic SMs include      this approach would allow for unprecedented freedom in pathway de-
Myxococcus xanthus, Pseudomonas putida [170] and  Bacillus  subtilis     sign, the complexity of metabolic pathways required for the production
[171].                                                                       of even simple SMs makes the task of designing functional BGC in silico
   In many instances, it would appear that hosts that are evolutionarily      far from trivial. For these reasons, the methodology appears to be best
closely linked to the organism harbouring the target pathway may be     suited for improvements in the production titres of known value-added
best suited  for heterologous expression. Several well-characterized     metabolites and not for the activation of unknown pathways. Examples
Streptomyces sp. are easily amenable and are eﬃcient surrogate hosts     of fully synthetic refactored gene clusters include rebeccamycin and
for  the  heterologous  characterization  of  diﬀerent  genes  from     pyrrolnitrin [190].
Actinobacteria. In particular, S. albus J1074 [172], S. lividans TK24      A more widely used approach in refactoring has been to modify
[173], S. venezuelae ATCC10712 and S. coelicolor A3(2) have been     regulatory elements or promoter regions of natural gene clusters prior
widely used for the expression of cryptic pathways. S. coelicolor is ge-     to heterologous expression. Expression of the unmodiﬁed taromycin
netically the most studied actinomycete and a large array of tools are    gene cluster directly in S. coelicolor M1146 did not lead to the pro-
available for manipulation of the organism [174], whereas the closely     duction of the lipopeptide, but activation of the pathway was achieved
related S. lividans TK24 has particularly excelled at expression of pro-    by deletion of pathway –speciﬁc repressors using in vivo yeast re-
teins [175]. S. venezuelae, is well-suited for the heterologous expression     combination-mediated PCR targeting [191]. Conversely, refactoring of
of the PKs and NRPS due to the presence of large number of innate    a strong constitutive promoter in front of a cluster situated activator

                                                                       172


[PDF physical page 11]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178


                                                                                                           Fig. 6. Targeted genome-wide approaches for the acti-
                                                                                                      vation of the silent gene clusters. A) In Reporter Guided
                                                                                         Mutant selection, promoters identiﬁed from the target
                                                                                       pathway are utilized to report increased transcription
                                                                                          from the BGC. The selected BGC is activated (i) either by
                                                                                   random chemical mutagens or UV irradiation to generate
                                                                                             mutants where the pathway has been upregulated. (ii)
                                                                                     The double-reporter system (xylE-neo) allows for selec-
                                                                                                            tion  of mutants  in the presence  of kanamycin and
                                                                                                      screening of the mutant library for highest expression
                                                                                                                  levels  of  xylE. Abbreviation: RGMS, Reporter-guided
                                                                                          mutant   selection.  B)  In  high-throughput   elicitor
                                                                                                          screening, activation of the gene clusters is achieved by
                                                                                          ﬁnding a small-molecular weight compound that triggers
                                                                                                          expression. (iv) Elicitors from a chemical library are
                                                                                        added to individual wells for performing the elicitation
                                                                                                        response, which  is (v) followed by monitoring tran-
                                                                                                              scription levels from a promoter probe construct ex-
                                                                                                        pressing GFP. (vi) Metabolic proﬁling can be used to
                                                                                                          detect novel SMs from cultivations of wild type and
                                                                                                         biosynthesis activated strains, followed by (vii) structural
                                                                                                         elucidation of the target metabolite. Abbreviations: GFP,
                                                                                          Green ﬂuorescence protein; HiTES, High-throughput eli-
                                                                                                                    citor screening; WT, wild-type strain.





enabled the heterologous production of pacidamycin D [190]. In a more     of the novobiocin gene cluster, where a cosmid harbouring the BGC was
arduous approach, individual genes or short operons from BGCs may    modiﬁed using recombineering to facilitate the generation of plug-and-
also be ampliﬁed by PCR and placed in front of active promoters. After     play expression modules [195]. Through a plug-and-play promoter in-
reassembly of full length pathways, polycyclic tetramate macrolactams     sertion strategy, introduction of three novel constitutive promoters of S.
[192,193] and spectinabilin [194] have been produced in heterologous      coelicolor, upstream of jadJ in the cryptic jadomycin B gene cluster in S.
hosts. The PCR –ampliﬁcation step was circumvented in the refactoring     venezuelae, led to cluster activation. Importantly, expression of jadJ


                                                                       173


[PDF physical page 12]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178


from these three promoters led to higher transcription levels than when     4.3.2. High-throughput elicitor screening
the widely used ermEp* was utilized [196]. The beneﬁt of strong con-      Many SMs are produced in response to various chemical signals,
stitutive promoters is that they may lead to increased transcription le-    which may either be communication molecules or chemical weapons
vels and product yields, as has been shown in the engineering of    made by other organisms cohabiting the same environment. If the en-
polycyclic tetramate macrolactams [193].                               vironmental signal can be identiﬁed in the laboratory using small mo-
                                                                              lecule libraries, expression of silent BGCs can be achieved (Fig. 6B). The
                                                                  chemogenetic HiTES (high-throughput elicitor screening) method does
4.3. Targeted genome-wide methodologies                                        this by coupling the screening to a promoter-probe system, where either
                                                                         lacZ [205] or eGFP [206] is utilized to report increased transcription
   To date, only few approaches have been developed that are able to    from the target BGC. The approach has been successfully applied to two
focus on the desired cryptic BGC detected by genome mining, which are    gene clusters in the Gram-negative pathogenic model bacterium Bur-
able to utilize pleiotropic methods to widely probe conditions that lead     kholderia thailandensis E264, where a silent virulence factor, namely
to activation of the pathway. These targeted genome-wide methodol-     malleilactone (mal) and a poorly expressed burkholdac (bhc) cluster
ogies (Fig. 6) typically take advantage of a biosensor to report increased    were targeted [205]. The strategy has also been implemented in S. albus
transcription or other activity from the desired BGC, but diﬀer in the    J1074, where the nonribosomal peptide surugamide (sur) cluster was
ways of generating alterations to the global transcriptome.              awakened [207]. Interestingly, the cytotoxins etoposide and ivermectin
                                                               were found to be eﬀective inducers resulting the occurrence of 14 novel
                                                            compounds in the culture media.
4.3.1. Reporter guided systems
  A pioneering Reporter-Guided Mutant Selection (RGMS) method     5. Concluding thoughts and future perspectives
developed in the group of Prof. Keqian Yang provides a widely ap-
plicable approach for targeted activation of silent gene clusters in the       The abundance of silent and cryptic pathways in microbial genomes
native organism [197]. RGMS combines two eﬀective yet simple tech-     provides an exciting opportunity for the discovery of new chemical
niques: cloning of key promoter sequences from the gene cluster of      entities with high therapeutic potential. The diverse strategies devel-
interest in front of a double xylE-neo reporter system and the use of    oped for awakening these pathways oﬀer an excellent starting point,
genome-wide mutagenesis to generate a library of mutants that contain     but to date no single superior methodology has been developed. This is
tremendous genomic diversity. The core rationale relies on randomly     not unexpected, since the BGCs reside in vastly diverse micro-organisms
modulating the complex regulatory cascades that are controlling sec-    and in many cases are strictly regulated to be activated only under
ondary metabolism and converting expression of the target pathway     highly speciﬁc conditions. The availability of the numerous methods
into a signal that enables selection of a mutant with the desired phe-     described above, which all have their strengths and weaknesses, can
notype. The reporter cassette allows initial selection by kanamycin re-     therefore be considered as a signiﬁcant advantage and it will remain the
sistance (neo), followed by colour-based detection of catechol oxidase     responsibility of the researcher to choose the most appropriate one for
(xylE) activity, which allows for distinction between spontaneous ka-    any given project.
namycin-resistant and genuine target-activated mutants (Fig. 6A).
  RGMS was initially developed for industrial strain improvement    Acknowledgements
purposes by taking advantage of the correlation between increased
transcription  levels from the target BGC and product  yields. The       The authors would like to dedicate this article to the memory of
method has been used to improve production of lovastatin [198], cla-     Prof. Keqian Yang, who made signiﬁcant contributions to our under-
vulanic acid [199] and natamycin [200] in Aspergillus terreus, S. cla-     standing of secondary metabolic pathways in Streptomyces. The authors
vuligerus and S. gilvosporeus, respectively. In addition, the methodology    would like to thank the Jane and Aatos Erkko Foundation for their ﬁ-
has also been successfully carried out in combination with ribosome     nancial support.
engineering, through exposure to streptomycin, to achieve over-pro-
duction of daptomycin in S. roseosporus NRRL11379 [201]. Recently,    References
BGC situated TetR –family transcriptional repressors have been devel-
oped as alternative biosensors to aid screening of mutant libraries.        [1] Singh SB. Confronting the challenges of discovery of novel antibacterial agents.
These reporter proteins bind end products of the pathways and are            Bioorg Med Chem Lett 2014;24:3683–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bmcl.2014.06.
                                                                                            053.
therefore able to report increased production of the target metabolites        [2] Awan AR, Shaw WM, Ellis T. Biosynthesis of therapeutic natural products using
directly, which reduces the number of false positives encountered with             synthetic biology. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2016;105:96–106. https://doi.org/10.
reporters that only monitor transcription levels. The method was uti-            1016/j.addr.2016.04.010.
                                                                                            [3] Rutledge PJ, Challis GL. Discovery of microbial natural products by activation of
lized for increasing the production of panamycins in S. alboniger [202].                                                                                                                 silent biosynthetic gene clusters. Nat Rev Microbiol 2015;13:509–23. https://doi.
   Many of the cryptic gene clusters denoted “silent” may, in eﬀect, be           org/10.1038/nrmicro3496.
transcribed at a low basal level, but in such low quantities that the        [4] Newman DJ, Cragg GM. Natural products as sources of new drugs over the last 25
corresponding metabolite remains undetected. Therefore RGMS is also             years. J Nat Prod 2007;70:461–77. https://doi.org/10.1021/np068054v.
                                                                                            [5] Challinor VL, Bode HB. Bioactive natural products from novel microbial sources.
suitable for the activation of BGCs and has been successfully utilized on          Ann N Y Acad Sci 2015;1354:82–97. https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.12954.
the jadomycin and gaudimycin pathways in S. venezuelae ISP5230 and        [6] Schäberle TF, Lohr F, Schmitz A, König GM. Antibiotics from myxobacteria. Nat
Streptomyces sp. PGA64, respectively [197]. The jadomycin BGC is si-           Prod Rep 2014;31:953. https://doi.org/10.1039/c4np00011k.
                                                                                            [7] Watve MG, Tickoo R, Jog MM, Bhole BD. How many antibiotics are produced by
lent under typical culture conditions unless special environmental cues            the genus Streptomyces? Arch Microbiol 2001;176:386–90. https://doi.org/10.
such as heat-shock are applied [203]. To establish proof of concept,           1007/s002030100345.
jadomycin biosynthesis could be re-activated by using RGMS strategy,        [8] Bérdy J. Bioactive microbial metabolites. J Antibiot (Tokyo) 2005;58:1–26.
                                                                                                  https://doi.org/10.1038/ja.2005.1.
whereas work on the cryptic gaudimycin pathway led to the isolation of        [9] Hatanaka H, Kino T, Miyata S, Inamura N, Kuroda A, Goto T, et al. FR-900520 and
two novel anthraquinone aminoglycosides [197]. The  indigoidine           FR-900523, novel immunosuppressants isolated from a Streptomyces. II.
synthetase gene bpsA, which is responsible for synthesis of a blue pig-            Fermentaion, isolation and physio-chemical and biological characteristics. J
                                                                                                    Antibiot (Tokyo) 1988;41:1592–601. https://doi.org/10.7164/antibiotics.41.
ment ‘indigoidine’, has also been utilized as a reporter in the activation           1592.
of the cryptic coelimycin gene cluster in S. lividans, where the activation       [10] Hu J, Wunderlich D, Thiericke R, Dahse H-M, Grabley S, Feng X-Z, et al.
was achieved through over-expression of a pathway-speciﬁc regulatory            Jenamidines A to C: unusual alkaloids from Streptomyces sp. with speciﬁc anti-
                                                                                                            proliferative properties obtained by chemical screening. J Antibiot (Tokyo)
gene [204].

                                                                       174


[PDF physical page 13]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178


      2003;56:747–54. https://doi.org/10.7164/antibiotics.56.747.                         [40] Weber T, Blin K, Duddela S, Krug D, Kim HU, Bruccoleri R, et al. antiSMASH
 [11] Tapiolas DM, Roman M, Fenical W, Stout TJ, Clardy J. Octalactins A and B: cy-           3.0—a comprehensive resource for the genome mining of biosynthetic gene clus-
       totoxic eight-membered-ring lactones from a marine bacterium, Streptomyces sp. J                ters. Nucleic Acids Res 2015;43:W237–43. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv437.
    Am Chem Soc 1991;113:4682–3. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00012a048.               [41] Medema MH, Blin K, Cimermancic P, de Jager V, Zakrzewski P, Fischbach MA,
 [12] Patel RN. Biocatalytic synthesis of chiral intermediates for antiviral and anti-                  et al. antiSMASH: rapid identiﬁcation, annotation and analysis of secondary me-
       hypertensive drugs. J Am Oil Chem Soc 1999;76:1275–81. https://doi.org/10.                 tabolite biosynthesis gene clusters in bacterial and fungal genome sequences.
      1007/s11746-999-0139-7.                                                                 Nucleic Acids Res 2011;39:W339–46. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkr466.
 [13] Maullu C, Lampis G, Deidda D, Petruzzelli S, Pompei R. A rapid method for           [42] Khaldi N, Seifuddin FT, Turner G, Haft D, Nierman WC, Wolfe KH, et al. SMURF:
       screening large numbers of environmental microorganisms for antiviral activity.            genomic mapping of fungal secondary metabolite clusters. Fungal Genet Biol
      Appl Environ Microbiol 1998;64:1161–2.                                               2010;47:736–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fgb.2010.06.003.
 [14] Tong J, Trapido-Rosenthal H, Wang J, Wang Y, Li QX, Lu Y. Antiviral activities and       [43] van Heel AJ, de Jong A, Montalbán-López M, Kok J, Kuipers OP. BAGEL3: auto-
       putative identiﬁcation of compounds in microbial extracts from the Hawaiian              mated identiﬁcation of genes encoding bacteriocins and (non-) bactericidal post-
       coastal waters. Mar Drugs 2012;10:521–38. https://doi.org/10.3390/                          translationally modiﬁed peptides. Nucleic Acids Res 2013;41:448–53. https://doi.
     md10030521.                                                                        org/10.1093/nar/gkt391.
 [15] Imada C. Enzyme inhibitors and other bioactive compounds from marine actino-       [44] Skinnider MA, Johnston CW, Edgar RE, Dejong CA, Merwin NJ, Rees PN, et al.
      mycetes. Antonie Leeuwenhoek 2005;87:59–63. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10482-           Genomic charting of ribosomally synthesized natural product chemical space fa-
      004-6544-x.                                                                                                cilitates targeted mining. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2016;113:E6343–51. https://
 [16] Newman DJ. Developing natural product drugs: supply problems and how they             doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1609014113.
      have been overcome. Pharmacol Ther 2016;162:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.        [45] Skinnider MA, Dejong CA, Rees PN, Johnston CW, Li H, Webster ALH, et al.
      pharmthera.2015.12.002.                                                      Genomes to natural products PRediction informatics for secondary metabolomes
 [17] Lewis K. Platforms for antibiotic discovery. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2013;12:371–87.            (PRISM). Nucleic Acids Res 2015;43:9645–62. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
      https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd3975.                                                    gkv1012.
 [18] Anderson AC. The process of structure-based drug design. Chem Biol                  [46] Medema MH, Kottmann R, Yilmaz P, Cummings M, Biggins JB, Blin K, et al.
      2003;10:787–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2003.09.002.                    Minimum information about a biosynthetic gene cluster. Nat Chem Biol
 [19] Antel J. Integration of combinatorial chemistry and structure-based drug design.            2015;11:625–31. https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.1890.
      Curr Opin Drug Discov Dev 1999;2:224–33.                                         [47] Bibb MJ. Regulation of secondary metabolism in streptomycetes. Curr Opin
 [20] Piddock LJV. The crisis of no new antibiotics-what is the way forward? Lancet               Microbiol 2005;8:208–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2005.02.016.
       Infect Dis 2012;12:249–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(11)70316-4.          [48] Cimermancic P, Medema MH, Claesen J, Kurita K, Wieland Brown LC,
 [21] Wright GD. Something old, something new: revisiting natural products in anti-             Mavrommatis K, et al. Insights into secondary metabolism from a global analysis of
       biotic drug discovery. Can J Microbiol 2014;60:147–54. https://doi.org/10.1139/             prokaryotic biosynthetic gene clusters. Cell 2014;158:412–21. https://doi.org/10.
      cjm-2014-0063.                                                                            1016/j.cell.2014.06.034.
 [22] Georgiev MI. Natural products utilization. Phytochem Rev 2014;13:339–41.            [49] Wisecaver JH, Slot JC, Rokas A. The evolution of fungal metabolic pathways. PLoS
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s11101-014-9363-3.                                           Genet 2014;10. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1004816.
 [23] Zhang Z, Pan H-X, Tang G-L. New insights into bacterial type II polyketide bio-        [50] Siitonen V, Claesson M, Patrikainen P, Aromaa M, Mäntsälä P, Schneider G, et al.
       synthesis. F1000Research 2017;6:172. https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.              Identiﬁcation of late-stage glycosylation steps in the biosynthetic pathway of the
      10466.1.                                                                                   anthracycline nogalamycin. Chembiochem 2012;13:120–8. https://doi.org/10.
 [24] Robbins T, Liu YC, Cane DE, Khosla C. Structure and mechanism of assembly line            1002/cbic.201100637.
       polyketide synthases. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2016;41:10–8. https://doi.org/10.          [51] Kelly WL, Pan L, Li C. Thiostrepton biosynthesis: prototype for a new family of
       1016/j.sbi.2016.05.009.                                                                         bacteriocins. J Am Chem Soc 2009;131:4327–34. https://doi.org/10.1021/
 [25] Payne JAE, Schoppet M, Hansen MH, Cryle MJ. Diversity of nature's assembly              ja807890a.
       lines-recent discoveries in non-ribosomal peptide synthesis. Mol Biosyst               [52] Miao V, Coëﬀet-LeGal MF, Brian P, Brost R, Penn J, Whiting A, et al. Daptomycin
      2017;13:9–22. https://doi.org/10.1039/c6mb00675b.                                        biosynthesis in Streptomyces roseosporus: cloning and analysis of the gene cluster
 [26] Hudson GA, Mitchell DA. RiPP antibiotics: biosynthesis and engineering potential.           and revision of peptide stereochemistry. Microbiology 2005;151:1507–23. https://
      Curr Opin Microbiol 2018;45:61–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2018.02.010.             doi.org/10.1099/mic.0.27757-0.
 [27] Bentley SD, Chater KF, Cerdeño-Tárraga A-M, Challis GL, Thomson NR, James KD,       [53] Mast Y, Weber T, Gölz M, Ort-Winklbauer R, Gondran A, Wohlleben W, et al.
       et al. Complete genome sequence of the model actinomycete Streptomyces coeli-             Characterization of the “pristinamycin supercluster” of Streptomyces pristinaespir-
       color A3(2). Nature 2002;417:141–7. https://doi.org/10.1038/417141a.                             alis. Microb Biotechnol 2011;4:192–206. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-7915.
 [28] Machida M, Asai K, Sano M, Tanaka T, Kumagai T, Terai G, et al. Genome se-               2010.00213.x.
      quencing and analysis of Aspergillus oryzae. Nature 2005;438:1157–61. https://doi.       [54] Nieselt K, Battke F, Herbig A, Bruheim P, Wentzel A, Jakobsen ØM, et al. The
      org/10.1038/nature04300.                                                        dynamic architecture of the metabolic switch in Streptomyces coelicolor. BMC
 [29] Omura S, Ikeda H, Ishikawa J, Hanamoto A, Takahashi C, Shinose M, et al.             Genom 2010;11:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-11-10.
     Genome sequence of an industrial microorganism Streptomyces avermitilis: de-        [55] van der Heul HU, Bilyk BL, McDowall KJ, Seipke RF, van Wezel GP. Regulation of
      ducing the ability of producing secondary metabolites. Proc Natl Acad Sci                     antibiotic production in Actinobacteria: new perspectives from the post-genomic
      2001;98:12215–20. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.211433198.                                  era. Nat Prod Rep 2018;00:1–30. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8NP00012C.
 [30] Yaegashi J, Oakley BR, Wang CCC. Recent advances in genome mining of sec-         [56] Rigali S, Titgemeyer F, Barends S, Mulder S, Thomae AW, Hopwood DA, et al.
      ondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters and the development of heterologous             Feast or famine: the global regulator DasR links nutrient stress to antibiotic pro-
       expression systems in Aspergillus nidulans. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol                        duction by Streptomyces. EMBO Rep 2008;9:670–5. https://doi.org/10.1038/
      2014;41:433–42. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10295-013-1386-z.                            embor.2008.83.
 [31] Pidot SJ, Coyne S, Kloss F, Hertweck C. Antibiotics from neglected bacterial           [57] Martín JF. Phosphate control of the biosynthesis of antibiotics and other secondary
       sources. Int J Med Microbiol 2014;304:14–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmm.               metabolites is mediated by the PhoR-PhoP system: an unﬁnished story. J Bacteriol
      2013.08.011.                                                                       2004;186:5197–201. https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.186.16.5197-5201.2004.
 [32] Gross H, Loper JE. Genomics of secondary metabolite production by Pseudomonas       [58] Martín JF, Liras P. Engineering of regulatory cascades and networks controlling
       spp. Nat Prod Rep 2009;26:1408–46. https://doi.org/10.1039/b817075b.                      antibiotic biosynthesis in Streptomyces. Curr Opin Microbiol 2010;13:263–73.
 [33] Mousa WK, Athar B, Merwin NJ, Magarvey NA. Antibiotics and specialized me-              https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2010.02.008.
       tabolites from the human microbiota. Nat Prod Rep 2017;34:1302–31. https://doi.       [59] Martín JF, Casqueiro J, Liras P. Secretion systems for secondary metabolites: how
      org/10.1039/c7np00021a.                                                             producer cells send out messages of intercellular communication. Curr Opin
 [34] Milshteyn A, Schneider JS, Brady SF. Mining the metabiome: identifying novel               Microbiol 2005;8:282–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2005.04.009.
       natural products from microbial communities. Chem Biol 2014;21. https://doi.         [60] Ikeno S, Yamane Y, Ohishi Y, Kinoshita N, Hamada M, Tsuchiya KS, et al. ABC
      org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2014.08.006.                                                         transporter genes, kasKLM, responsible for self-resistance of a kasugamycin pro-
 [35] Burkhart BJ, Hudson GA, Dunbar KL, Mitchell DA. A prevalent peptide-binding             ducer strain. J Antibiot (Tokyo) 2000;53:373–84. https://doi.org/10.7164/
      domain guides ribosomal natural product biosynthesis. Nat Chem Biol                         antibiotics.53.373.
      2015;11:564–70. https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.1856.                           [61] Chen J, Liu M, Liu X, Miao J, Fu C, Gao H, et al. Interrogation of Streptomyces
 [36] Sardar D, Lin Z, Schmidt EW. Modularity of RiPP enzymes enables designed                     avermitilis for eﬃcient production of avermectins. Synth Syst Biotechnol
       synthesis of decorated peptides. Chem Biol 2015;22:907–16. https://doi.org/10.             2016;1:7–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2016.03.002.
      1016/j.chembiol.2015.06.014.                                                     [62] Ochi K. Metabolic initiation of diﬀerentiation and secondary metabolism by
 [37]  Piel J, Hui D, Wen G, Butzke D, Platzer M, Fusetani N, et al. Antitumor polyketide            Streptomyces griseus: signiﬁcance of the stringent response (ppGpp) and GTP
       biosynthesis by an uncultivated bacterial symbiont of the marine sponge Theonella            content in relation to A factor. J Bacteriol 1987;169:3608–16. https://doi.org/10.
       swinhoei. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:16222–7. https://doi.org/10.1073/            1128/jb.169.8.3608-3616.1987.
      pnas.0405976101.                                                                [63] Ochi K. From microbial diﬀerentiation to ribosome engineering. Biosci Biotechnol
 [38] Hover BM, Kim SH, Katz M, Charlop-Powers Z, Owen JG, Ternei MA, et al. Culture-           Biochem 2007;71:1373–86. https://doi.org/10.1271/bbb.70007.
      independent discovery of the malacidins as calcium-dependent antibiotics with         [64] Artsimovitch I, Patlan V, Sekine S-I, Vassylyeva MN, Hosaka T, Ochi K, et al.
       activity against multidrug-resistant Gram-positive pathogens. Nat Microbiol                   Structural basis for transcription regulation by alarmone ppGpp. Cell
      2018;3:415–22. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-018-0110-1.                             2004;117:299–310. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(04)00401-5.
 [39] Ling LL, Schneider T, Peoples AJ, Spoering AL, Engels I, Conlon BP, et al. A new       [65] Ross W, Vrentas CE, Sanchez-Vazquez P, Gaal T, Gourse RL. The magic spot: a
       antibiotic kills pathogens without detectable resistance. Nature 2015;517:455–9.          ppGpp binding site on E. coli RNA polymerase responsible for regulation of tran-
      https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14098.                                                          scription initiation. Mol Cell 2013;50:420–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.

                                                                       175


[PDF physical page 14]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178


      2013.03.021.                                                                         Heterochromatic marks are associated with the repression of secondary metabo-
 [66] Liu K, Bittner AN, Wang JD. Diversity in (p)ppGpp metabolism and eﬀectors. Curr             lism clusters in Aspergillus nidulans. Mol Microbiol 2010;76:1376–86. https://doi.
      Opin Microbiol 2015;24:72–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2015.01.012.                  org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07051.x.
 [67] Ochi K. Cryptic pathways and implications for novel drug discovery. Microb.          [92] Lombardi PM, Angell HD, Whittington DA, Flynn EF, Rajashankar KR, Christianson
       Resour., Elsevier; 2017. p. 189–203. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804765-         DW. Structure of prokaryotic polyamine deacetylase reveals evolutionary func-
      1.00009-6.                                                                                        tional relationships with eukaryotic histone deacetylases. Biochemistry
 [68] Martinez-Costa OH, Arias P, Romero NM, Parro V, Mellado RP, Malpartida F. A             2011;50:1808–17. https://doi.org/10.1021/bi101859k.
       relA/spoT homologous gene from Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) controls antibiotic       [93] Williams RM, Rimsky S. Molecular aspects of the E. coli nucleoid protein, H-NS: a
       biosynthetic genes. J Biochem Chem 1996;271:10627–34. https://doi.org/10.                 central controller of gene regulatory networks. FEMS Microbiol Lett
      1074/jbc.271.18.10627 May 3,1996.                                                   1997;156:175–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-1097(97)00397-2.
 [69] Chakraburtty R, Bibb M. The ppGpp synthetase gene (relA) of Streptomyces coeli-       [94] Moore JM, Bradshaw E, Seipke RF, Hutchings MI, McArthur M. Use and discovery
       color A3(2) plays a conditional role in antibiotic production and morphological               of chemical elicitors that stimulate biosynthetic gene clusters in Streptomyces
       diﬀerentiation. J Bacteriol 1997;179:5854–61. https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.179.                bacteria. Hopwood DA, editor. Methods enzymol, vol. 517. Elsevier Inc.; 2012. p.
      18.5854-5861.1997.                                                                 367–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-404634-4.00018-8.
 [70] Gomez-Escribano JP, Liras P, Pisabarro A, Martín JF. An rplKΔ29-PALG-32 mutation       [95] Aldridge M, Facey P, Francis L, Bayliss S, Del Sol R, Dyson P. A novel bifunctional
       leads to reduced expression of the regulatory genes ccaR and claR and very low              histone protein in Streptomyces: a candidate for structural coupling between DNA
       transcription of the ceaS2 gene for clavulanic acid biosynthesis in Streptomyces              conformation and transcription during development and stress? Nucleic Acids Res
        clavuligerus. Mol Microbiol 2006;61:758–70. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-               2013;41:4813–24. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkt180.
      2958.2006.05266.x.                                                              [96] Scherlach K, Hertweck C. Triggering cryptic natural product biosynthesis in mi-
 [71] Lai C, Xu J, Tozawa Y, Okamoto-Hosoya Y, Yao X, Ochi K. Genetic and physio-              croorganisms. Org Biomol Chem 2009;7:1753. https://doi.org/10.1039/
       logical characterization of rpoB mutations that activate antibiotic production in             b821578b.
       Streptomyces lividans. Microbiology 2002;148:3365–73. https://doi.org/10.1099/       [97] Bode HB, Bethe B, Höfs R, Zeeck A. Big eﬀects from small changes: possible ways
      00221287-148-11-3365.                                                                       to explore nature's chemical diversity. Chembiochem 2002;3:619. https://doi.org/
 [72] Xu J, Tozawa Y, Lai C, Hayashi H, Ochi K. A rifampicin resistance mutation in the           10.1002/1439-7633(20020703)3:7<619::AID-CBIC619>3.0.CO;2-9.
      rpoB gene confers ppGpp-independent antibiotic production in Streptomyces coeli-       [98] Reen FJ, Romano S, Dobson ADW, O'Gara F. The sound of silence: activating silent
       color A3(2). Mol Genet Genom 2002;268:179–89. https://doi.org/10.1007/                   biosynthetic gene clusters in marine microorganisms. Mar Drugs
      s00438-002-0730-1.                                                                  2015;13:4754–83. https://doi.org/10.3390/md13084754.
 [73] Tanaka Y, Kasahara K, Hirose Y, Murakami K, Kugimiya R, Ochi K. Activation and       [99] Paranagama PA, Wijeratne EMK, Gunatilaka AAL. Uncovering biosynthetic po-
      products of the cryptic secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters by ri-                   tential of plant-associated fungi: eﬀect of culture conditions on metabolite pro-
      fampin resistance (rpoB) mutations in actinomycetes. J Bacteriol                            duction by Paraphaeosphaeria quadriseptata and Chaetomium chiversii. J Nat Prod
      2013;195:2959–70. https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00147-13.                                2007;70:1939–45. https://doi.org/10.1021/np070504b.
 [74] Shima J, Hesketh A, Okamoto S, Kawamoto S, Ochi K. Induction of actinorhodin      [100] Doull JL, Singh AK, Hoare M, Ayer SW. Conditions for the production of jado-
      production by rpsL (encoding ribosomal protein S12) mutations that confer                mycin B by Streptomyces venezuelae ISP5230: eﬀects of heat shock, ethanol treat-
      streptomycin resistance in Streptomyces lividans and Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). J           ment and phage infection. J Ind Microbiol 1994;13:120–5. https://doi.org/10.
       Bacteriol 1996;178:7276–84. https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.178.24.7276-7284.               1007/BF01584109.
      1996.                                                                        [101] Liao Y, Wei ZH, Bai L, Deng Z, Zhong JJ. Eﬀect of fermentation temperature on
 [75] Ochi K, Zhang D, Kawamoto S, Hesketh A. Molecular and functional analysis of the            validamycin A production by Streptomyces hygroscopicus 5008. J Biotechnol
      ribosomal L11 and S12 protein genes (rplK and rpsL) of Streptomyces coelicolor               2009;142:271–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2009.04.015.
       A3(2). Mol Gen Genet 1997;256:488–98. https://doi.org/10.1007/                  [102] Hayes A, Hobbs G, Smith CP, Oliver SG, Butler PR. Environmental signals trig-
      s004380050593.                                                                           gering methylenomycin production by Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). J Bacteriol
 [76] Wang G, Hosaka T, Ochi K. Dramatic activation of antibiotic production in                 1997;179:5511–5. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00203-014-1000-4.
      Streptomyces coelicolor by cumulative drug resistance mutations. Appl Environ       [103] Rigali S, Titgemeyer F, Barends S, Mulder S, Thomae AW, Hopwood DA, et al.
      Microbiol 2008;74:2834–40. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02800-07.                        Feast or famine: the global regulator DasR links nutrient stress to antibiotic pro-
 [77] Hosoya Y, Okamoto S, Muramatsu H, Ochi K. Acquisition of certain streptomycin-            duction by Streptomyces. EMBO Rep 2008;9:670–5. https://doi.org/10.1038/
       resistant (str) mutations enhances antibiotic production in bacteria. Antimicrob              embor.2008.83.
      Agents Chemother 1998;42:2041–7.                                              [104] Craney A, Ozimok C, Pimentel-Elardo SM, Capretta A, Nodwell JR. Chemical
 [78] Tanaka Y, Hosaka T, Ochi K. Rare earth elements activate the secondary meta-               perturbation of secondary metabolism demonstrates important links to primary
       bolite-biosynthetic gene clusters in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). J Antibiot                  metabolism. Chem Biol 2012;19:1020–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.
      (Tokyo) 2010;63:477–81. https://doi.org/10.1038/ja.2010.53.                             2012.06.013.
 [79] Hosaka T, Ohnishi-Kameyama M, Muramatsu H, Murakami K, Tsurumi Y, Kodani      [105] Onaka H, Tabata H, Igarashi Y, Sato Y, Furumai T. Goadsporin, a chemical sub-
        S, et al. Antibacterial discovery in actinomycetes strains with mutations in RNA              stance which promotes secondary metabolism and morphogenesis in
      polymerase or ribosomal protein S12. Nat Biotechnol 2009;27:462–4. https://doi.              Streptomycetes. I. Puriﬁcation and Characterization. J Antibiot (Tokyo)
      org/10.1038/nbt.1538.                                                               2001;54:1036–44. https://doi.org/10.7164/antibiotics.54.1036.
 [80] Whitehouse I, Rando OJ, Delrow J, Tsukiyama T. Chromatin remodelling at pro-      [106] Onaka H. Novel antibiotic screening methods to awaken silent or cryptic sec-
      moters suppresses antisense transcription. Nature 2007;450:1031–5. https://doi.            ondary metabolic pathways in actinomycetes. J Antibiot (Tokyo) 2017:1–6.
      org/10.1038/nature06391.                                                                 https://doi.org/10.1038/ja.2017.51.
 [81] Bednar J, Horowitz RA, Grigoryev SA, Carruthers LM, Hansen JC, Koster AJ, et al.      [107] Wang W, Ji J, Li X, Wang J, Li S, Pan G, et al. Angucyclines as signals modulate the
      Nucleosomes, linker DNA, and linker histone form a unique structural motif that             behaviors of Streptomyces coelicolor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014;111:5688–93.
       directs the higher-order folding and compaction of chromatin. Proc Natl Acad Sci            https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1324253111.
    U S A 1998;95:14173–8. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.24.14173.                [108] Amano SI, Sakurai T, Endo K, Takano H, Beppu T, Furihata K, et al. A cryptic
 [82] Saha A, Wittmeyer J, Cairns BR. Chromatin remodelling: the industrial revolution              antibiotic triggered by monensin. J Antibiot (Tokyo) 2011;64:703. https://doi.
       of DNA around histones. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006;7:437–47. https://doi.org/10.            org/10.1038/ja.2011.69.
      1038/nrm1945.                                                               [109] Kawai K, Wang G, Okamoto S, Ochi K. The rare earth, scandium, causes antibiotic
 [83] Cedar H, Bergman Y. Linking DNA methylation and histone modiﬁcation: patterns            overproduction in Streptomyces spp. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2007;274:311–5.
      and paradigms. Nat Rev Genet 2009;10:295–304. https://doi.org/10.1038/                  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.2007.00846.x.
      nrg2540.                                                                     [110] Davies J, Spiegelman GB, Yim G. The world of subinhibitory antibiotic con-
 [84] Jenuwein T, Allis C. Translating the histone code. Science 2001;293:1074–80.                 centrations. Curr Opin Microbiol 2006;9:445–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.
      https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1063127.                                               2006.08.006.
 [85] Marks PA, Richon VM, Breslow R, Rifkind RA. Histone deacetylase inhibitors as       [111] Davies J. Are antibiotics naturally antibiotics? J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol
     new cancer drugs. Curr Opin Oncol 2001;13:477–83.                                     2006;33:496–9. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10295-006-0112-5.
 [86] Yu J-H, Keller N. Regulation of secondary metabolism in ﬁlamentous fungi. Annu      [112] Wakeﬁeld J, Hassan HM, Jaspars M, Ebel R, Rateb ME. Dual induction of new
      Rev Phytopathol 2005;43:437–58. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.phyto.43.                microbial secondary metabolites by fungal bacterial co-cultivation. Front
      040204.140214.                                                                          Microbiol 2017;8:1–10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2017.01284.
 [87] Gacek A, Strauss J. The chromatin code of fungal secondary metabolite gene         [113] Oh DC, Kauﬀman CA, Jensen PR, Fenical W. Induced production of emer-
        clusters. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2012;95:1389–404. https://doi.org/10.1007/             icellamides A and B from the marine-derived fungus Emericella sp. in competing
      s00253-012-4208-8.                                                                              co-culture. J Nat Prod 2007;70:515–20. https://doi.org/10.1021/np060381f.
 [88] Shwab EK, Jin WB, Tribus M, Galehr J, Graessle S, Keller NP. Histone deacetylase      [114] Amano SI, Morota T, Kano YK, Narita H, Hashidzume T, Yamamoto S, et al.
       activity regulates chemical diversity in Aspergillus. Eukaryot Cell 2007;6:1656–64.           Promomycin, a polyether promoting antibiotic production in Streptomyces spp. J
      https://doi.org/10.1128/EC.00186-07.                                                       Antibiot (Tokyo) 2010;63:486–91. https://doi.org/10.1038/ja.2010.68.
 [89] Bok JW, Chiang YM, Szewczyk E, Reyes-Domingez Y, Davidson AD, Sanchez JF,      [115] Schroeckh V, Scherlach K, Nutzmann H-W, Shelest E, Schmidt-Heck W,
       et al. Chromatin-level regulation of biosynthetic gene clusters. Nat Chem Biol             Schuemann J, et al. Intimate bacterial-fungal interaction triggers biosynthesis of
      2009;5:462–4. https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.177.                                      archetypal polyketides in Aspergillus nidulans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
 [90] Williams RB, Henrikson JC, Hoover AR, Lee AE, Cichewicz RH. Epigenetic re-              2009;106:14558–63. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0901870106.
      modeling of the fungal secondary metabolome. Org Biomol Chem 2008;6:1895.       [116] König CC, Scherlach K, Schroeckh V, Horn F, Nietzsche S, Brakhage AA, et al.
      https://doi.org/10.1039/b804701d.                                                    Bacterium induces cryptic meroterpenoid pathway in the pathogenic fungus
 [91] Reyes-Dominguez Y, Bok JW, Berger H, Shwab EK, Basheer A, Gallmetzer A, et al.               Aspergillus fumigatus. Chembiochem 2013;14:938–42. https://doi.org/10.1002/

                                                                       176


[PDF physical page 15]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178


      cbic.201300070.                                                                     1007/s10529-011-0673-x.
[117] Beld J, Sonnenschein EC, Vickery CR, Noel JP, Burkart MD. The phospho-            [141] Zhuo Y, Zhang W, Chen D, Gao H, Tao J, Liu M, et al. Reverse biological en-
       pantetheinyl transferases: catalysis of a post-translational modiﬁcation crucial for             gineering of hrdB to enhance the production of avermectins in an industrial strain
         life. Nat Prod Rep 2014;31:61–108. https://doi.org/10.1039/C3NP70054B.                    of Streptomyces avermitilis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:11250–4. https://
[118] Bunet R, Riclea R, Laureti L, Hôtel L, Paris C, Girardet JM, et al. A single Sfp-type            doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1006085107.
      phosphopantetheinyl transferase plays a major role in the biosynthesis of PKS and      [142] Olano C, García I, González A, Rodriguez M, Rozas D, Rubio J, et al. Activation
     NRPS derived metabolites in Streptomyces ambofaciens ATCC23877. PLoS One              and identiﬁcation of ﬁve clusters for secondary metabolites in Streptomyces albus
       2014;9:1–12. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0087607.                             J1074. Microb Biotechnol 2014;7. https://doi.org/10.1111/1751-7915.12116.
[119] Gunnarsson N, Eliasson A, Nielsen J. Control of ﬂuxes towards antibiotics and the      [143] Bai C, Zhang Y, Zhao X, Hu Y, Xiang S, Miao J, et al. Exploiting a precise design of
       role of primary metabolism in production of antibiotics. Adv Biochem Eng                    universal synthetic modular regulatory elements to unlock the microbial natural
       Biotechnol 2004;88:137–78. https://doi.org/10.1007/b99260.                              products in Streptomyces. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015;112:12181–6. https://doi.
[120] Zhang B, Tian W, Wang S, Yan X, Jia X, Pierens GK, et al. Activation of natural             org/10.1073/pnas.1511027112.
       products biosynthetic pathways via a protein modiﬁcation level regulation. ACS      [144] Zhang MM, Wong FT, Wang Y, Luo S, Lim YH, Heng E, et al. CRISPR–Cas9 strategy
     Chem Biol 2017;12:1732–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/acschembio.7b00225.                    for activation of silent Streptomyces biosynthetic gene clusters. Nat Chem Biol
[121] Yan X, Zhang B, Tian W, Dai Q, Zheng X, Hu K, et al. Puromycin A, B and C, cryptic            2017;13:607–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.2341.
       nucleosides identiﬁed from Streptomyces alboniger NRRL B-1832 by PPtase-based      [145] Kennedy J, Turner G. δ-(L-α-Aminoadipyl)-L-cysteinyl-D-valine synthetase is a
       activation. Synth Syst Biotechnol 2018;3:76–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.                    rate limiting enzyme for penicillin production in Aspergillus nidulans. Mol Gen
       synbio.2018.02.001.                                                                Genet MGG 1996;253:189–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/s004380050312.
[122] Tilburn J, Sarkar S, Widdick DA, Espeso EA, Orejas M, Mungroo J, et al. The         [146] Yeh H-H, Ahuja M, Chiang Y-M, Oakley CE, Moore S, Yoon O, et al. Resistance
        Aspergillus PacC zinc ﬁnger transcription factor mediates regulation of both acid-            gene-guided genome mining: serial promoter exchanges in Aspergillus nidulans
      and alkaline-expressed genes by ambient pH. EMBO J 1995;14:779–90. https://              reveal the biosynthetic pathway for Fellutamide B, a proteasome inhibitor. ACS
       doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb07056.x.                                  Chem Biol 2016;11:2275–84. https://doi.org/10.1021/acschembio.6b00213.
[123] Brakhage AA. Regulation of fungal secondary metabolism. Nat Rev Microbiol         [147] Huang J, Shi J, Molle V, Sohlberg B, Weaver D, Bibb MJ, et al. Cross-regulation
      2013;11:21–32. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro2916.                             among disparate antibiotic biosynthetic pathways of Streptomyces coelicolor. Mol
[124] Makitrynskyy R, Ostash B, Tsypik O, Rebets Y, Doud E, Meredith T, et al.                   Microbiol 2005;58:1276–87. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04879.x.
       Pleiotropic regulatory genes bldA, adpA and absB are implicated in production of      [148] Santos-Beneit F, Rodríguez-García A, Sola-Landa A, Martín JF. Cross-talk between
       phosphoglycolipid antibiotic moenomycin. Open Biol 2013;3:130121https://doi.           two global regulators in Streptomyces: PhoP and AfsR interact in the control of afsS,
      org/10.1098/rsob.130121.                                                                        pstS and phoRP transcription. Mol Microbiol 2009;72:53–68. https://doi.org/10.
[125] Ohnishi Y, Yamazaki H, Kato J, Tomono A, Horinouchi S. AdpA, a central tran-             1111/j.1365-2958.2009.06624.x.
       scriptional regulator in the A-Factor regulatory cascade that leads to morpholo-       [149] Romero-Rodríguez A, Robledo-Casados I, Sánchez S. An overview on transcrip-
        gical development and secondary metabolism in Streptomyces griseus. Biosci                    tional regulators in Streptomyces. Biochim Biophys Acta Gene Regul Mech
       Biotechnol Biochem 2005;69:431–9. https://doi.org/10.1271/bbb.69.431.                  2015;1849:1017–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.06.007.
[126] Xu J, Zhang J, Zhuo J, Li Y, Tian Y, Tan H. Activation and mechanism of a cryptic      [150] Bhukya H, Anand R. TetR regulators: a structural and functional perspective. J
      oviedomycin gene cluster via the disruption of a global regulatory gene, adpA, in             Indian Inst Sci 2017;97:245–59. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41745-017-0025-5.
       Streptomyces ansochromogenes. J Biol Chem 2017;292:19708–20. https://doi.org/      [151] Orth P, Schnappinger D, Hillen W, Saenger W, Hinrichs W. Structural basis of gene
      10.1074/jbc.M117.809145.                                                                  regulation by the tetracycline inducible Tet repressor-operator system. Nat Struct
[127] Becerril A, Álvarez S, Braña AF, Rico S, Díaz M, Santamaría RI, et al. Uncovering              Biol 2000;7:215–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/73324.
       production of specialized metabolites by Streptomyces argillaceus: activation of        [152] Onaka H, Horinouchi S. DNA-binding activity of the A-factor receptor protein and
       cryptic biosynthesis gene clusters using nutritional and genetic approaches. PLoS                 its recognition DNA sequences. Mol Microbiol 1997;24:991–1000. https://doi.
     One 2018;13:e0198145https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0198145.                     org/10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.4081772.x.
[128] Fowler-Goldsworthy K, Gust B, Mouz S, Chandra G, Findlay KC, Chater KF. The       [153] Xu G, Wang J, Wang L, Tian X, Yang H, Fan K, et al. “Pseudo” γ-butyrolactone
       actinobacteria-speciﬁc gene wblA controls major developmental transitions in                 receptors respond to antibiotic signals to coordinate antibiotic biosynthesis. J Biol
       Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). Microbiology 2011;157:1312–28. https://doi.org/          Chem 2010;285:27440–8. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.143081.
      10.1099/mic.0.047555-0.                                                       [154] Zhang YY, Zou ZZ, Niu GQ, Tan HR. jadR* and jadR2 act synergistically to repress
[129] Huang H, Hou L, Li H, Qiu Y, Ju J, Li W. Activation of a plasmid-situated type III            jadomycin biosynthesis. Sci China Life Sci 2013;56:584–90. https://doi.org/10.
     PKS gene cluster by deletion of a wbl gene in deepsea-derived Streptomyces so-              1007/s11427-013-4508-y.
        maliensis SCSIO ZH66. Microb Cell Factories 2016;15:116. https://doi.org/10.        [155] Bunet R, Song L, Mendes MV, Corre C, Hotel L, Rouhier N, et al. Characterization
      1186/s12934-016-0515-6.                                                        and manipulation of the pathway-speciﬁc late regulator AlpW reveals Streptomyces
[130]  Li H, Huang H, Hou L, Ju J, Li W. Discovery of antimycin-type depsipeptides from             ambofaciens as a new producer of kinamycins. J Bacteriol 2011;193:1142–53.
      a wbl gene mutant strain of deepsea-derived Streptomyces somaliensis SCSIO ZH66             https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.01269-10.
      and their eﬀects on pro-inﬂammatory cytokine production. Front Microbiol          [156] Lee HN, Huang J, Im JH, Kim SH, Noh JH, Cohen SN, et al. Putative TetR family
       2017;8:1–8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2017.00678.                                       transcriptional regulator SCO1712 encodes an antibiotic downregulator in
[131] Gruber TM, Gross CA. Multiple sigma subunits and the partitioning of bacterial               Streptomyces coelicolor. Appl Environ Microbiol 2010;76:3039–43. https://doi.org/
       transcription space. Annu Rev Microbiol 2003;57:441–66. https://doi.org/10.              10.1128/AEM.02426-09.
      1146/annurev.micro.57.030502.090913.                                         [157] Takano E, Kinoshita H, Mersinias V, Bucca G, Hotchkiss G, Nihira T, et al. A
[132] Paget MS, Helmann JD. The σ70 family of sigma factors. Genome Biol 2003;4:203.              bacterial hormone (the SCB1) directly controls the expression of a pathway-spe-
       https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2003-4-1-203.                                                  ciﬁc regulatory gene in the cryptic type I polyketide biosynthetic gene cluster of
[133] Jiang C, Wang H, Kang Q, Liu J, Bai L. Cloning and characterization of the                   Streptomyces coelicolor. Mol Microbiol 2005;56:465–79. https://doi.org/10.1111/
       polyether salinomycin biosynthesis gene cluster of Streptomyces albus XM211. Appl            j.1365-2958.2005.04543.x.
      Environ Microbiol 2012;78:994–1003. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.06701-11.       [158] Gomez-Escribano JP, Song L, Fox DJ, Yeo V, Bibb MJ, Challis GL. Structure and
[134] Shelest E. Transcription factors in fungi: TFome dynamics, three major families,              biosynthesis of the unusual polyketide alkaloid coelimycin P1, a metabolic pro-
      and dual-speciﬁcity TFs. Front Genet 2017;8:53. https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.             duct of the cpk gene cluster of Streptomyces coelicolor M145. Chem Sci
      2017.00053.                                                                          2012;3:2716. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2sc20410j.
[135] Hu Y, Qin Y, Liu G. Collection and curation of transcriptional regulatory inter-       [159] Zhang R, Pappas KM, Brace JL, Miller PC, Oulmassov T, Molyneaux JM, et al.
       actions in Aspergillus nidulans and Neurospora crassa reveal structural and evolu-              Structure of a bacterial quorum-sensing transcription factor complexed with
       tionary features of the regulatory networks. Front Microbiol 2018;9:1–8. https://           pheromone and DNA. Nature 2002;417:971–4. https://doi.org/10.1038/
      doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.00027.                                                    nature00833.
[136] Jnawali HN, Liou K, Sohng JK. Role of σ-factor (orf21) in clavulanic acid pro-        [160] White CE, Winans SC. Identiﬁcation of amino acid residues of the Agrobacterium
       duction in Streptomyces clavuligerus NRRL3585. Microbiol Res 2011;166:369–79.              tumefaciens quorum-sensing regulator TraR that are critical for positive control of
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micres.2010.07.005.                                                  transcription. Mol Microbiol 2005;55:1473–86. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
[137] Lee S, Yang SH, Kang C, Mo S, Suh J. Overexpression of the putative extra-                 2958.2004.04482.x.
       cytoplasmic function sigma (σ) factor FujE enhances FK506 production in            [161] Schrijver AD, Mot RD. A subfamily of MalT-related ATP-dependent regulators in
       Streptomyces sp. strain KCCM 11116P. Can J Microbiol 2014;60:363–9. https://              the LuxR family. Microbiology 1999;145:1287–8. https://doi.org/10.1099/
      doi.org/10.1139/cjm-2014-0166.                                                     13500872-145-6-1287.
[138] Taniguchi H, Henke NA, Heider SAE, Wendisch VF. Overexpression of the primary      [162] Danot O. A complex signaling module governs the activity of MalT, the prototype
      sigma factor gene sigA improved carotenoid production by Corynebacterium glu-               of an emerging transactivator family. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001;98:435–40.
       tamicum: application to production of β-carotene and the non-native linear C50              https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.98.2.435.
       carotenoid bisanhydrobacterioruberin. Metab Eng Commun 2017;4:1–11. https://      [163] Chen R, Zhang Q, Tan B, Zheng L, Li H, Zhu Y, et al. Genome mining and acti-
       doi.org/10.1016/j.meteno.2017.01.001.                                                    vation of a silent PKS/NRPS gene cluster direct the production of
[139] Stevens DC, Conway KR, Pearce N, Villegas-Peñaranda LR, Garza AG, Boddy CN.            Totopotensamides. Org Lett 2017;19:5697–700. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
       Alternative sigma factor over-expression enables heterologous expression of a                orglett.7b02878.
      Type II polyketide biosynthetic pathway in Escherichia coli. PLoS One                [164] Wilkinson B, Mickleﬁeld J. Mining and engineering natural-product biosynthetic
       2013;8:e64858https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0064858.                            pathways. Nat Chem Biol 2007;3:379–86. https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.
[140] Jiang L, Liu Y, Wang P, Wen Y, Song Y, Chen Z, et al. Inactivation of the extra-             2007.7.
       cytoplasmic function sigma factor Sig6 stimulates avermectin production in          [165] Liu T, Mazmouz R, Ongley SE, Chau R, Pickford R, Woodhouse JN, et al. Directing
       Streptomyces avermitilis. Biotechnol Lett 2011;33:1955–61. https://doi.org/10.                the heterologous production of speciﬁc cyanobacterial toxin variants. ACS Chem

                                                                       177


[PDF physical page 16]
B. Baral et al.                                                                                                                          Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 3 (2018) 163–178


       Biol 2017;12:2021–9. https://doi.org/10.1021/acschembio.7b00181.                [187] Kouprina N, Larionov V. Transformation-associated recombination (TAR) cloning
[166] Ongley SE, Bian X, Zhang Y, Chau R, Gerwick WH, Müller R, et al. High-titer                  for genomics studies and synthetic biology. Chromosoma 2016;125:621–32.
       heterologous production in E. coli of lyngbyatoxin, a protein kinase C activator              https://doi.org/10.1007/s00412-016-0588-3.
      from an uncultured marine cyanobacterium. ACS Chem Biol 2013;8:1888–93.        [188] Wang H, Li Z, Jia R, Hou Y, Yin J, Bian X, et al. RecET direct cloning and Redαβ
       https://doi.org/10.1021/cb400189j.                                                    recombineering of biosynthetic gene clusters, large operons or single genes for
[167] Gustafsson C, Govindarajan S, Minshull J. Codon bias and heterologous protein              heterologous expression. Nat Protoc 2016;11:1175–90. https://doi.org/10.1038/
       expression. Trends Biotechnol 2004;22:346–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.                  nprot.2016.054.
       tibtech.2004.04.006.                                                           [189] Greunke C, Duell ER, D'Agostino PM, Glöckle A, Lamm K, Gulder TAM. Direct
[168] Zhang Z, Smart TJ, Choi H, Hardy F, Lohans CT, Abboud MI, et al. Structural and           Pathway Cloning (DiPaC) to unlock natural product biosynthetic potential. Metab
       stereoelectronic insights into oxygenase-catalyzed formation of ethylene from 2-           Eng 2018;47:334–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2018.03.010.
       oxoglutarate. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2017;114:4667–72. https://doi.org/10.1073/        [190] Casini A, Chang FY, Eluere R, King AM, Young EM, Dudley QM, et al. A pressure
      pnas.1617760114.                                                                                       test to make 10 molecules in 90 days: external evaluation of methods to engineer
[169] Peiru S, Menzella HG, Rodriguez E, Carney J, Gramajo H. Production of the potent             biology. J Am Chem Soc 2018;140:4302–16. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.
       antibacterial polyketide Erythromycin C in Escherichia coli. Appl Environ Microbiol           7b13292.
      2005;71:2539–47. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.71.5.2539-2547.2005.              [191] Yamanaka K, Reynolds KA, Kersten RD, Ryan KS, Gonzalez DJ, Nizet V, et al.
[170] Choi KR, Cho JS, Cho IJ, Park D, Lee SY. Markerless gene knockout and integration             Direct cloning and refactoring of a silent lipopeptide biosynthetic gene cluster
       to express heterologous biosynthetic gene clusters in Pseudomonas putida. Metab               yields the antibiotic taromycin A. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014;111:1957–62.
      Eng 2018;47:463–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2018.05.003.                       https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1319584111.
[171] Liu Q, Shen Q, Bian X, Chen H, Fu J, Wang H, et al. Simple and rapid direct cloning      [192] Luo Y, Zhang L, Barton KW, Zhao H. Systematic identiﬁcation of a panel of strong
      and heterologous expression of natural product biosynthetic gene cluster in                   constitutive promoters from Streptomyces albus. ACS Synth Biol 2015;4:1001–10.
        Bacillus subtilis via Red/ET recombineering. Sci Rep 2016;6:1–10. https://doi.org/             https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00016.
      10.1038/srep34623.                                                           [193] Luo Y, Huang H, Liang J, Wang M, Lu L, Shao Z, et al. Activation and character-
[172] Wendt-Pienkowski E, Huang Y, Zhang J, Li B, Jiang H, Kwon H, et al. Cloning,                ization of a cryptic polycyclic tetramate macrolactam biosynthetic gene cluster.
       sequencing, analysis, and heterologous expression of the fredericamycin biosyn-            Nat Commun 2013;4:2894. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms3894.
        thetic gene cluster from Streptomyces griseus. J Am Chem Soc 2005;127:16442–52.      [194] Shao Z, Rao G, Li C, Abil Z, Luo Y, Zhao H. Refactoring the silent spectinabilin
       https://doi.org/10.1021/ja054376u.                                                  gene cluster using a plug-and-play scaﬀold. ACS Synth Biol 2013;2:662–9. https://
[173] Young TS, Walsh CT. Identiﬁcation of the thiazolyl peptide GE37468 gene cluster            doi.org/10.1021/sb400058n.
      from Streptomyces ATCC 55365 and heterologous expression in Streptomyces livi-      [195] Basitta P, Westrich L, Rösch M, Kulik A, Gust B, Apel AK. AGOS: a plug-and-play
       dans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;108:13053–8. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.           method for the assembly of artiﬁcial gene operons into functional biosynthetic
      1110435108.                                                                      gene clusters. ACS Synth Biol 2017;6:817–25. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.
[174] Gomez-Escribano JP, Bibb MJ. Heterologous expression of natural product bio-             6b00319.
       synthetic gene clusters in Streptomyces coelicolor: from genome mining to manip-      [196]  Li S, Wang J, Li X, Yin S, Wang W, Yang K. Genome-wide identiﬁcation and
       ulation of biosynthetic pathways. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 2014;41:425–31.               evaluation of constitutive promoters in streptomycetes. Microb Cell Factories
       https://doi.org/10.1007/s10295-013-1348-5.                                             2015;14:172. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-015-0351-0.
[175] Rückert C, Albersmeier A, Busche T, Jaenicke S, Winkler A, Fridjónsson ÓH, et al.      [197] Guo F, Xiang S, Li L, Wang B, Rajasärkkä J, Gröndahl-Yli-Hannuksela K, et al.
      Complete genome sequence of Streptomyces lividans TK24. J Biotechnol                     Targeted activation of silent natural product biosynthesis pathways by reporter-
      2015;199:21–2. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2015.02.004.                            guided mutant selection. Metab Eng 2015;28:134–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
[176] Baltz RH. Genetic manipulation of secondary metabolite biosynthesis for improved            ymben.2014.12.006.
       production in Streptomyces and other actinomycetes. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol      [198] Askenazi M, Driggers EM, Holtzman DA, Norman TC, Iverson S, Zimmer DP, et al.
      2016;43:343–70. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10295-015-1682-x.                                Integrating transcriptional and metabolite proﬁles to direct the engineering of
[177] Zaburannyi N, Rabyk M, Ostash B, Fedorenko V, Luzhetskyy A. Insights into                 lovastatin-producing fungal strains. Nat Biotechnol 2003;21:150–6. https://doi.
       naturally minimised Streptomyces albus J1074 genome. BMC Genom                        org/10.1038/nbt781.
      2014;15:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-15-97.                          [199] Xiang S-H, Li J, Yin H, Zheng J-T, Yang X, Wang H-B, et al. Application of a
[178] Nielsen MT, Nielsen JB, Anyaogu DC, Holm DK, Nielsen KF, Larsen TO, et al.                double-reporter-guided mutant selection method to improve clavulanic acid pro-
      Heterologous reconstitution of the intact Geodin gene cluster in Aspergillus nidu-             duction in Streptomyces clavuligerus. Metab Eng 2009;11:310–8. https://doi.org/
        lans through a simple and versatile PCR based approach. PLoS One 2013;8.                 10.1016/j.ymben.2009.06.003.
       https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0072871.                                   [200] Wang Y, Tao Z, Zheng H, Zhang F, Long Q, Deng Z, et al. Iteratively improving
[179] Alberti F, Foster GD, Bailey AM. Natural products from ﬁlamentous fungi and              natamycin production in Streptomyces gilvosporeus by a large operon-reporter
       production by heterologous expression. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol                         based strategy. Metab Eng 2016;38:418–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.
      2017;101:493–500. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-016-8034-2.                          2016.10.005.
[180] Smith DJ, Burnham MKR, Edwards J, J EA, Turner G. Cloning and heterologous      [201] Wang L, Zhao Y, Liu Q, Huang Y, Hu C, Liao G. Improvement of A21978C pro-
       expression of the Penicillin biosynthetic gene cluster from Penicillium chrysogenum.            duction in Streptomyces roseosporus by reporter-guided rpsL mutation selection. J
       Biotechnology 1990;8:39–41. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt0190-39.                       Appl Microbiol 2012;112:1095–101. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2012.
[181] Tagami K, Liu C, Minami A, Noike M, Isaka T, Fueki S, et al. Reconstitution of              05302.x.
       biosynthetic machinery for indole-diterpene paxilline in Aspergillus oryzae. J Am      [202] Rebets Y, Schmelz S, Gromyko O, Tistechok S, Petzke L, Scrima A, et al. Design,
     Chem Soc 2013;135:1260–3. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja3116636.                         development and application of whole-cell based antibiotic-speciﬁc biosensor.
[182] Tagami K, Minami A, Fujii R, Liu C, Tanaka M, Gomi K, et al. Rapid reconstitution           Metab Eng 2018;47:263–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2018.03.019.
       of biosynthetic machinery for fungal metabolites in Aspergillus oryzae: total bio-       [203] Yang K, Han L, He J, Wang L, Vining LC. A repressor-response regulator gene pair
       synthesis of aﬂatrem. Chembiochem 2014;16:2076–80. https://doi.org/10.1002/              controlling jadomycin B production in Streptomyces venezuelae ISP5230. Gene
      cbic.201402195.                                                                     2001;279:165–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-1119(01)00723-5.
[183] Alberti F, Khairudin K, Venegas ER, Davies JA, Hayes PM, Willis CL, et al.           [204] Sun Y-Q, Busche T, Rückert C, Paulus C, Rebets Y, Novakova R, et al. Development
      Heterologous expression reveals the biosynthesis of the antibiotic pleuromutilin               of a biosensor concept to detect the production of cluster-speciﬁc secondary me-
      and generates bioactive semi-synthetic derivatives. Nat Commun 2017;8:1–9.                   tabolites. ACS Synth Biol 2017;6:1026–33. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.
       https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-01659-1.                                         6b00353.
[184] Chiang Y-M, Oakley CE, Ahuja M, Entwistle R, Schultz A, Chang S-L, et al. An        [205] Seyedsayamdost MR. High-throughput platform for the discovery of elicitors of
      eﬃcient system for heterologous expression of secondary metabolite genes in                   silent bacterial gene clusters. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014;111. https://doi.org/
        Aspergillus nidulans. J Am Chem Soc 2013;135:7720–31. https://doi.org/10.1021/            10.1073/pnas.1400019111.
      ja401945a.                                                                   [206] Rosen PC, Seyedsayamdost MR. Though much is taken, much abides: ﬁnding new
[185] Gomez-Escribano JP, Bibb MJ. Engineering Streptomyces coelicolor for hetero-                  antibiotics using old ones. Biochemistry 2017;56:4925–6. https://doi.org/10.
       logous expression of secondary metabolite gene clusters. Microb Biotechnol                 1021/acs.biochem.7b00782.
      2011;4:207–15. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-7915.2010.00219.x.                 [207] Xu F, Nazari B, Moon K, Bushin LB, Seyedsayamdost MR. Discovery of a cryptic
[186] Komatsu M, Komatsu K, Koiwai H, Yamada Y, Kozone I, Izumikawa M, et al.                 antifungal compound from Streptomyces albus J1074 using high-throughput eli-
      Engineered Streptomyces avermitilis host for heterologous expression of biosyn-                  citor screens. J Am Chem Soc 2017;139:9203–12. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.
        thetic gene cluster for secondary metabolites. ACS Synth Biol 2013;2:384–96.              7b02716.
       https://doi.org/10.1021/sb3001003.





                                                                       178


[PDF physical page 17]
             Update
Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology
       Volume 5, Issue 4, December 2020, Page 328

    DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2020.10.003


[PDF physical page 18]
                                                    Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology 5 (2020) 328–328

                                                 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
                       Synthetic and Systems Biotechnology

                        journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/synthetic-and-systems-biotechnology


Erratum regarding previously published articles

   The Declaration of Competing Interest statements were not included         9. “The functional differentiation of the Post-PKS tailoring oxy­
in the published version of articles that appeared in the journal: Synthetic           genases contributed  to the chemical  diversities  of  atypical
and Systems Biotechnology. For the below articles, The authors were           angucyclines” (Volume 3, 2018, 275–282)
contacted  after publication  to request a Declaration of  Interest       10. “Systematically investigating the key features of the DNase
statement.                                                                     deactivated Cpf1 for tunable transcription regulation in pro­
                                                                                 karyotic cells” (Volume 4, 2019, 1–9)
    1. “Methods and approaches to disease mechanisms using systems       11. “Crystal structure of the condensation domain from lovastatin
      kinomics” (Volume 3, 2018, 34–43)                                      polyketide synthase” (Volume 4, 2019, 10–15)
    2. “Synthetic  Immunology:  T-cell  Engineering  and  Adoptive       12. “Engineering and modification of microbial chassis for systems
      Immunotherapy” (Volume 3, 2018, 179–185)                         and synthetic biology” (Volume 4, 2019, 25–33)
    3. “Activation of microbial secondary metabolic pathways: avenues       13. “Miniaturisation of high-throughput plasmid DNA library prep­
     and challenges” (Volume 3, 2018, 163–178)                               aration  for  next-generation  sequencing  using  multifactorial
    4. “Substrate specificity of the cypemycin decarboxylase CypD”           optimization” (Volume 4, 2019, 57–66)
      (Volume 3, 2018, 159–162)                                          14. “Simultaneously down-regulation of multiplex branch pathways
    5. “CRISPR-Cas9/Cas12a biotechnology and application in bacte­           using CRISPRi and fermentation optimization for enhancing
       ria” (Volume 3, 2018, 135–149)                                       β-amyrin production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae” (Volume 4,
    6. “Regulation of antibiotic biosynthesis in actinomycetes: Per­          2019, 79–85)
       spectives and challenges” (Volume 3, 2018, 229–235)                 15. “Resistance mechanisms and reprogramming of microorganisms
    7. “New KAT6 inhibitors induce senescence and  arrest cancer            for efficient biorefinery under multiple environmental stresses”
      growth” (Volume 3, 2018, 244–245)                                (Volume 4, 2019, 92–98)
    8. “SCO3129, a TetR family regulator, is responsible for osmotic
       stress in Streptomyces coelicolor” (Volume 3, 2018, 261–267)





   DOIs of original article: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2018.10.005, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2018.11.002, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2018.
09.004, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2017.12.004, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2018.08.001, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2018.09.001, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.synbio.2018.10.012, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2018.11.001, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2018.12.001, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.syn­
bio.2019.02.002,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2019.02.003,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2019.01.002,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2018.09.002,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2018.10.006, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2018.11.003.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.synbio.2020.10.003

Available online 12 October 2020
2405-805X/© 2020 Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co.