
[PDF physical page 1]
                                                  BIOCHEMISTRY                            RESEARCH                                    ARTICLE | CHEMISTRY

    Trojan horse peptide conjugates remodel the activity spectrum
    of clinical antibiotics
       Shangwen Luoa,1      , Xin-­Rong Lia,1, Xiao-­Tong Gonga      , Alexey Kulikovskyb      , Feng Quc,d      , Konstantinos Beisc,d      , Konstantin Severinovb,e      ,
         Svetlana Dubileyb      , Xinxin Fengf,g      , Shi-­Hui Donga,2      , and Satish K. Nairh,i,j,2

         Edited by Mark Blaskovich, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia; received November 6, 2023; accepted November 16, 2024 by
          Editorial Board Member Natalie G. Ahn

        Infections caused by gram-­negative pathogens continue to be a major risk to human
        health because of the innate antibiotic resistance endowed by their unique cell membrane     Significance
        architecture. Nature has developed an elegant solution to target gram-­negative strains,
       namely by conjugating toxic antibiotic warheads to a suitable carrier to facilitate the      The need for antibiotics that
        active import of the drug to a specific target organism. Microcin C7 (McC) is a Trojan        target infections from gram-
       horse peptide–conjugated antibiotic that specifically targets enterobacteria by exploit-       negative pathogens is a growing
       ing active import through oligopeptide transport systems. Here, we characterize the        global health concern. Here, we210.27.113.117.
       molecular mechanism of McC recognition by YejA, the solute binding protein of the      show that antibiotics with activity
                                      transporter.                                                             mutational                                                                and functional        Escherichia                       coli oligopeptide                                                  Structure-­guided                                                                                                    against gram-positive organismsaddress        analysis elucidates                         the determinants                                            of substrate                                                        recognition.                                          We demonstrate                                                                                      that theIP                                                                                     can be repurposed to target       peptide carrier can serve as a passport for the entry of molecules that are otherwise not
                                                                                             gram-negative species byfrom     taken into E. coli cells. We show that peptide conjugation can remodel the antibiotic                                                                                                    attaching a peptide carrier. Our       spectrum of clinically relevant parent compounds. Bioinformatics analysis reveals a
2025     broad distribution of YejA-­like transporters in only the Proteobacteria, underscoring       studies show a strategy for the
16,     the potential for the development of Trojan horse antibiotics that are actively imported      development of gram-negative
        into such gram-­negative bacteria.                                                                  specific antibiotics using warheads
                                                                                                      that are proven antibiotics against
         antibiotics | gram-­negative | transporter                                                        gram-positive pathogens.September
on     Infections from gram-negative pathogens continue to remain among the most significant
        threats to human health, and organisms from this phylum constitute the majority of the      Author affiliations: aState Key Laboratory of Applied Organic
       Global Priority Pathogens listed by the World Health Organization (WHO)  ( 1 ).      Chemistry,Lanzhou University,College of LanzhouChemistry730000,and ChemicalPeople’sEngineering,Republic
        Proteobacteria have a distinct membrane architecture with an outer membrane that limits       of China; bInstitute of Gene Biology, Russian Academy of
                                                                                                                                                 Sciences, Moscow 119334, Russia; cDepartment of  LifeUNIVERSITY     permeability and precludes the entry of most small molecules, leading to an inherent       Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United
         resistance capacity ( 2 , 3 ). Consequently, the development of antibiotics for the treatment      Kingdom;  dRutherford  Appleton  Laboratory,  Research
        of infections by pathogenic Proteobacteria remains a standing challenge ( 4 ). Several outer     Complex at Harwell, Didcot, Oxfordshire OX11 OFA, United                                                                                                                          Kingdom; eWaksman Institute for Microbiology, RutgersFOREST    membrane permeabilizers that disrupt the cross-bridging between bilayer lipopolysac-       University, Piscataway, NJ 08901;  fInstitute of Chemical
        charides have been developed to sensitize pathogenic Proteobacteria to the available      Biology and  Nanomedicine,  State Key  Laboratory  of                                                                                                                            Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, Hunan University,AND        arsenal of antibiotics, but therapeutic usage of these permeabilizers has been limited due      Changsha, Hunan 410082, People’s Republic of China;
        to toxicity ( 5 – 8 ). Efforts to design therapeutics against gram-negative pathogenic strains      gSchoolUniversity,of Changsha,Chemistry Hunanand Chemical410082, People’sEngineering,RepublicHunanof
        are largely empiric, and despite extensive screening campaigns over the last half-century,      China; hDepartment of Biochemistry, University of Illinois,
        there have been few new classes of antibiotics that target Proteobacteria deployed to the      Urbana, IL 61801; iCarl R. Woese Institute for Genomic
         clinic ( 9 , 10 ).                                                                                                                     Biology,for BiophysicsUniversityand Quantitativeof Illinois, Urbana,Biology,ILUniversity61801; andof jCenterIllinois,AGRICULTURE     Two significant factors have impeded efforts toward the discovery of antibiotics that      Urbana, IL 61801
        target gram-negative pathogens. The first is the presence of a dense lipopolysaccharide
         layer on the outer membrane that serves as a barrier to protect against toxins. The second
           is the presence of numerous efflux pumps that can extrude toxic compounds before they      AuthorS.L.,  X.-­R.L.,contributions:A.K.,  X.F.,K.S.S.-­H.D.,and S.K.N.and designedS.K.N. performedresearch;
       can reach intended targets. The biological targets of several antibiotics are typically      research; S.L., X.-­R.L., X.-­T.G., A.K., F.Q., K.B., K.S., S.D., X.F.,NORTHWEST                                                                                                          and S.-­H.D. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; S.L.,       found across multiple phyla, but these restrictions in entry and accumulation limit the         X.-­R.L., K.B., K.S., S.D., X.F., S.-­H.D., and S.K.N. analyzed
                                                                                                                                          data; and S.L., S.-­H.D., and S.K.N. wrote the paper.by      utility of otherwise useful drugs against gram-negative pathogens. Several different
       approaches have been pursued to overcome limitations of entry and accumulation to     The authors declare no competing interest.
       expand the antibacterial activity spectrum of known compounds. Examples include the      This article is a PNAS Direct Submission M.B. is a guest
        use of membrane permeabilizing agents ( 11 , 12 ), or peptidomimetic ( 13 ) adjuvants      editor invited by the Editorial Board.
       with existing antibiotics, or synthetic refactoring of known compounds ( 14 , 15 ) to      Copyright © 2024 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.
       improve permeability into and limit efflux out of gram-negative organisms. While these      ThisAttribution-­NonCommercial-­NoDerivativesarticle  is distributed under CreativeLicenseCommons4.0https://www.pnas.org     approaches have shown impressive outcomes, they are also limited as changes in the      (CC BY-­NC-­ND).
        physical chemical properties of the membrane or of the compound may result in       1S.L. and X.-­R.L. contributed equally to this work.from      unwanted effects.                                                                                              2To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email:
         Nature has devised multiple solutions to the problem by utilizing siderophores (16,      dongsh@lzu.edu.cn or snair@illinois.edu.
      17), oligosaccharides (18), or short peptides ( 19, 20) as conjugates to actively deliver      Thishttps://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.​article contains supporting information online at
        antimicrobials into target organisms followed by their release and performance of the      2319483121/-­/DCSupplemental.Downloaded       intended function. Research efforts have long sought to parlay this Trojan horse strategy      Published December 31, 2024.


      PNAS  2025  Vol. 122  No. 1 e2319483121                                        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2319483121 1 of 10


[PDF physical page 2]
        to devise synthetic conjugates that exploit active transporters, with    5′-phosphate of adenosine monophosphate (AMP). The hepta-
         significant focus on the use of siderophores as delivery vehicles    peptide  is derived from a ribosomally synthesized precursor
          (21). However, such efforts require the development and extensive   (fMRTGNAD) that is adenylated via an aspartamide by the ubiq-
        optimization of strategies to cleave the siderophore to liberate the     uitin ligase-like enzyme MccB (Fig. 1A) (19, 20). Further matu-
         active drug in the cytoplasm (22, 23). Consequently, most efforts     ration of the conjugate includes the installation of 3-aminopropyl
       have focused on the development of noncleavable conjugates with    moiety, derived from S﻿-adenosylmethionine, on the phosphate
         antibiotics that engage periplasmic targets (24–26). Unfortunately,    2′-hydroxyl group (30, 31).
       most gram-positive antibiotics target macromolecules in the cyto-    McC is actively imported into target cells by oligopeptide trans-
       plasm and cannot be easily repurposed without finding ways to     porters that recognize its peptide part. Once inside the target cell,
        cleave off the siderophore carrier (27). Hence, alternative Trojan   McC is processed by nonspecific oligopeptidases (e.g., PepA, PepB,
        horse strategies are required to overcome the limitations of current    or PepN in Escherichia coli) to cleave the peptide and release the
       methodologies.                                                        antibiotic “warhead” (2, processed McC). Processed McC is an
         Microcin C7 (McC) is a peptide-nucleotide natural product     inert analog of aspartyl adenylate 3 and acts as a competitive
        that shows potent inhibitory activity with IC50 at low micromolar     inhibitor of aspartyl-tRNA synthetase (aspRS) to halt protein
       range against Enterobacteria (28, 29). The structure of McC fea-     synthesis (Fig. 1A) (32). The activity of McC is contingent on
        tures a phosphoramidate (N−P bond) linkage between the termi-    uptake and subsequent proteolytic processing as the peptide con-
        nal α-carboxylate of the formylated heptapeptide fMRTGNA N     jugate does not inhibit aspRS. Conversely, the processed final
       (1, fMccA, where  f represents the N﻿-formyl group) and the   compound 2, lacking the peptide, cannot be taken up by target210.27.113.117.
address
IP
from
2025
16,
September
on
UNIVERSITY
FOREST
AND
AGRICULTURE
NORTHWEST
by
https://www.pnas.org
from
           Fig. 1.   Functions of fMccA peptide. (A) Left, biosynthesis of McC from fMccA in producing cells. Right, proteolysis of McC to 2, an inert analogue of aspRS
         intermediate 3, inside sensitive cells. The N-­terminal formyl group and C-­terminal Asn/Asp residues are shown in red and blue, respectively. The phosphoramidate
        and corresponding phosphoester bonds are highlighted by pink ellipse. (B) Structure of fMccAGGK-­FITC. Linker residues (GlyGlyLys) and FITC are shown in orange
        and green, respectively. (C) FP curve for fMccAGGK-­FITC recognition by YejA. Competition FP curves for fMccAGGK-­FITC recognition by YejA using fMccA (D), MccADownloaded             (E), and McC (F) as competitors, respectively. Error bars represent the SD of the mean (n = 3).

   2 of 10   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2319483121                                                                           pnas.org


[PDF physical page 3]
         strains (33). Consequently, McC has been categorized as a Trojan    YejA binding (Fig. 1E), consistent with previous findings that
        horse type antibiotic (34): The inactive formylated heptapeptide    desformyl McC exhibited lower antibacterial activities (38). The
          facilitates entry into target cells, where it is processed to release     Ki value for McC (~0.95 μM) increased approximately eightfold
       and deploy the toxic warhead.                                 comparing to that for fMccA (Fig. 1F), supporting the notion
         Transposon insertional screening of McC-sensitive E.  coli     that the 3-­aminopropyl adenylate moiety of McC is not critical
        revealed that the yejABEF operon is both necessary and sufficient     for interactions with YejA. Collectively, these in vitro experiments
         for McC uptake (35). The operon encodes an ABC-type trans-    demonstrated that fMccA peptide alone is recognized by YejA to
        porter composed of a periplasmic solute binding protein, two    allow McC internalization by gram-­negative E. coli strains and
       transmembrane channel proteins, and an inner membrane ATPase,     therefore serves as a Trojan horse.
         respectively. Deletion of any of the yejABEF genes produces
       mutant strains that are fully resistant to McC. To date, there are    The structure of YejA with McC. To provide a molecular rationale
      no details on the specificity determinants of McC recognition by     for the Trojan horse mechanism, we determined the crystal structure
         this transport system. Such details would inform on the develop-     of YejA in complex with McC to 1.76 Å resolution (Fig. 2A). The
      ment of antibiotics that can exploit oligopeptide transporters to     structure consists of two domains with the N-­terminal formed by
         traverse the gram-negative outer cell wall.                            residues Ile4–Lys282, and the C-­terminal domain consisting of
          In this study, we focused on characterization of E. coli YejA, the     residues Asn283–Pro579. A query against the Protein Data Bank
        solute binding protein of the YejABEF transporter. In known    (39) using the DALI server (40) (SI Appendix, Fig. S3) reveals that
      ABC-type transporters solute binding proteins determine the    YejA is structurally related to apo MbnE (PDB 5ICQ), a solute
         specificity of the transporter system by capturing extracellular    binding  protein  of  the  peptidyl  copper-­binding siderophore210.27.113.117.        ligands for delivery to the cognate membrane components for    methanobactin transporter (41). The structure of YejA can be
address     transportation(FP) assays we (36demonstrated). Using competitionthat the formylatedfluorescenceheptapeptidepolarization    superimposedan RMSD of 1.626withÅthatfor theof MbnEN-­terminalusingdomainindividual(272domainresidues)withand
IP    was the only structural portion of McC that interacts with YejA,    3.590 Å for the C-­terminal domain (280 residues). Comparison
       whereas the 3-aminopropyl adenylate moiety was not critical for     of the full-­length structures demonstrates that apo MbnE is infrom        ligand recognition. High-resolution crystal structures of YejA in    open conformation with its binding pocket accessible to solvent for
2025    complex with McC and fMccA revealed the detailed molecular     ligand capture (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). In contrast, the YejA-­McC
16,      interactions between the protein and the formylated heptapeptide     cocrystal structure is in closed conformation resulting from a ~10
        moiety, which was consolidated by subsequent mutational studies.   Å interdomain movement (Fig. 2B).
         The structural and biochemical data suggest that YejA can accom-      YejA binds to the McC substrate in a solvent occluded pocket
       modate formylated heptapeptides conjugated to molecules with    formed by the closure of the two domains, where the interface isSeptember         diverse structures. Incubation of E. coli cells with fMccAGGK﻿-FITC     largely formed by α-helices and loops at the top and central regions
on      (fluorescein isothiocyanate) showed rapid uptake of the fluorophore      (Fig. 2A). A simulated annealing difference Fourier map (FO – FC)
        into cells. These data highlight the capacity of the Trojan horse     reveals electron density for the peptide moiety of McC from fMet1
        peptide to transport molecules that are otherwise not imported into     to Asp7 (Fig. 2C), but density for the 3-aminopropyl adenylate
            ﻿E. coli cells. As a proof of concept, we synthetized a conjugate of the    moiety is sparse presumably due to disorder. This observation isUNIVERSITY     Trojan horse peptide with the gram-positive antibiotic eperezolid     consistent with the above binding studies, which show that the
         derivative and evaluated  its antimicrobial activity against both    3-aminopropyl adenylate moiety was not critical for McC binding
        gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. We show that the Trojan     to YejA. The surface cutaway of the structure shows that theFOREST     horse peptide remodels the antibacterial spectrum of eperezolid    C-terminal 3-aminopropyl adenylate moiety is directed toward a
         derivative from a compound that targets only gram-positive bacteria     large and open cavity formed by the bottom intertwined β-strandsAND        to one that targets only gram-negative bacteria. Given the wide      (Fig. 2 A and D). The maximum width of the cavity is approxi-
        distribution of YejA-like transporters in Proteobacteria, our results    mately 26 Å, suggesting the potential to accommodate larger
        present a viable strategy for the development of gram-negative spe-    molecules.
          cific antibiotics using warheads that are proven antibiotics against
        gram-positive pathogens.                                         Characterization of the Ligand Binding Sites in YejA. We furtherAGRICULTURE                                                               determined the 1.78 Å resolution structure of YejA bound to
      Results                                                      the fMccA peptide (lacking the 3-­aminopropyl adenylate) and
                                                              found it to be nearly identical with that of YejA bound to McC
        In Vitro Characterization of the fMccA Peptide as a Trojan Horse.   (RMSD of 0.15 Å over 575 residues; SI Appendix, Fig. S5).
       Given that the role of yejABEF operon in McC uptake has been    Density for the peptide ligand is clearer in the fMccA-­boundNORTHWEST        established (35), we attempted to determine the structural basis     structure. The fMccA-­bound and McC-­bound structures affirm
by     of McC bound to YejA. The predicted N-­terminal 19-­residue    the key role of the formyl group in YejA binding, which points
        signaling peptide (37) (SI Appendix, Fig. S1) was removed and    toward the Ser481 side chain hydroxy group within hydrogen
        the resulting protein (hereafter referred to as YejA) was used for    bonding distance (3.6 Å) (Fig. 3A). Additionally, the formyl
        in vitro studies (SI Appendix, Fig. S2). The fluorescent probe    group is sandwiched between the side chains of Asp477 and
       (fMccAGGK-­FITC) was synthetized by coupling FITC with the    Tyr491. Unexpectedly, the  single-­substitution YejA S481A
        side chain amine of a GlyGlyLys linker added to the C terminus    mutant binds to fMccAGGK-­FITC with a KD of ~0.49 μMhttps://www.pnas.org     of fMccA (Fig. 1B). The binding of fMccAGGK-­FITC to YejA     (Fig. 3B and SI Appendix, Fig. S6), i.e., with a 2.5-­fold higher
        yielded a KD of ~1.31 μM (Fig. 1C). FP assays with different     affinity than wild-­type YejA. To explain this observation, wefrom        ligands acting as fMccAGGK-­FITC competitors were carried out    determined the structure of the YejA-­S481A bound to McC
        to determine their affinity to YejA. The assays of fMccA yielded     (Fig. 3C). The overall structure is identical to those of wild-­type
        a Ki of ~0.12 μM (Fig. 1D), indicating its high affinity to YejA.    YejA bound to McC or fMccA (SI Appendix, Fig. S7), but with
      The over 50-­fold increase of the Ki value for MccA (~6.47 μM)     differences in the orientation of the formylated Met1. In theDownloaded       confirmed the critical role of the N-­terminal formyl group for   S481A YejA structure, the formyl amide group and Met1 side

      PNAS  2025  Vol. 122  No. 1 e2319483121                                        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2319483121 3 of 10


[PDF physical page 4]
210.27.113.117.
address
IP       Fig. 2.   Overall structural analysis of YejA in complex with McC. (A) Complex of YejA and McC with the two domains represented as green and cyan ribbons. (B)
from      Superimposition of structures of McC-­bound YejA (green) and the apo MbnE (light gray). (C) The difference Fourier map (FO – FC) contoured at 2.0 σ (gray) is shown          for electron density revealing the occupancy for McC peptide region (orange sticks). (D) Surface cutaway of the complex structure of YejA and McC (purple for
2025      peptide and orange for 3-­aminopropyl adenylate moiety). The maximum width of the cavity is shown by a blue dashed line.
16,
       chain of McC are rotated by ~180 °C around the bond formed      it to fMccA through a GlyGlyLys linker (hereafter fMccAGGK-­
       between the α-­carbon and the keto carbon. The Met1 side chain    FITC) (Fig. 1B). E. coli BL21(DE3) cells were incubated with 1
       extends in the direction of Ala481 and occupies the position   μM of fMccAGGK-­FITC or the mixture of fMccAGGK and FITCSeptember
on     of the formyl group in the structure of fMccA bound to wild-­     (i.e., separate molecules without a covalent linkage) for 3 h and
       type YejA; the formyl group pointed to the opposite direction    followed cell entry using fluorescent microscopy (Fig. 4). Cell
         (Fig. 3C). We surmise that these compensatory changes in the     densities for both groups of samples were similar in bright-­field
        orientation of McC explain the higher affinity of fMccA to    confocal microscopic imaging (Fig. 4 A and D), but fMccAGGK-­
       YejA-­S481A.                                       FITC treated cells exhibited much stronger green fluorescenceUNIVERSITY      Numerous additional interactions stabilizing the binding of    than cells treated with the mixture of fMccAGGK and FITC (Fig. 4
      fMccA to YejA were observed with Arg2, Asn5, and Asn7 of fMccA   B and E). The confocal microscopic images from bright-­field and
         as primary determinants for recognition. For example, fMccA-Arg2   FITC emission channels were colocalized perfectly (Fig. 4 CFOREST           is within hydrogen-bonding distance of Tyr137, Asp161, Ser476,    and F). The relative fluorescence intensities of the control and
AND    and Asp477 of YejA (Fig. 3A); fMccA-Asn5 is engaged by YejA    experimental images were quantified (SI Appendix, Fig. S11),        residues Gln132 and Thr490 (Fig. 3D); and fMccA-Asn7 is within     revealing an 11-­fold increase in the fluorescence intensity in the
       hydrogen-bonding distance from Arg51, Asn57, Thr453, and    images treated with fMccAGGK-­FITC compared to the control.
      Arg457 of YejA (Fig. 3D and SI Appendix, Fig. S8). The impor-    These data suggested that fMccA was able to carry the FITC cargo
        tance of Arg2, Asn5, and Asn7 of fMccA for recognition by YejA     into E. coli cells, whereas FITC itself could not efficiently enter
           is consistent with earlier structure–activity analysis that showed    E. coli cells, even in the presence of exogenous unbound TrojanAGRICULTURE      significantly reduced antibacterial activities for McC variants with    horse carrier peptide.
        substitutions at these residues (38). Additional interactions are
       observed between the side chains of Arg51, Gln132, Arg457,                                                                     Trojan Horse Carrier Remodels a Gram-­Positive Antibiotic to a       Thr490, and Tyr491 of YejA and the backbone amide groups of                                                                    Gram-­Negative Antibiotic. Having shown that conjugation with       Met1, Gly4, Asn5, and Ala6 of fMccA (SI Appendix, Figs. S9 andNORTHWEST                                                        fMccA enables entry of otherwise nontraversable compounds into      S10). YejA variants that contain mutations in each of these keyby                                                                            gram-­negative cells, we theorized that by extension conjugated        residues exhibited dramatically reduced substrate affinities com-                                                         fMccA could also deliver antibiotics in gram-­negative organisms.        paring with the wild type, supporting the important roles of these                                                                     Oxazolidinones are a class of synthetic antibiotics that show        residues in fMccA recognition, and demonstrating that the bind-                                                                                       activity against gram-­positive bacteria and targets protein synthesis.        ing modes observed in the complex structures are functionally                                                       Compounds of this class cannot permeate the gram-­negative cell       important (Fig. 3B).                                                                                  wall, or if they do, are rapidly extruded by endogenous effluxhttps://www.pnas.org                                                      pumps (42–44). Eperezolid is a representative member from this
       Fusion to a Trojan Horse Carrier Actively Transports FITC into     class (Fig. 5A), which shows no activity against wild-­type E. coli
from      E. coli Cells. Having demonstrated that YejA recognition of McC   [minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) > 170 μM], but is
        requires only interactions of the Trojan horse peptide fMccA,     active against ΔbamBΔtolC mutants with disrupted efflux systems
      we sought to evaluate whether fusions to fMccA could facilitate   (MIC ~ 5 μM). The corresponding amine variant of eperezolid,
        transport of other cargo molecules into gram-­negative organisms.    NH2-­eperezolid (Fig. 5A) has been shown to be inactive againstDownloaded    As a proof of concept, we utilized FITC as a cargo and attached    both wild-­type and ΔbamBΔtolC E.  coli (MIC > 200 μM)

   4 of 10   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2319483121                                                                           pnas.org


[PDF physical page 5]
210.27.113.117.
address
IP
from
2025
           Fig. 3.   Ligand binding sites in YejA. (A) Close-­up view of ligand binding sites in structure of YejA bound to fMccA (purple sticks). The difference Fourier map16,
          (gray) is contoured at level of 2.0 σ revealing the occupancy for the entire fMccA. Critical YejA residues are represented as green and cyan sticks. Interactions
        between fMccA (formyl group and Arg2) and YejA residues are indicated by blue dash lines and distances (Å). (B) The results of FP binding assays for wild-­type
        and variants of YejA. The functions of individual residues are indicated. (C) Close-­up view of formyl group binding sites in structure of S481A YejA variant bound
         to McC (yellow sticks). The difference Fourier map (gray) is contoured at level of 2.0 σ revealing the occupancy for the peptide region. (D) Interactions betweenSeptember     fMccA (Asn5 and Asn7) and YejA residues are indicated by blue dash lines and distances (Å).
on
         (Fig. 5B) (22, 44). We selected NH2-­eperezolid to evaluate     into sensitive cells. We next sought to establish that fMccA con-
        the capacity of the Trojan horse peptide fMccA to remodel the    jugated to other molecules are likewise processed by endogenous
       spectrum of antibacterial action.                                      proteases. Through the detection by liquid chromatographyUNIVERSITY      The fMccA conjugate of NH2﻿-eperezolid [fMccA-NH2﻿-eperezolid     high-resolution mass spectroscopy (LC-HRMS), the iterative
        (4)] was synthesized (SI Appendix, Figs. S12 and S13) by linking the     hydrolysis of fMccA was observed after incubation of 4 with E. coli
         free amine of NH2﻿-eperezolid to the C-terminal carboxyl group of      cell lysates resulting in the release NH2﻿-eperezolid, as well as itsFOREST    fMccAG via an amide bond. The conjugate 4 was evaluated for anti-     various derivatives (SI Appendix, Fig. S15). With extended incu-
         bacterial activity using fMccA and NH2﻿-eperezolid as controls    bation times, the quantity of 4 decreased and that of NH2﻿-eperezolidAND          (Fig. 5B). fMccA exhibited no activity against neither gram-negative    and related derivatives increased, demonstrating that 4 is processed
        (wild-type E.  coli K12 MG1655 and E.  coli K12 MG1655    by E. coli endogenous proteases, as previously shown for McC (32).
       ΔbamB﻿ΔtolC mutant) nor gram-positive (S. aureus Newman) strains
      (MIC > 200 μM for all strains tested), and NH2﻿-eperezolid only    Trojan Horse Carrier Remodels the Activity Spectrum of a Broad-­
       showed moderate activity against S. aureus Newman (MIC ~50 μM).    Spectrum Antibiotic. Having demonstrated that conjugationAGRICULTURE     However, conjugate 4 demonstrated activities against wild-type E. coli    to the fMccA peptide reprograms the activity spectrum of an
      K12 MG1655, and the E. coli K12 MG1655 ΔbamB﻿ΔtolC variant,     antibiotic  active  against  gram-­positive  bacteria  to one  that
        with MIC values of ~17.5, and 4.4 μM, respectively. Even more    only functioned against gram-­negative bacteria, we sought to
        remarkably, the antibacterial spectrum of this compound has been    expand this strategy to limit the activity of a broad-­spectrum
        switched as it is no longer active against S. aureus Newman (MIC >     antibiotic. Both experimental and modeling studies suggest thatNORTHWEST      200 μM). Additionally, fluorescence microscopic imaging experi-     in some instances, developing narrow-­spectrum drugs may be
by     ments demonstrated the ability of the Trojan Horse peptide to trans-    warranted (45, 46). Narrow spectrum antibiotics are directed
        port FITC into E. coli K12 MG1655 cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S14).    toward specific targets and may limit compound loss to other
       These findings demonstrated that conjugation to fMccA eliminated     targets. These compounds limit the emergence of resistance and
        the moderate activity of NH2﻿-eperezolid against a gram-positive bac-     are less likely to disrupt host microbiomes, but the successful
       terium and introduced activity against gram-negative bacteria. A    deployment of narrow-­spectrum drugs requires diagnostics to
         similar phenomenon was observed for a nonmodel strain Shigella     identify the infectious pathogens. We determined the effect ofhttps://www.pnas.org      flexneri strain CGMCC 1.1868, against which 4 showed weak activ-   fMccA conjugation on antibacterial spectrum of clinically used
          ity (MIC 100 μM), while NH2﻿-eperezolid displayed no inhibitory    broad-­spectrum  antibiotic  ciprofloxacin, which  has  activityfrom         activity at 200 μM. Additional structure–activity relationship studies     against most gram-­negative and many gram-­positive bacteria
         will be necessary to further optimize the activity of the Trojan Horse     (47). Ciprofloxacin exhibited strong (MIC lower than 1 μM)
        conjugates.                                                         inhibitory activities against all three test strains used in this study
           Activation of the aspartamide-adenylate McC warhead is medi-     (Fig. 5B). We synthesized an fMccAG-­ciprofloxacin conjugate,Downloaded        ated by the release from the Trojan horse peptide upon uptake   5 (Fig. 5A) and tested the conjugate against these strains. As


      PNAS  2025  Vol. 122  No. 1 e2319483121                                        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2319483121 5 of 10


[PDF physical page 6]
210.27.113.117.
address
IP       Fig. 4.   Transport of FITC into E. coli facilitated by fMccA. Confocal microscopic images of E. coli cells after incubation with the mixture of fMccAGGK and FITC
            (A, bright field; B, fluorescence; C, overlay) and with fMccAGGK-­FITC (D, bright field; E, fluorescence; F, overlay).
from
       observed with NH2-­eperezolid and 4, the activity of 5 against     transport  efficiency  of  the YejABEF  transporter  relative  to
2025     the gram-­positive S. aureus Newman reduced dramatically (over     porin-facilitated diffusion and passive diffusion.
16,      100-­fold) from a MIC of 0.62 μM for ciprofloxacin to 80 μM        Finally, the cytotoxicity of the three conjugates and the three
         for 5. The MIC of 5 against wild-­type E. coli K12 MG1655 and     antibiotics was tested against five normal cell lines (LX-2, L02,
        E. coli K12 MG1655 ΔbamBΔtolC mutant were 5 and 0.78   HEK-293, HUVEC, and NCM-460) to evaluate the safety pro-
                                               5 against      files of the conjugates. At a concentration of 100 μM and a treat-September    μM, respectively. Similarly, the antibacterial activity of
on     the nonmodel strain S. flexneri strain CGMCC 1.1868 showed    ment time of 2 h, the three conjugates exhibited comparable
        a MIC of 50 μM compared to 0.03 μM for ciprofloxacin. The     inhibition ratios to those of the three antibiotics, with no signifi-
        data suggested that the conjugation of ciprofloxacin to fMccA    cant inhibition observed in these normal cell lines (SI Appendix,
         partially preserved the inhibitory activity against gram-­negative     Fig. S18), indicating the safety of fMccA Trojan horse peptides in
         bacteria and diminished activity against the gram-­positive bacteria.    mammalian cells.UNIVERSITY       Conjugation of the fMccA Trojan horse peptide likely altered
        the uptake mechanism as 5 is likely imported through YejABEF    Transport Limitation of the Trojan Horse Carrier and Serum
        transporter whereas ciprofloxacin permeates into cells through     Stability of the Conjugates. Both conjugates demonstrated theFOREST         porin-­facilitated diffusion and passive diffusion (48).                  ability of the Trojan horse peptide to transport small-­molecule
AND       Next, we tested whether 5 could specifically eradicate gram-     antibiotics into E. coli cells via the YejA transporter. As shown
         ­negative strains in a mixed bacterial culture to investigate the spec-     in Fig. 2D, the YejA cavity, where the 3-­aminopropyl adenylate
          ificity of the Trojan Horse conjugate in a more complex setting. We    moiety of McC  is accommodated, has a maximum width of
        incubated 0.78 μM of 5 with a mixture of E. coli K12 MG1655    approximately 26 Å, suggesting a potential size limitation for the
       ΔbamB﻿ΔtolC and S. aureus Newman overnight. Subsequent PCR    cargo being transported. To further explore this transportation
         analysis targeting the E. coli YejA sequence showed complete erad-     limitation, a third conjugate 6 was synthesized using fMccAG andAGRICULTURE         ication of E. coli K12 MG1655 ΔbamB﻿ΔtolC, while S. aureus    daptomycin, which has a larger molecular weight of 1,620.7 Da
     Newman continued to grow (SI Appendix, Fig. S16). This further     (Fig. 5A). Both 6 and daptomycin were tested for antibacterial
       confirmed the activity spectrum remodeling and high specificity of     activity under identical conditions. The results indicated no
        the conjugate.                                                             activity against wild-­type E. coli K12 MG1655 and minimal
         As the hydrolysis of 4 by E. coli lysates resulted in multiple     activity against E. coli K12 MG1655 ΔbamBΔtolC mutant, withNORTHWEST
by     fragments in addition to the desired antibiotic, a similar experi-   MICs of 180 μM for daptomycin and 140 μM for 6 (Fig. 5B). The
      ment was conducted for 5. LC-HRMS analysis revealed the pres-     insignificant decrease in MICs suggests that the size of daptomycin
       ence of multiple hydrolysis products (SI Appendix, Fig. S17).   may approach the transportation limitation when conjugated to
        Several fragments with residual residues attached to ciprofloxacin    the fMccA peptide.
       were abundant. To evaluate the effect of the incomplete processing    We next tested the stability of the three conjugates (4﻿-6) in
        of the warhead, we synthesized a conjugate of glycine and cipro-   human serum to assess their potential viability under physiological
        floxacin (gly-ciprofloxacin) and tested its antibacterial activities.     conditions. The compounds were incubated with serum at a finalhttps://www.pnas.org        Gly-ciprofloxacin exhibited approximately a 10-fold increase in    concentration of 100 μM, and the resultant amounts of each con-
from    MICs against E.  coli K12 MG1655, E.  coli K12 MG1655     jugate were analyzed by LC-HRMS after various incubation times.
       ΔbamB﻿ΔtolC, and S. aureus Newman compared to ciprofloxacin.    Quantification revealed that after 12 h of incubation, compounds
         Collectively, the 12-fold increase in MIC observed for 5 compared       ﻿4, 5, and 6 remained at 43%, 68%, and 82% of their initial con-
        to ciprofloxacin may be attributed to the combined effects of     centration, respectively (Fig. 5C and SI Appendix, Figs. S19–S21).Downloaded     incomplete degradation of the Trojan Horse peptide and lower    This variation suggested that different cargos may play a role in the


   6 of 10   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2319483121                                                                           pnas.org


[PDF physical page 7]
210.27.113.117.
address
IP
from
2025
16,
September
on       Fig. 5.   fMccA remodels the activity spectrum of antibiotics. (A) Structures of eperezolid, NH2-­eperezolid, gly-­ciprofloxacin, and conjugates 4-­6. (B) Antibacterial
           activities (MIC in μM) against nine strains. * indicates that the genomes of these strains are not available and assumptively encode YejA homologs. NA indicates
          that the MICs were not determined. The sequence identity and coverage with YejA are indicated in the parentheses. (C) Quantification curves of 4-­6 after
         incubation in human serum.UNIVERSITY      stabilities of the corresponding conjugates in human serum. After     to simplify the SSN. A total of 1,939 nonredundant grouped
      24 h of incubation, all three conjugates were reduced to approxi-    sequences were retrieved, which distributed solely in gram-­negative
       mately 25% (Fig. 5C and SI Appendix, Figs. S19–S21). The stabil-     bacteria, suggesting that  YejA-­like transporters may provideFOREST      ity of other candidate peptide conjugates under physiological    broadly applicable systems to design Trojan horse antibiotics that
        conditions must be examined to establish viability of the strategy     target gram-­negative bacteria (SI Appendix, Fig. S23A). Among
AND     in antibiotic development.                                           gram-­negative bacteria, the majority of YejA homologous proteins
            Finally, we obtained the resistance evolution profiles of conju-    were from the phylum of Proteobacteria, which contained 1,854
        gate 5 and ciprofloxacin against E. coli K12 MG1655 ΔbamB﻿ΔtolC    nonredundant grouped sequences with less than 90% sequence
       by monitoring their MICs over 14 consecutive days (SI Appendix,     identity, accounting for 95.6% of the total retrieved sequences.
         Fig. S22). The data showed that the MICs of compound 5   When a cutoff of 54% sequence identity was used, the YejA-­AGRICULTURE     increased twofold on the second (1.56 μM), fourth (3.12 μM),    containing cluster was separated to include 263 nonredundant
       and seventh days (6.24 μM), and the eightfold MIC (6.24 μM)    sequences (SI Appendix, Fig. S23B). They were further separated to
       remained unchanged for the following 7 d. In contrast, the MIC     three major clusters by applying 60% sequence identity that mostly
        of ciprofloxacin remained unchanged throughout the period.    belonged to 9 families (Fig. 6A). E. coli YejA is in cluster 1, which
       These data suggest mutations in the transporter should be consid-    comprised transporters mainly from 5 families, Enterobacteriaceae,NORTHWEST     ered as a limitation of the Trojan Horse approach. In principle, it     Yersiniaceae, Erwiniaceae, Pectobacteriaceae, and Budviciaceae. Of
by     should be possible to monitor the mutational profile of the trans-     note, cluster 1 contained YejA-­like transporters encoded by several
        porter  for the design  of peptides  that can overcome such     clinically important pathogens, such as Klebsiella, Yersinia, and
       mechanisms.                                                      Salmonella strains. Cluster 2 was composed of transporters mainly
                                                               from Vibrionaceae family, and members from family Orbaceae
        Distribution and Divergence of YejA Homologs  in Gram-­    were solely present in cluster 3.
       Negative Bacteria. As McC, fMccA, and antibiotic conjugates      The sequences from each cluster were aligned with that of E.https://www.pnas.org     of the latter (4 and 5) are actively imported into target gram-­     coli YejA to check for the conservation of the residues involved in
        negative bacteria by the YejA transport system, the diversity and   fMccA/McC binding (Fig. 3), including Arg51, Asn57, Gln132,
from     phylogenetic distribution of YejA homologs were further explored.    Tyr137, Asp161, Arg457, Arg469, Ser476, Asp477, Ser481,
     We used EFI-­EST Tools (49–52) to generate a sequence similarity    Thr490, and Tyr491. Sequence alignment results were used to
       network (SSN) of YejA-­like members using the UniRef90 database     generate the sequence logos for each of the residues using WebLogo
       (UniProt Version: 2021_03), which grouped the highly similar    3 (53) (Fig. 6 B–D and SI Appendix, Figs. S24–S26). Arg51,Downloaded        sequences with over 90% sequence identity into individual nodes    Gln132, and Arg457 were the most conserved residues across all


      PNAS  2025  Vol. 122  No. 1 e2319483121                                        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2319483121 7 of 10


[PDF physical page 8]
                                                                          NH2-­eperezolid, daptomycin, nor for 4-­6. Only ciprofloxacin
                                                                    demonstrated activity against this strain with MIC of 2 μM. These
                                                                         data suggest that YejA homolog of A. baumannii ATCC 19606
                                                                                      likely cannot bind fMccA due to difference in the binding pocket
                                                                      composition.
                                               We then tested three other strains, Klebsiella pneumoniae
                                             ATCC  27736,  Enterobacter  cloacae  clinical  isolate,  and
                                                                              ﻿Salmonella typhimurium SL1344, which all encode YejA-like
                                                                           transporters  with  higher  sequence  identity  ( Fig. 5B and
                                                                                                            ﻿SI Appendix, Fig. S27 ). Notably the E. cloacae clinical isolate
                                                               was assumed to encode YejA-like transporter with 75 to 80%
                                                                   sequence identity based on the BLASTp search of YejA against
                                                                       the sequenced E. cloacae strains. NH2﻿-eperezolid, daptomycin,
                                                                                                                  ﻿4 , and 6 showed no activity against these strains, whereas cip-
                                                                           rofloxacin exhibited MICs of 0.03, 0.5, and 0.03 μM, respec-
                                                                                        tively. Compound 5 , the ciprofloxacin conjugate, displayed
                                                               moderate activity against these strains with MICs of 16, 64,
                                                            and 8 μM, respectively. The significant MIC increase of 5
                                                                          against these strains suggest that the conjugates are imported210.27.113.117.                                                                through their respective YejA-like transport systems, and tun-
address                                                                    ingmaytheresultpeptidein betterfor moreefficacy.avidAdditionally,binding to thethesehydrolysisYejA systemsof 5
IP                                                                       in the target cells into less active ciprofloxacin derivatives may
from                                                                           also account for a partial decrease in activity. Taken together,                                                                         these findings underscore the high specificity of the Trojan
2025                                                                   horse peptide from the fMccA family toward their producing
16,                                                                             strains ( 54 ).

                                                                        Limitation of the Trojan Horse Approach in Multidrug-­ResistantSeptember                                                                            Strains. The benefit of Trojan horse antibiotics depends on both
on                                                                                    efficient transport of the conjugate by active transport systems
           Fig. 6.   Distribution and conservation of YejA-­like transporters. (A) SSN of 263    and accumulation of the inactive conjugate inside target cells
        nonredundant                                  transporters,                                           separated                                                 by                                            60%                                                        sequence                                                                                      identity.                              YejA-­like
       Nodes are colored                        by their                                  corresponding                                                        family,                                               and                                                                   cluster                                                        numbers                                                                           are     for subsequent proteolytic release of the warhead. A potential
         assigned. The node representing YejA is highlighted by a white circle. WebLogo    drawback of these systems is that strains that harbor multiple
         frequency plots for the fMccA/McC-­binding residues of YejA-­like transporters     resistance genes that inactivate the antibiotic warhead may stillUNIVERSITY     from SSN clusters (B) 1, (C) 2, and (D) 3. The positions of fMccA/McC-­binding                                                                        function on the conjugate, and thus render the warhead inactive.         residues identified in YejA are indicated above the WebLogo using the residue
       number of YejA. Residues are colored according to their hydrophobicity.      To test this limitation, we tested two drug-­resistant E. coli strains
                                                                      sourced from animal origins, E. coli SHP45 and extraintestinalFOREST        three major clusters, and Thr490 and Tyr491 were relatively    pathogenic E. coli ST117. Prior studies show that E. coli SHP45
AND     well-conserved with substitutions by chemically similar Ser and    harbors resistance to colistin as well as most other classes of
       Trp residues at some cases, respectively. Tyr137 was well conserved     antibiotics (55), while E. coli ST117 encodes resistance genes
        in sequences from clusters 1 and 2, with several using Phe as     for aminoglycosides, β-­lactams, lincosamides, fluoroquinolones,
        substitute (Fig. 6 B and C), whereas most sequences from cluster   among others (56).
      3 had Asn residue at this position (Fig. 6D). Sequences from clus-      Although the genome sequences of these strains are not avail-
         ter 3 were highly conserved at Ser476, which was replaced by Thr/     able, they are presumed to encode YejA-like transporters (withAGRICULTURE       Ala and Pro/Thr residues in some sequences from clusters 1 and     greater than 90% sequence identity) based on our YejA distribu-
        2, respectively. Asp477 was variable across these sequences, with     tion analysis. The hypothesis was supported by fluorescence micro-
      Asn and Ser as the most frequent replacements. The remaining     scopic imaging experiments using fMccAGGK﻿-FITC as a probe,
       Asn57, Asp161, Arg469, and Ser481 were highly flexible with    which demonstrated that FITC was successfully transported intoNORTHWEST     substitutions by a diverse variety of residues. The analysis of    the cells of both strains, as observed in the cases of BL21(DE3)
by    fMccA/McC binding residues suggested that these YejA-like trans-    and MG1655, through conjugation with the Trojan Horse peptide
        porters are highly divergent, and may bind different peptides and     (SI Appendix, Figs. S28 and S29). Hence, these strains are viable
       have the potential to display affinity toward McC-like peptides     for active import of MccA conjugates. No activity against these
       with suitable compensatory sequence changes.                         strains was observed for not only the gram-positive antibiotics
                                                                         NH2﻿-eperezolid and daptomycin but also the broad-spectrum
      The High Specificity of the fMccA Conjugates. Given  the     antibiotic ciprofloxacin, due to the inherent resistance mechanisms
       widespread  presence  of  YejA-­like  transporters  with  diverse     of these strains (Fig. 5B). As expected, none of the peptide con-https://www.pnas.org        sequences in gram-­negative bacteria, we expanded our investigation     jugates 4﻿-6 exhibited activity against these strains (Fig. 5B) due
from     to evaluate the antibacterial activities of the conjugates (4-­6)     to the presence of multiple resistance genes that inactivate or active
       and antibiotics against a panel of different gram-­negative strains     transporters that efflux the released warheads. Hence, the Trojan
         (Fig. 5B). We chose Acinetobacter baumannii ATCC 19606 as it    conjugation approach cannot overcome the collective actions of
       encodes a distantly related YejA homolog with 33.8% sequence    multiple resistance genes and transporters on the antibiotic war-Downloaded      identity over 97% coverage. This strain displayed no activity for    heads in multidrug resistance strains.


   8 of 10   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2319483121                                                                           pnas.org


[PDF physical page 9]
      Discussion                                                            related homologs show some efficacy. Structure- and sequence-guided
                                                                             redesign of the carrier peptide is likely necessary and is of further
       As the emergence of drug-resistant gram-negative pathogens con-    study by our groups. Efficient proteolytic processing of the peptide
        tinues as a major health risk, the discovery of compounds to keep                                                                                        carrier is necessary for target release and can be tested using lysate
       pace with this threat has been lagging. The presence of a tightly                                                                from pathogenic targets, as shown by our studies with compounds
       packed and seemingly impermeable outer wall and of multiple                                                                                                                  ﻿4 and 5. Last, the nature of the antibiotic itself should be considered
       promiscuous efflux pumps together limit the accumulation of                                                                                   as the strategy will not be effective in pathogens where the target is
        small molecules and hamper attempts toward the development of                                                                       modified or those that harbor multiple resistance alleles and/or mul-
         antibiotics that target such pathogens. Nature has devised multiple                                                                                          tiple transporters, as demonstrated by our studies with E. coli strains
       Trojan horse strategies to overcome these hurdles, which exploit                                                     SHP45 and ST117. While the Trojan conjugation approach may be
         specific transporters to deliver antibiotic warheads into target                                                                      used to direct antibiotic warheads into specific target cells, the war-
        organisms. The warhead conjugates are not bioactive allowing for                                                                       heads are still prone to inactivation by resistance mechanism in such
        cytoplasmic accumulation at concentrations necessary to elicit     multidrug-resistant pathogens. Despite these limitations, such efforts       potent response once activated. Release of the warhead by cyto-                                                                                  are warranted as the resultant conjugates should be narrow spectrum
        plasmic nonspecific proteolysis or hydrolysis liberates the antibi-                                                                                    antibiotics and will be less likely to incur resistance through mech-
         otic only inside the cytoplasm of targeted pathogens.                                                                      anisms in species that are not targeted by the peptide conjugate.
          In some instances, restricting the activity spectrum of an antibiotic                                                                 The discovery of small molecules that target gram-negative organ-       drug may be beneficial, especially due to their limited antibacterial                                                                        isms largely remains empiric, and despite extensive screening cam-
          effects on the host microbiome. Advances in the development of                                                                              paigns, there are no new classes of compound that have been210.27.113.117.      diagnostics for identifying specific infective pathogens and reliable                                                                     approved by FDA for nearly half a century (57). In contrast, screen-
         diagnostics could facilitate the utility of such compounds. As a first                                                                          ing campaigns against gram-positive organisms have been largely         step toward a broader plan for the development of compounds withaddress                                                                               successful and nine synthetic or natural products have been char-
IP     narrow spectrum activity, we characterized the molecular basis for     acterized and approved by the FDA or EMA in just the last 20 y
        recognition of one exemplar Trojan horse compound, McC with its
from     cognate transporter, namely E. coli YejABEF. Biochemical studies      (58). Moreover, the existing arsenal of compounds that target                                                                             gram-positive organisms target processes also found in gram-negative
2025     demonstrate that only the fMccA peptide contributes to binding, and    organisms and these compounds could be repurposed so long as        the cocrystal structures of McC or fMccA bound to YejA provide a16,                                                                                  issues with cell entry and accumulation could be overcome. Our        molecular rationale for the binding data. These studies suggest that                                                                                        results demonstrate that attachment of Trojan horse peptides to
         variations in the warhead moiety can be tolerated by this transport                                                                     such warheads serves exactly this purpose, and processing of the
        system and point at the suitability of exploiting transport system for                                                                          peptide by nonspecific proteases in situ will liberate the antibioticSeptember     the directed targeting of other small molecules into gram-negative    only inside target cells. This approach can likely be extended to
on      bacteria. Intake of fMccAGGK﻿-FITC and subsequent fluorescence     diverse species of gram-negative bacteria, as bioinformatic analysis         inside E coli cells after incubation serves as a proof of concept for this                                                                                  identify ~2,000 nonredundant YejA-like transporters whose distri-           utility. This approach  is further validated by our studies with                                                                         butions are limited solely to gram-negative bacteria. Sequence anal-
        fMccA-NH2﻿-eperezolid, in which addition of the Trojan horse peptide     ysis suggests that these YejA-like transporters may show differencesUNIVERSITY         abolishes the gram-positive activity of the eperezolid warhead and the     in selectivity toward different peptides, providing a platform for the
        conjugate is active against gram-negative pathogens. Likewise, the    design of Trojan horse peptides that show pathogen specificity. The
FOREST     broad-spectrumtrum compoundantibioticeffective ciprofloxacinagainst gram-negativeis rewiredorganismsinto a narrowthroughspec-    designsitate theof TrojanYejA structure-basedhorse antibioticsevolutionfor clinicalof Trojantreatmenthorsewillpeptidesneces-      fMccA conjugation. Presumably, conjugation of a compound to the
AND     Trojan horse peptide suppresses entry into gram-positive organisms    and comprehensive structure–activity studies of the warheads.
         via passive diffusion. Entry of the conjugate into target gram-negative     Data, Materials, and Software Availability. X-­ray coordinates have been
         species only occurs through active transport mechanisms. Based on     deposited in RCSB (www.rcsb.org) under accession codes 8FSQ (59), 8FSR (60),
        the observation that the efficacy of the conjugates varies nearly directly     8FSS (61) and 7Z6F (62).
        with the sequence conservation of the cognate YejAs in other bacterial                                                              ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Spencer Anderson and Keith Brister and theAGRICULTURE       strains, structure–function-directed optimization of the peptide carrier       staff at Life Science Collaborative Access Team Sector 21 for help with data collec-      may improve the entry efficacy of the conjugate.                                                                                                          tion. We also thank the Diamond Light Source for additional beam time allocation.
        Our studies also detail several limitations in the Trojan conjuga-                                                          We thank Jie Feng from Institute of Pathology, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
        tion strategy that must be considered prior to the design of                                                                                Lanzhou University, for assistance in the E. coli gene knockout and MIC evaluation
         antibiotic-peptide conjugates. For example, we show that the stability     experiments. We thank Zengxiu Feng (State Key Laboratory of Applied OrganicNORTHWEST     of conjugates 4, 5, and 6 in human serum varies highly, and after     Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Lanzhou University)
by       12-h incubation, the amount of compounds remaining are at 43%,    and Hailong Zhang (School of Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou University) for
      68%, and 82% of their initial concentration. Hence, the nature of      their assistance with the fluorescence microscopic imaging experiments. This work
        the conjugate greatly influences the stability of the final product.     was supported by the NIH (R35 GM 151874, R01 GM131347, and R01 AI117210
       Second, the differences in affinity of peptide binding to YejA      to S.K.N.), the Russian Science Foundation (24-­14-­00181 to K.S.) and National
       homologs is also of concern as distant homologs (A. baumannii      Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21907046 and 22077056 to S.-­H.D; No.
     ATCC 19606 with a YejA of ~34% sequence identity) cannot trans-    21907047 to S.L). Some of the data were collected at the Metabolomics Center,
        port conjugates of the E. coli fMccA peptide, while more closely     Roy J. Carver Biotechnology Center, University of Illinois at Urbana-­Champaign.https://www.pnas.org
from
             1.    E. Tacconelli, N. Magrini, Global Priority List of Antibiotic-­Resistant Bacteria to                            3.   G. Rizzatti, L. R. Lopetuso, G. Gibiino, C. Binda, A. Gasbarrini, Proteobacteria: A common factor in
               Guide Research, Discovery, and Development of New Antibiotics (World Health Organization,            human diseases. Biomed. Res. Int. 2017, 9351507 (2017).
                2017).                                                                                                      4.   H. K. Ropponen, R. Richter, A. K. H. Hirsch, C. M. Lehr, Mastering the Gram-­negative bacterial
              2.   M. G. Page, The role of the outer membrane of Gram-­negative bacteria in antibiotic resistance: Ajax’             barrier–Chemical approaches to increase bacterial bioavailability of antibiotics. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev.Downloaded              shield or Achilles’ heel? Handb. Exp. Pharmacol. 67, 67–86 (2012).                                      172, 339–360 (2021).


      PNAS  2025  Vol. 122  No. 1 e2319483121                                        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2319483121 9 of 10


[PDF physical page 10]
              5.    P. B. Savage, Multidrug-­resistant bacteria: Overcoming antibiotic permeability barriers of gram-­          34.   J. S. Reader et al., Major biocontrol of plant tumors targets tRNA synthetase. Science 309, 1533
                 negative bacteria. Ann. Med. 33, 167–171 (2001).                                                           (2005).
              6.    K. Klobucar et al., Chemical screen for vancomycin antagonism uncovers probes of the Gram-­             35.  M. Novikova et al., The Escherichia coli Yej transporter is required for the uptake of translation
                 negative outer membrane. ACS Chem. Biol. 16, 929–942 (2021).                                                  inhibitor microcin C. J. Bacteriol. 189, 8361–8365 (2007).
              7.     T. Velkov, K. D. Roberts, P. E. Thompson, J. Li, Polymyxins: A new hope in combating Gram-­negative         36.  A. J. Wilkinson, K. H. G. Verschueren, “Crystal structures of periplasmic solute binding proteins in
                superbugs? Future Med. Chem. 8, 1017–1025 (2016).                                                          ABC-­transport complexes illuminate their function” in ABC Transporters from Bacteria to Man, I. B.
              8.    L. D. Andrews et al., Optimization and mechanistic characterization of pyridopyrimidine inhibitors of             Holland, S. P. C. Cole, K. Kuchler, C. F. Higgins, Eds. (Higgins Academic Press, London, 2003),
                    bacterial biotin carboxylase. J. Med. Chem. 62, 7489–7505 (2019).                                          pp. 187–207.
              9.   M. S. Butler, I. R. Henderson, R. J. Capon, M. A. T. Blaskovich, Antibiotics in the clinical pipeline as of        37.  H. Nielsen, K. D. Tsirigos, S. Brunak, G. von Heijne, A brief history of protein sorting prediction.
               December 2022. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo) 76, 431–473 (2023).                                                       Protein J. 38, 200–216 (2019).
            10.  A. Cassini et al., Attributable deaths and disability-­adjusted life-­years caused by infections with            38.  G. H. Vondenhoff et al., Characterization of peptide chain length and constituency requirements for
                     antibiotic-­resistant bacteria in the EU and the European Economic Area in 2015: A population-­level             YejABEF-­mediated uptake of microcin C analogues. J. Bacteriol. 193, 3618–3623 (2011).
                modelling analysis. Lancet Infect. Dis. 19, 56–66 (2019).                                              39.  S. K. Burley et al., RCSB Protein Data Bank: Sustaining a living digital data resource that enables
            11.  D. Corbett et al., Potentiation of antibiotic activity by a novel cationic peptide: Potency and spectrum            breakthroughs in scientific research and biomedical education. Protein Sci. 27, 316–330 (2018).
                   of activity of SPR741. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 61, e00200-­17 (2017).                            40.   L. Holm, DALI and the persistence of protein shape. Protein Sci. 29, 128–140 (2020).
            12.  M. Vaara, Agents that increase the permeability of the outer membrane. Microbiol. Rev. 56,               41.   L. M. Dassama, G. E. Kenney, S. Y. Ro, E. L. Zielazinski, A. C. Rosenzweig, Methanobactin transport
              395–411 (1992).                                                                                      machinery. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, 13027–13032 (2016).
            13.  E. H. Mood et al., Antibiotic potentiation in multidrug-­resistant Gram-­negative pathogenic bacteria        42.  S. J. Brickner et al., Synthesis and antibacterial activity of U-­100592 and U-­100766, two
                by a synthetic peptidomimetic. ACS Infect. Dis. 7, 2152–2163 (2021).                                        oxazolidinone antibacterial agents for the potential treatment of multidrug-­resistant gram-­positive
            14.  K. A. Munoz, P. J. Hergenrother, Facilitating compound entry as a means to discover antibiotics for                 bacterial infections. J. Med. Chem. 39, 673–679 (1996).
                 Gram-­negative bacteria. Acc. Chem. Res. 54, 1322–1333 (2021).                                       43.  M. R. Barbachyn, The oxazolidinones. Top. Med. Chem. 26, 97–122 (2017).
            15.  A. G. Myers, R. B. Clark, Discovery of macrolide antibiotics effective against multi-­drug resistant            44.  R. Liu et al., A synthetic dual drug sideromycin induces Gram-­negative bacteria to commit suicide
                 Gram-­negative pathogens. Acc. Chem. Res. 54, 1635–1645 (2021).                                          with a Gram-­positive antibiotic. J. Med. Chem. 61, 3845–3854 (2018).
            16.  E. M. Nolan, M. A. Fischbach, A. Koglin, C. T. Walsh, Biosynthetic tailoring of microcin E492m: Post-­        45.   J. D. Palmer et al., The evolution of spectrum in antibiotics and bacteriocins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
                    translational modification affords an antibacterial siderophore-­peptide conjugate. J. Am. Chem. Soc.             U.S.A. 119, e2205407119 (2022).
               129, 14336–14347 (2007).                                                                        46.  M. A. Cook, G. D. Wright, The past, present, and future of antibiotics. Sci. Transl. Med. 14, eabo7793210.27.113.117.        17.  X. Thomas et al., Siderophore peptide, a new type of post-­translationally modified antibacterial                 (2022).
                 peptide with potent activity. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 28233–28242 (2004).                                 47.  D. M. Campoli-­Richards et al., A review of its antibacterial activity, pharmacokinetic properties and
            18.   J. G. Kim et al., Bases of biocontrol: Sequence predicts synthesis and mode of action of agrocin 84, the              therapeutic use. Drugs 35, 373–447 (1988).
                   Trojan horse antibiotic that controls crown gall. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 8846–8851 (2006).           48.  C. F. Sousa et al., Passive diffusion of ciprofloxacin and its metalloantibiotic: A computational andaddress
            19.  S. H. Dong et al., Biosynthesis of the RiPP trojan horse nucleotide antibiotic microcin C is directed by            experimental study. J. Mol. Biol. 433, 166911 (2021).
IP             the N-­formyl of the peptide precursor. Chem. Sci. 10, 2391–2395 (2019).                               49.  R. Zallot, N. Oberg, J. A. Gerlt, The EFI web resource for genomic enzymology tools: Leveraging
from        20.  R.antibioticF. Roush,byE.ATP-­consumingM. Nolan, F. Lohr,N-­PC.bondT. Walsh,formationMaturationin microcinof an EscherichiaC7. J. Am. Chem.coli ribosomalSoc. 130,peptide                   protein,Biochemistrygenome,58, 4169–4182and metagenome(2019).databases to discover novel enzymes and metabolic pathways.
2025        21.  3603–3609V. Braun, A. Pramanik,(2008).   T. Gwinner, M. Koberle, E. Bohn, Sideromycins: Tools and antibiotics.                50.  R.assignment.Zallot, N. O.Curr.Oberg,Opin.J. A.Chem.Gerlt,Biol.“Democratized”47, 77–85 (2018).genomic enzymology web tools for functional
16,             Biometals 22, 3–13 (2009).                                                                        51.   J. A. Gerlt, Genomic enzymology: Web tools for leveraging protein family sequence-­function space
            22.   J. H. Boyce et al., Platform to discover protease-­activated antibiotics and application to siderophore-­          and genome context to discover novel functions. Biochemistry 56, 4293–4308 (2017).
                    antibiotic conjugates. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 21310–21321 (2020).                                   52.   J. A. Gerlt et al., Enzyme function initiative-­enzyme similarity tool (EFI-­EST): A web tool for
            23.  C. Peukert et al., Siderophore conjugation with cleavable linkers boosts the potency of RNA                generating protein sequence similarity networks. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1854, 1019–1037
               polymerase inhibitors against multidrug-­resistant E. coli. Chem. Sci. 14, 5490–5502 (2023).               (2015).September        24.   J. D. Steckbeck, B. Deslouches, R. C. Montelaro, Antimicrobial peptides: New drugs for bad bugs?          53.  G. E. Crooks, G. Hon, J. M. Chandonia, S. E. Brenner, WebLogo: A sequence logo generator. Genome
on              Expert Opin. Biol. Ther. 14, 11–14 (2014).                                                                      Res. 14, 1188–1190 (2004).
            25.  M. Ghosh et al., Siderophore conjugates of daptomycin are potent inhibitors of carbapenem              54.   J. F. Garcia-­Bustos, N. Pezzi, E. Mendez, Structure and mode of action of microcin 7, an antibacterial
                    resistant strains of Acinetobacter baumannii. ACS Infect. Dis. 4, 1529–1535 (2018).                           peptide produced by Escherichia coli. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 27, 791–797 (1985).
            26.  G. Cornelissen et al., Circatrigintan hormonal and skin surface temperature rhythms following             55.   Y. Y. Liu et al., Emergence of plasmid-­mediated colistin resistance mechanism MCR-­1 in animals
                  hysterectomy. Prog. Clin. Biol. Res. 227A, 493–505 (1987).                                          and human beings in China: A microbiological and molecular biological study. Lancet Infect. Dis.
            27.   T. A. Wencewicz, M. J. Miller, “Sideromycins as pathogen-­targeted antibiotics” in Antibacterials,                16, 161–168 (2016).
                        P. R. Bernstein et al., Eds. (2017), vol. 26, pp. 151–183.                                                56.  S. De Koster et al., Genetic characterization of ESBL-­producing and ciprofloxacin-­resistantUNIVERSITY            28.  K. Severinov, S. K. Nair, Microcin C: Biosynthesis and mechanisms of bacterial resistance. Future                  Escherichia coli from Belgian broilers and pigs. Front. Microbiol. 14, 1150470 (2023).
                   Microbiol. 7, 281–289 (2012).                                                                      57.  K. Lewis, The science of antibiotic discovery. Cell 181, 29–45 (2020).
            29.  K. Severinov, E. Semenova, A. Kazakov, T. Kazakov, M. S. Gelfand, Low-­molecular-­weight post-­             58.  A. Bloem, H. I. Bax, E. Yusuf, N. J. Verkaik, New-­generation antibiotics for treatment of gram-­positive
                    translationally modified microcins. Mol. Microbiol. 65, 1380–1394 (2007).                                        infections: A review with focus on endocarditis and osteomyelitis. J. Clin. Med. 10, 1743 (2021).FOREST
            30.  A. Metlitskaya et al., Maturation of the translation inhibitor microcin C. J. Bacteriol. 191, 2380–2387       59.  S. K. Nair, S.-­H. Dong, Complex structure of YejA with Microcin C7. Protein Data Bank. https://www.
AND        31.  (2009).A. Kulikovsky et al., The molecular mechanism of aminopropylation of peptide-­nucleotide antibiotic       60.  rcsb.org/structure/8FSQ.S. K. Nair, S.-­H. Dong, ComplexDepositedstructure11 Januaryof YejA2023.with fMccA. Protein Data Bank. https://www.rcsb.
                  microcin C. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 11168–11175 (2014).                                                      org/structure/8FSR. Deposited 11 January 2023.
            32.   T. Kazakov et al., Escherichia coli peptidase A, B, or N can process translation inhibitor microcin C.          61.  S. K. Nair, S.-­H. Dong, Complex structure of YejA-­S481A with Microcin C7. Protein Data Bank. https://
                      J. Bacteriol. 190, 2607–2610 (2008).                                                                        www.rcsb.org/structure/8FSS. Deposited 11 January 2023.
            33.  A. Metlitskaya et al., Aspartyl-­tRNA synthetase is the target of peptide nucleotide antibiotic Microcin        62.  K. Beis, F. Qu, Crystal structure of the substrate-­binding protein YejA in complex with peptide
                   C. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 18033–18042 (2006).                                                              fragment. Protein Data Bank. https://www.rcsb.org/structure/7Z6F. Deposited 11 March 2022.AGRICULTURE
NORTHWEST
by
https://www.pnas.org
from
Downloaded


   10 of 10   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2319483121                                                                          pnas.org