
[PDF physical page 1]
                                                          Journal of Chromatography A, 1292 (2013) 219–228


                                        Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

                        Journal of Chromatography A


                              jou rn al hom epage: www.elsevier.com/locate/chroma



Detection of metabolite induction in fungal co-cultures on solid media
by high-throughput differential ultra-high pressure liquid
chromatography–time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry ﬁngerprinting

Samuel Bertrand a,1, Olivier Schumpp b,∗,1, Nadine Bohni a, Alban Bujard a,
Antonio Azzollini a, Michel Monod c, Katia Gindro b, Jean-Luc Wolfender a

a School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, EPGL, University of Geneva, University of Lausanne, Quai Ernest-Ansermet 30, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
b Swiss Federal Research Station Agroscope Changins-Wädenswil, Route de Duillier, P.O. Box 1012, CH-1260 Nyon, Switzerland
c Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Laboratory of Mycology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland



a r t i c l e    i n f o               a b s t r a c t


Article history:                                 Access to new biological sources is a key element of natural product research. A particularly large number
Available online 30 January 2013                    of biologically active molecules have been found to originate from microorganisms. Very recently, the
                                           use of fungal co-culture to activate the silent genes involved in metabolite biosynthesis was found to
Keywords:                                 be a successful method for the induction of new compounds. However, the detection and identiﬁcation
Fungal interactions                                of the induced metabolites in the confrontation zone where fungi interact remain very challenging. To
Fusarium                                         tackle this issue, a high-throughput UHPLC–TOF-MS-based metabolomic approach has been developed
Solid media
                                                   for the screening of fungal co-cultures in solid media at the petri dish level. The metabolites that were
Co-culture proﬁling
                                            overexpressed because of fungal interactions were highlighted by comparing the LC–MS data obtainedMetabolomics
UHPLC–TOF-MS                            from the co-cultures and their corresponding mono-cultures. This comparison was achieved by subjecting
                                              automatically generated peak lists to statistical treatments. This strategy has been applied to more than
                                       600 co-culture experiments that mainly involved fungal strains from the Fusarium genera, although
                                          experiments were also completed with a selection of several other ﬁlamentous fungi. This strategy was
                                         found to provide satisfactory repeatability and was used to detect the biomarkers of fungal induction in a
                                                 large panel of ﬁlamentous fungi. This study demonstrates that co-culture results in consistent induction
                                                  of potentially new metabolites.
                                                                 © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.



1. Introduction                                                       of these compounds. One such strategy is the co-cultivation of two
                                                             microorganisms in a single environment, which is referred to as
   Natural products (NPs) obtained from microorganisms are a     interspecies crosstalk [5,7–9].
historical source of lead compounds [1], but the attractiveness       Co-culturing exploits the fact that fungi have evolved highly
of such NPs is diminished because of the difﬁculties involved in     specialised capacities to occupy environments, such as soil, rhizo-
working with complex mixtures [2] and because of the continual     spheres, plants, mucosal membranes and guts, which also support
rediscovery of the same bioactive chemical structures in pharma-    dense populations of other microorganisms [10]. Interactions
cological screens despite the existence of dereplication processes    between microorganisms lead to the activation of complex reg-
[3]. Such continual rediscovery is inconsistent with the tremen-     ulation mechanisms, which results in the biosynthesis of highly
dous diversity of the cryptic biosynthetic pathways dedicated to     diverse NPs  [8], such as pheromones, defence molecules and
the production of secondary metabolites, which have been revealed    metabolites that are involved in symbiotic associations [11]. Inves-
by genome sequencing programmes [4–6]. Recently, a variety of     tigations into co-culture experiments with fungi have been limited,
strategies have been proposed for the activation of the production    but co-culture has a high potential for the generation of enhanced
                                                               chemical diversity, an advantage that has been demonstrated in
                                                             both liquid [9,12–20] and solid co-cultures [11,21–24]. For exam-
                                                                              ple, emericellamide A and B were induced during a liquid co-culture
  ∗Corresponding author at: Groupe Mycologie, Station de recherche Agroscope     of the marine-derived fungus Emericella sp. with the marine acti-
Changins-Wädenswil ACW, Route de Duiller 50, CP 1012, 1260 Nyon, Switzerland.    nomycete Salinispora arenicola [14]. Such stress-induced molecules
Tel.: +41 22 363 43 71; fax: +41 22 362 13 25.
    E-mail addresses: olivier.schump@acw.admin.ch,                             exhibit speciﬁc noteworthy bioactivities, and some of them have
olivier.schumpp@acw.admin.ch (O. Schumpp).                            been found to have antimicrobial [12,14,17,20,21], anticancer
  1 SB and OS contributed equally to this work.                                [13,18] and phytotoxic activities [21].


0021-9673/$ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chroma.2013.01.098


[PDF physical page 2]
220                                                                      S. Bertrand et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1292 (2013) 219–228


   For practical reasons, the large-scale production of microbial     difﬁcult-to-treat onychomycosis were  progressively  collected
metabolites is usually accomplished in liquid reactors as they are     at the Centre Hospitalier Cantonal Vaudois (CHUV, Lausanne
amenable to easy control of temperature, pressure and atmo-    Switzerland) and stored in the database of Agroscope ACW in vials
spheric composition [25,26]. However, solid-media cultures are    containing diluted potato dextrose broth (PDB) solution (1:4) at
more similar to the environmental conditions in which fungi    4 ◦C (Table S1 and http://mycoscope.bcis.ch/). Other fungal species
evolved. Furthermore, these cultures have been found to yield a    from the collection that were representative of contrasting eco-
substantially higher number of metabolites from diverse microor-     logical niches were also added to the list. Soil isolates utilised in
ganisms [27] and references therein. In addition, solid media     this study included Aspergillus clavatus, which is known to produce
cultures facilitate visualisation of the interaction zone between the     toxins and bioactive compounds [36], Cladosporium sp. and Hohen-
fungi [21,23], which allows for growth rate estimation. This also     buehelia reniformis. Bionectria ochroleuca and Eutypa lata were also
allows the excision of well-deﬁned parts of the agar media for fur-    included as representatives of plant endophytes with the capability
ther analysis of speciﬁc zones of the confrontation, an advantage     to degrade wood. Both of these fungi are able to form dark-brown
for metabolite localisation studies. Recent developments in scal-    substances upon interaction with other fungi (unpublished data
ing up microbial cultures [28] have opened the door to the study    and [21]). Two non-Fusarium species that cohabit with Fusarium in
of microbial interactions on solid media for the purpose of drug   human nails [37] and that were isolated from onychomycosis were
discovery.                                                             also included in this study. The ﬁrst of these was an Acremonium
   To  monitor  stress-related  metabolome  modiﬁcations  in     strain known for its capacity to produce uncommon chlorinated
microorganisms, hyphenated analytical methods, such as liquid or    metabolic compounds [38], and the second was a dermatophytic
gas chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC–MS and    Trichophyton rubrum strain.
GC–MS), are well suited because they can separate metabolites
from crude extracts and provide spectroscopic information for full
                                                                                   2.2. Chemicals
or partial chemical identiﬁcation [3]. Only a few proﬁling studies of
fungal interactions have been performed to delineate interspecies
                                                                        Extractions were performed with methanol (HPLC grade), iso-
crosstalk [11,21,23,24]. GC–MS was applied to study the up- and
                                                              propanol (HPLC grade), t-butanol (PA grade), dichloromethane
down-regulation of metabolites in co-culture involving Stereum
                                                          (HPLC grade), and nano-pure water (Millipore). UHPLC–TOF-MS
and Coprinus species. This analytical technique enabled molecule
                                                                   analyses were performed using ULC/MS-grade acetonitrile and a
identiﬁcation through database searches based on fragmentation
                                                              mixture of water and formic acid (FA) from Biosolve (Valkenswaard,
patterns and retention indexes [23]. Several LC–MS studies have
                                                          The Netherlands).
applied direct comparisons of mono-cultures with their corre-
sponding co-cultures [14,18,21]. LC–MS can analyse extracts from
microorganisms with minimal sample preparation. Compared to      2.3. Culture and co-culture conditions
GC–MS, however, the LC–MS dereplication process often generates
putative peak annotations only. Nevertheless, the localisation of       For mono-cultures, a 5 mm agar plug of a fungal pre-culture was
induced compounds in LC–MS chromatograms enables targeted    inoculated in the centre of a 9 cm petri dish containing 30 mL of
micro-isolation of such compounds and subsequent de novo iden-    potato dextrose agar media (PDA, Difco, BD & Co., Le pont de Claix,
tiﬁcation by NMR [29]. This method also has the potential to assess     France). The petri dishes were incubated at 21 ◦C.
the bioactivity of a given up-regulated metabolite. Recently, direct        Similarly, co-culture experiments were inoculated with two
MALDI-imaging mass spectrometry experiments have revealed    5 mm agar plugs of the appropriate fungal strains on opposite sides
the production of high molecular weight (MW) metabolites at the     of a petri dish containing agar media (PDA), and the petri dishes
interaction zone between confronting bacteria [30,31].             were incubated at 21 ◦C.
   For metabolite proﬁling  of complex  matrices,  ultra-high-
pressure liquid chromatography coupled to electrospray ionisation
and time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry (UHPLC–TOF-MS) is the lat-      2.4. Extraction procedure
est cutting-edge technology [32]. UHPLC–TOF-MS combines high
LC and MS resolutions, high throughput and good reproducibility of      The confrontation zones of fungal co-cultures were excised
the LC–MS data sets, an advantage that is important for data com-    with a razor blade as 1 cm × 1 cm pieces of agar and then freeze-
parison in metabolomics studies [33,34]. This analytical platform     dried. The dry material was transferred into an extraction vessel
has demonstrated its utility for high-throughput ﬁngerprinting of    with 20 mL of solvent per 300 mg of dry material. The extraction
a large set (>15,000) of microbial extracts [35].                       properties of the following solvents were compared: methanol, iso-
   In this work, UHPLC–TOF-MS ﬁngerprinting was used to screen    propanol, t-butanol, dichloromethane/methanol/water (64:36:8)
a large number of co-culture experiments for any chemical induc-    and dichloromethane/ethyl acetate/methanol (2:3:1) with or with-
tion of low MW metabolites occurring in fungal co-cultures grown    out 1% (v/v) formic acid. The solvent mixtures were freshly
on solid media. Multivariate statistical treatments were applied    prepared, and unless otherwise noted, extractions were performed
to the UHPLC–TOF-MS proﬁles to highlight compounds that were     in a water-bath sonicator (Ultrasonic Cleaver 5200, Branson Ultra-
speciﬁcally induced because of the interactions between colonies     sonics Corporation) at room temperature for 20 min. The sonicated
of ﬁlamentous fungi. The results of this screening indicate that a    samples were ﬁltered through glass cotton. Finally, the extracts
large majority of fungi produce new substances when confronted    were dried under vacuum using a centrifugal evaporator (Genevac
with other fungi on solid media. The signiﬁcance of these ﬁndings    HT-4, SP scientiﬁc, Ipswich, Suffolk, UK). Uninoculated plates and
in the context of natural product research is discussed below.         plates inoculated with one fungal strain  (i.e., mono-cultures as
                                                          opposed to co-cultures) were used as blanks and controls, respec-
                                                                                 tively.
2. Experimental
                                                      An  accelerated  solvent  extraction  (ASE,  Dionex,  Olten,
                                                                  Switzerland) method was also tested, and the results obtained2.1. Biological material
                                                                 using two different solvent systems (dichloromethane/methanol/
   The strains of fungi used in this study were  clinical, soil    water (64:36:8) and methanol) were compared to those of the
or plant-derived  isolates. Fusarium  strains  isolated from the     sonication procedure.


[PDF physical page 3]
                                                                           S. Bertrand et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1292 (2013) 219–228                                           221


2.5. Sample preparation                                                             list was randomly generated using an Excel macro (Supplementary
                                                                         material).
   During method development sample enrichment by classical
solid phase extraction (SPE) ﬁltration was achieved using Sep Pak
                                                                                   2.7. Peak picking and data analysis
Vac SPE C18 cartridge (1 cc, 100 mg, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) using
methanol/water 85:15 (v/v) as eluent [21].
                                                                    Native MassLynx data (Waters, Baden-Daettwil, Switzerland)
   To facilitate screening a large number of samples, the SPE proce-
                                                        were converted into nCDF (common data format) data using
dure was simpliﬁed as follows. The dry extracts were dissolved in a
                                                                DataBridge software (Waters, Baden-Daettwil, Switzerland). Auto-
4:1 methanol/water mixture at a concentration of 2 mg/mL. A 1 mL
                                                               matic feature detection was performed between 0.5 and 4.5 min
aliquot of this solution was transferred into a 1.5 mL microtube con-
                                                             with MZmine2 software [41] using parameters selected according
taining 200 mg of reversed-phase C18 material (Silica gel ZEOprep                                                                     to the TOF-MS detector. Peaks with a width of at least 0.03 s and an
60 C18, Zeochem AG, Uetikon, Switzerland) to remove the most apo-                                                                        intensity greater than either 20 counts (NI) or 50 counts (PI) were
lar compounds, as these compounds would be incompatible with
                                                                     selected with a 5 ppm m/z tolerance and deconvoluted. Deisotope
reversed-phase chromatography. The tubes were gently shaken
                                                                       ﬁltering was applied using the “isotopic peaks grouper” module
(Rotation Mischer 3300, Vaudaux-Eppendorf, Basel, Switzerland)
                                                             with tolerance parameters adjusted to 0.03 s and 5 ppm. Feature
for 2 min and then centrifuged (Mikroliter Zentrifugen, Hettich) for
                                                              alignment and gap ﬁlling were achieved with an m/z tolerance of
5 min. The supernatants were ﬁltered through 0.45 m ﬁlters and
                                                        15 ppm and a retention-time (RT) tolerance of 0.3 min. The features
diluted 2× with methanol. When the same solvent was used, this
                                                                 detected from blank samples and uninoculated agar samples were
procedure was found to produce similar results to those of the clas-
                                                        removed from the generated matrix. The full procedure for fea-
sical SPE ﬁltration procedure but was easier to implement for the
                                                                    ture detection is presented in Table S2. The exported feature lists
preparation of a large number of samples.
                                                        were compared using Microsoft Excel, and multivariate analyses
                                                        were performed using Unscrumbler X software (CAMO Software
                                                                     AS, Norway). Principal component analysis (PCA) and partial least-
                                                                squares regression (PLS-DA) applied after unit variance (UV) scaling
2.6. UHPLC–TOF-MS analysis
                                                      was used for sample discrimination as well as the generation of
                                                                        biplots and the list of features (loadings).
  UHPLC–TOF-MS analyses were performed on a Micromass-LCT
                                                            The detection threshold for selection of the induced peaks was
Premier Time-of-Flight mass spectrometer from Waters (Milford,
                                                                         set to 1% of the mean peak area of the 10 most intense features in the
MA, USA), which had an electrospray (ESI) interface coupled to
                                                                         dataset. Features that were retained were considered signiﬁcantly
an Acquity UPLC system (Waters, Baden-Daettwil, Switzerland). In
                                                             induced and were ﬁltered again according to increases in peak
separate runs, detection was achieved in both the positive (PI) and
                                                                          areas. The ﬁltering results were veriﬁed for the main biomarkers
negative ion (NI) modes. The m/z range was set to be 100–1000 in
                                                                        in the corresponding raw UHPLC–TOF-MS data.
centroid mode with a scan time of 0.25 s and an inter-scan delay
of 0.01 s. The ESI conditions in PI and NI modes were as follows:
capillary voltage of 2800 V, cone voltage of 40 V, source temper-     3. Results and discussion
ature of 120 ◦C, desolvation temperature of 250 ◦C, cone-gas ﬂow
of 20 L/h, and desolvation-gas ﬂow 600 L/h. For internal calibra-        Solid media was preferred over liquid cultures for the screening
tion, a 5  g/mL solution of leucine-enkephalin from Sigma–Aldrich     of induction phenomena in fungal co-cultures for the following
(Steinheim, Germany) was infused through the lock-mass probe at     reasons. (i) From a fungal ecology perspective, solid media bet-
a ﬂow rate of 5  L/min using a second Shimadzu LC-10ADvp LC     ter mimics the natural growth conditions of ﬁlamentous fungi in
pump (Duisburg, Germany).                                   an aerobic environment and enables better development because
  UHPLC–TOF-MS  proﬁles  were  collected  with  either  a      it is a solid support. (ii) From a practical perspective, solid media
150 mm × 2.1 mm  i.d., 1.7 m Acquity BEH C18 UPLC column    enables visualisation of the development of fungal colonies over the
(Waters, Baden-Daettwil, Switzerland) or an Acquity BEH C4 UPLC    experimental time and allows excision of a part of the agar media
column (Waters, Baden-Daettwil, Switzerland) in gradient mode at     for further analysis of the location of fungal confrontations.
a ﬂow rate of 0.46 mL/min with the following solvent system: (A)       Mono-cultures of ﬁlamentous fungi were produced via inocula-
0.1 vol% FA in water; (B) 0.1 vol% FA in acetonitrile. Analysis began     tion of an agar pre-culture plug in the middle of a petri dish, while
with an isocratic step of 5% B for 3.60 min, which was followed     co-culture plates were inoculated on opposite sides of a single petri
by a gradient from 5% to 95% B over 34.50 min. The column was    dish of the type used for mono-cultures. The co-culture plates were
then washed for 6.93 min with 95% B, reconditioned with 5% B    incubated for several weeks. Colony growth leading to interaction
for 0.87 min and ﬁnally equilibrated with 5% B for 9.50 min. The    with the competing colony was monitored with the unaided eye.
temperature was maintained at 40 ◦C, and the injection volume    Chemical analyses were focused on the confrontation zone, and the
was 2   L.                                                                results were compared to those obtained from mono-cultures.
  UHPLC–TOF-MS   ﬁngerprints  were   recorded   with   a      The method of metabolic induction through fungal co-culture
50 mm × 1 mm i.d., 1.7 m Acquity BEH C18 UPLC column (Waters,    was evaluated by culturing all of the Fusarium strains included in
Baden-Daettwil, Switzerland) in gradient mode at a ﬂow rate of    the collection of clinical isolates with representatives of a fungal
0.3 mL/min with the solvent system described above. The protocol     collection of phytopathogenic and environmentally derived fungal
used to establish the ﬁngerprints included a direct geometric     strains (http://mycoscope.bcis.ch/). As described below, more than
transfer of the metabolite proﬁling procedure calculated using    600 co-culture experiments were screened.
a dedicated Excel spread sheet, ‘HPLC calculator’ [39,40]. The      To highlight the metabolite modiﬁcations that are caused by
gradient was increased from 5% to 95% B in 4 min. The column    fungal interactions, an LC–MS ﬁngerprinting method was adapted
was then washed for 0.8 min with 95% B, reconditioned with 5%     to the analysis of agar solid media. The development of this adapted
B for 0.1 min and ﬁnally equilibrated with 5% B for 1.1 min. The    method included the optimisation of an extraction procedure to
temperature was maintained at 40 ◦C, and the injection volume     detect the largest possible number of metabolites over a wide range
was 1   L. Analyses were performed randomly and included quality     of polarities. The repeatability of the ﬁngerprinting method, as well
control and blank samples after every 10 sample runs. The sample    as the metabolite proﬁles of biological replicates, was veriﬁed to


[PDF physical page 4]
222                                                                      S. Bertrand et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1292 (2013) 219–228




                                                                                                                                                                                     TOF MS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ES-ensure that satisfactory statistical results were obtained even when     A) t-Butanol                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BPI                                                                                                                           100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  500
screening a large number of samples.


                                                                      %
3.1. UHPLC–TOF-MS metabolite proﬁling of fungal cultures in
solid media                                                                                                           0                                                                                                     Min
                                                                                                                                                0.00          5.00         10.00        15.00        20.00        25.00        30.00        35.00        40.00
                                                                                   B) Isopropanol
   To proﬁle the largest possible number of fungal metabolites, a             100
repeatable and generic extraction procedure was devised. Because
different fungal strains may produce highly divergent metabolite        %
patterns, preliminary analyses were used to select those fungal
strains that produced metabolites with a large range of polari-                 0.000             5.00         10.00        15.00        20.00        25.00        30.00        35.00        40.00Min
ties. This representative strain set included two Fusarium solani     C) Methanol100
strains, one A. clavatus and one Fusarium oxysporum strain (See Fig.
S1 for the UHPLC–TOF-MS ﬁngerprint of each). All of the strains
were grown in standard solid-media conditions and were mixed        %
to form homogenous materials. This pooled solid media was used
                                                                                                                             0                                                                                                     Min
to optimise the extraction procedure as well as the high resolution                 0.00          5.00         10.00        15.00        20.00        25.00        30.00        35.00        40.00
metabolite proﬁling and rapid ﬁngerprinting LC–MS methods.         D) Dichloromethane/Ethyl acetate/Methanol 2:3:1 with 0.1% Formic Acid
                                                                                                                           100

3.1.1. Extraction of fungal metabolites from solid media                    %
   To ensure good extraction repeatability, the solid culture media
from the petri dishes was frozen and lyophilised prior to extraction,               0                                                                                                     Min
a step taken to exclude interference from the water content. The                 0.00          5.00         10.00        15.00        20.00        25.00        30.00        35.00        40.00
                                                                                         E) Dichloromethane/Ethyl acetate/Methanol 2:3:1metabolic activity and growth speed of some fungal strains from the             100
collection cultivated on agar plates varied signiﬁcantly according
to species. These behavioural differences strongly impact the water        %
content of solid cultures, a result that was observed in the ﬁrst days
after inoculation (data not shown).                                                                             0.000             5.00         10.00        15.00        20.00        25.00        30.00        35.00        40.00Min
   Accelerated  solvent  extraction  (ASE)  and  ultra-sound                                                                                         F) Dichloromethane/Methanol/Water 64:36:8
assisted extraction (UAE) were evaluated as potential extrac-             100
tion methods  for  this spongy material. The solvent systems
used in these evaluations consisted of either methanol or a        %
dichloromethane/methanol/water mixture. No major differences
in yield or in chemical composition of the extracts were observed                 0.000             5.00         10.00        15.00        20.00        25.00        30.00        35.00        40.00Min
between these two methods (data not shown). Therefore, UAE was     G) Dichloromethane/Methanol/Water100                                64:36:8 (Fingerprint)
preferred for the screening of a large number of samples because
it was relatively easy to implement. Such a type of extraction        %
technology was reported to give good extraction yields when
applied to solid media [42].                                                                                0                                                                                                     Min
   The  4  selected  fungal  cultures  mentioned  above  were                 0.00                    1.00                    2.00                    3.00                    4.00
lyophilised, homogenised and subjected to UAE for 20 min with a      Fig. 1. (A–F) High-resolution NI UHPLC–TOF-MS metabolite proﬁles (BPI traces)
70× excess of solvent when compared to the amount used for the     from extracts obtained using 6 different solvent systems (the solvents used are indi-
dried media (v/m ratio). This high ratio of solvent was necessary     cated in the ﬁgures) from culture media pooled from 4 representative fungal strains
to fully submerge the lyophilised material. Repeated extractions         (i.e., 2 Fusarium solani, 1 Fusarium oxysporum and 1 Aspergillus clavatus). UHPLC
                                                                                      conditions: Acquity C18 150 mm × 2.1 mm i.d., 1.7 m column, 460  L/min, 40 ◦C,
revealed that approximately 90% of the extractable material was     2.6% slope gradient. (G) Fast NI UHPLC–TOF-MS ﬁngerprint obtained after gradient
obtained during the ﬁrst extraction step. To maintain the simplic-      transfer using the DMW extract (F). UHPLC conditions: Acquity 50 mm × 1.0 mm
ity of this procedure and cope with the large number of screened        i.d., 1.7 m column, 300  L/min, 40 ◦C, 22.5% slope gradient. This high-throughput
samples, one extraction step was considered to be sufﬁcient. Within     method was used to generate the ion maps for the screening of all the involved
                                                                                                  strains.
this procedure, the metabolite extraction capacities of 6 different
solvents or solvent systems comprising a wide range of polarities,
while still remaining compatible with reversed-phase HPLC, were     to the isopropanol and t-butanol extracts, the methanol extract
compared.                                              was found to contain a larger number of polar compounds (RT
   To evaluate the metabolite diversity in the solid culture media    from 0 to 20 min). By contrast, the complement of less-polar
extracts, a generic UHPLC–TOF-MS proﬁling method was applied.    metabolites (RT from 20 to 35 min) in the methanol extract
The proﬁling was performed using an extended linear acetoni-    was found to be less diverse than those of the isopropanol and
trile/water gradient on a 150 mm UHPLC column to ensure high     t-butanol extracts. To optimise the extraction of most metabo-
peak capacity (P = 408 as calculated by HPLC calculator 3.0 [39,40])      lites over a large range of polarities, solvent mixtures were also
and thus baseline separation of most of the metabolites present.     investigated. Three previously reported solvent mixtures were
The detection was achieved in both positive (PI) and negative ioni-     assessed: dichloromethane/methanol/water (64:36:8) (DMW) [21]
sation (NI) modes, which allowed monitoring of the largest possible    and dichloromethane/ethyl acetate/methanol (2:3:1) (DEM) (both
number of metabolites. A classical SPE sample preparation was    with and without 1% (v/v) of FA) [42]. The addition of FA into the
performed to remove very lipophilic constituents (see below).      DEM solvent system led to reduced chemical diversity, as assessed
   The UHPLC–TOF-MS proﬁles obtained in NI mode for all 6    by the drastic decrease in the number of detected peaks.
extraction solvent systems used are presented in Fig. 1. In all        In the less-polar region of the chromatogram (RT from 20 to
cases, this analytical procedure yielded well-resolved UHPLC–TOF-    35 min), both the DMW and DEM extracts showed a higher number
MS base peak intensity (BPI) chromatograms. When compared     of peaks than the isopropanol and butanol extracts. Moreover, the


[PDF physical page 5]
                                                                           S. Bertrand et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1292 (2013) 219–228                                           223


chemical diversity in the apolar region was even more pronounced
when DEM was used. In the polar region (RT from 0 to 20 min), DEM
performed similarly to methanol.
  When compared to all of the previously tested extraction solvent
systems, DMW was found to yield a substantially higher number of
peaks in the polar region of the chromatogram. Because this solvent
system was already found to be appropriate for the extraction of
non-polar constituents, it was considered to have a relatively broad
extraction capacity and was the extraction solvent system chosen
for the rest of this study.
   Considering the large number of samples to be analysed, a SPE
method prior to UHPLC–TOF-MS analysis was established to pre-
vent sample carryover and maximise the lifespan of the column.
Thus, the highly lipophilic compounds were removed from the
extracts using C18 SPE [21,43]. To assess the number of metabo-
lites lost during the SPE step, the extracts were proﬁled using a
C4 column that had a lower retention of lipophilic constituents.
A comparison of the crude extract proﬁles with those of the SPE-
puriﬁed extracts recorded using the C4 column revealed that, for
DMW extracts, there was no signiﬁcant difference in the detected
lipophilic constituents (RT over 26 min). It was found, however, that
the SPE procedure eliminated the most lipophilic constituents from
the butanol extract (Fig. S2).
   Because the SPE protocol reduced the sample weight by approx-
imately 30% without affecting the reversed-phase proﬁles of DMW
extracts, it was systematically applied to all of the screened samples
in an effort to preserve experimental reproducibility. To facilitate
screening a large number of samples (see below), the SPE proce-
dure was simpliﬁed by mixing the samples with C18 particles prior
to ﬁltration. This modiﬁed procedure was found to produce results
similar to those of direct SPE ﬁltration.
   In conclusion, extraction by UAE with DMW as the solvent sys-
tem followed by SPE was found to be a highly suitable sample
preparation method for generic reversed-phase proﬁling of fungal
metabolites.


3.1.2. Development of the UHPLC ﬁngerprinting methods
   To chemically proﬁle a large number of fungal confrontations as
well as their respective pure strains (more than 400 samples in this
study), a high-throughput UHPLC–TOF-MS ﬁngerprinting method
was developed that was based on the high-resolution proﬁling
analysis used to optimise the metabolite extraction. Development      Fig. 2. PI and NI 2D ion maps obtained from the UHPLC–TOF-MS ﬁngerprints of
                                                                                 the DMW extract of Fusarium oxysporum (Sin106) (see conditions in Fig. 1G). Peak
of this rapid ﬁngerprinting method was necessary because the                                                                                  annotations based on the high mass and high spectral accuracy of this technique
high-resolution LC–MS proﬁling procedure required more than      are used for the assignment of molecular formulae. The ﬁgure shows satisfactory
55 min to complete and was not compatible with the screening of      resolution of most of the features in the ion maps. For example, the TOF-MS data
a large number of samples.                                            and literature search provided the identiﬁcation of fumonisin B1 or isofumonisin B1
   To decrease the analysis time, the column length was reduced      as the best putative structures associated to the 2 features with masses of 722.3989
                                                                                                     (PI) and 720.3831 Da (NI).
from 150 mm to 50 mm. This column geometry was found to yield
higher peak capacities with gradient times of less than 10 min
[44,45]. When a 50 mm column with a diameter of 2.1 mm was    with the management of a reasonably timely analysis of a large
used, the optimal ﬂow rate required to reach 90% of the maximum     series of samples without much loss of efﬁciency in the LC sep-
pressure allowed by the system (1000 bar, the optimum condi-     aration. Fig. 1F and G compares the UHPLC–TOF-MS BPI proﬁle
tion for high peak capacity) [46] was approximately 1.2 mL/min.    and ﬁngerprint obtained from the same DMW extract. Although
This ﬂow rate was not suitable for electrospray ionisation (ESI)    the ﬁngerprint required a shorter analysis time, the selectivity of
[47], and rather than split the ﬂow rate, a reduced-diameter col-     this method was similar to that of the proﬁle. This result was con-
umn (1.0 mm) was selected. The optimal ﬂow rate for this column    ﬁrmed by comparing the extracted ion traces (XICs) of the main
was 0.3 mL/min. This ﬂow rate was suitable for the ESI source of    LC peaks. The decrease in peak capacity was not detrimental to
the TOF-MS detector and considerably reduced the solvent con-    the detection of features (m/z × RT) because the orthogonal TOF-
sumption. The selectivity of both the proﬁling and ﬁngerprinting   MS detection increased metabolite separation and the BPI proﬁling
methods were indistinguishable because of the application of a    method did not reveal the presence of many isomeric structures.
gradient transfer method [39,40]. By altering the column geom-    The UHPLC–TOF-MS ﬁngerprints were thus represented in the form
etry and gradient conditions, the overall analysis time was reduced     of 2D ion maps, in which the metabolites were resolved in both the
from 55 min to 6 min (Fig. 1). However, while a tenfold increase    LC and MS dimensions. An example of such an ion map is included
in throughput was obtained, these changes resulted in a twofold     in Fig. 2, which presents the PI and NI UHPLC–TOF-MS ﬁngerprints
decrease in theoretical peak capacity (from 408 to 190) [40]. Nev-     of a Fusarium pure strain extract with their corresponding BPIs. As
ertheless, this analytical procedure was found to be compatible    shown, the PI and NI ﬁngerprints were very complementary, and


[PDF physical page 6]
224                                                                      S. Bertrand et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1292 (2013) 219–228


all of the features were well separated despite the use of fast LC    very good match amongst the RT data (approximately 1% coefﬁ-
separation (Fig. 2).                                                     cient variation) for more than 25 analytical replicates that were
  TOF-MS not only can contribute an additional separation dimen-     representative of the whole sample list. Blank samples were found
sion to all of the spectral features but also can allow the user to     to contain very few contaminants, and their patterns were very
deduce molecular formulae from its high-mass-accuracy data, a     similar over the whole dataset, indicating no detectable carryover
process referred to as dereplication [48]. For example, one of the     effects.
main peaks of Fig. 2 was detected in both the PI and NI modes at     A PCA analysis of all of the pure strains also revealed satisfac-
an RT of 1.97 min for m/z values of 722.3989 Da and 720.3885 Da,     tory clustering of the biological replicates (Fig. S3). Within a given
respectively. The m/z difference of 2 Da between the two ioni-    pure strain, more than 80% of all the PI- and NI-detected peaks
sation modes was the basis for the identiﬁcation of the [M+H]+     exhibited biological variation of less than 30% (coefﬁcient vari-
and [M−H]−adducts. The high mass-accuracy of the TOF-MS data     ation of the peak areas of given peaks for all replicates). When
(<5 ppm) permitted 3 molecular formulae to be deduced in both    a variation of less than 50% was considered, the detection was
the NI and PI modes. Moreover, the comparison of theoretical and    95%. Considering that the growth of fungal strains (growth speed,
observed isotopic patterns (low normalised i-ﬁt value) as well as    colony morphology) may be prone to signiﬁcant variations over
the application of heuristic ﬁltering [49] allowed for the determi-    subsequent cultures, these results were determined to be very
nation of an unambiguous molecular formula (C34H59NO15) [50].     satisfactory (Tables S3 and S4). For the 9 biological replicates of
A search for this molecular formula in natural product databases    the 6 different co-cultures, the same repeatability was observed
[51,52] matched with two possible isomers – fumonisin B1 and   among replicates (Tables S3 and S4). This indicates that the metabo-
isofumonisin B1 – which are produced by Fusarium sp. [53,54].      lite ﬁngerprinting method developed for fungi grown on solid
These results indicate that the screening procedure developed in    media generates acceptable datasets that can be used for further
this work was able to detect known fungal metabolites efﬁciently    metabolomic analyses.
and that high-resolution TOF-MS data could be reliably used for the
putative identiﬁcation of features induced by fungal confrontation      3.1.4. Search for metabolite induction in fungal co-culture by
and the estimation of their novelty.                                 data mining
                                                                Because agar plates are limited in space and contain restricted
3.1.3. Repeatability of extraction and UHPLC–TOF-MS               amounts of nutrients, the co-cultivation of fungal strains forces
ﬁngerprinting analysis for a large set of microbial extracts              competitive interactions [56]. A co-cultivation experimental set-up
   To assess the reproducibility of the fungal growth conditions,    was used here to stimulate the production of secondary compounds
sample preparation methods and LC–MS analyses, a representative    by interacting fungi that would not be released by mono-cultures
set of 5 strain mono-cultures and 6 co-cultures were selected. The    grown in identical conditions. To evaluate the induction of novel
5 fungal strains used included two F. solani, one T. rubrum, one Cla-    compounds by the 6 representative fungal co-cultures described
dosporium sp. and one A. clavatus strain. 5 co-culture experiments,    above, UHPLC–TOF-MS ﬁngerprints of the fungal mono-cultures
which involved both of the F. solani strains cultured with the 3 oth-    and their corresponding co-cultures were compared.
ers fungal strain, were analysed in parallel to verify the consistency       As shown in Fig. 3, a visual comparison of the ﬁngerprints
of the metabolite proﬁles when fungal interactions were present.    displayed as 2D ion maps (RT × m/z) of 2 mono-cultures and
9 biological replicates of each sample were grown independently     their corresponding co-culture was sufﬁcient to detect the most
and submitted to UHPLC–TOF-MS ﬁngerprinting.                    obviously induced metabolites among several hundreds of spectral
  9 replicates of the uninoculated agar plates were subjected to     features. For example, when F. solani was confronted with Cla-
the same treatment and served as control samples so that the agar    dosporium sp., 2 intense features (highlighted by a box frame on
background detected in the LC–MS analyses could be excluded. A    the UHPLC–TOF-MS ion map in NI and PI mode) were only visi-
quality-control (QC) sample, which consisted of an equal mixture     ble after confrontation and were not observed in spectra obtained
of all of the previously described samples (108 in total), was pre-    from the corresponding mono-cultures. Comparison of the selected
pared to assess the stability of the system over the time required    ion trace XICs of these features further conﬁrmed that they were
for analysis of the complete sample set.                            not present in detectable quantities in the mono-cultures but were
   The samples were analysed in random order. The blank samples     clearly present in the interaction experiment. Observation of this
(injection solvent only) and quality QC were analysed every 12 sam-    induction phenomenon was consistent over the 9 replicates.
ples. In addition, 6 analyses of both blank samples and QC samples      To screen for all of the induced fungal metabolites and detect
were performed before and after the analysis of the complete set    minor induced compounds as well, a statistical approach was estab-
of fungal samples. To facilitate the set-up of an appropriate sample     lished. Multivariate analysis [57] was applied to 9 replicates of each
list, an Excel Macro was developed (Supplementary material). Both     of the 5 mono-cultures and 6 co-cultures, a total of 99 samples. For
the PI and NI ﬁngerprints were analysed independently to ensure    a given confrontation, all of the detected features with intensities
high MS acquisition frequency and detection stability. Altogether,     greater than an appropriate threshold were selected by an auto-
more than 300 injections were performed sequentially. This proce-    mated peak-picking procedure (see Section 2). This procedure was
dure was adapted from an established metabolomic protocol that    applied to the 9 replicates of the co-culture and mono-cultures of
has been applied to the analysis of body ﬂuids [34].                 each pair of fungi (27 samples).
   All of the LC–MS ﬁngerprints were automatically processed       As a ﬁrst step, an unsupervised PCA (unit variance scaling) was
using open-source peak-picking software [41,55] to generate lists    performed on these 27 samples for each interaction experiment.
of features (RT, m/z value, and peak area) for the entire set of sam-    For a given interaction (for example, F. solani and Cladosporium
ples (the fully detailed procedure is explained in Table S2). The      sp.), a well-resolved clustering of the 27 samples in 3 groups was
system stability over the time required to obtain the whole dataset    obtained (Fig. 4A). This behaviour was observed for most of the
was evaluated via a principal component analysis (PCA, unit vari-     interaction experiments. However, in some cases, PCA analysis
ance scaling) involving all the samples with a special focus on the     resulted in poorly resolved clustering of the co-culture samples
QC samples. The relatively tight clustering of QC samples (data not    apart from their corresponding mono-cultures (Figs. S4 and S5).
shown) suggested that the ﬁngerprints were suitable for further    The well-resolved sample clustering obtained showed that the
detailed analysis of fungal metabolite variations. In addition, the     co-culture ﬁngerprints did not overlap with the 2 corresponding
XICs of selected characteristic ions of the QC samples revealed a    mono-culture clusters. This indicated that the dataset contained


[PDF physical page 7]
                                                                           S. Bertrand et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1292 (2013) 219–228                                           225





Fig. 3. General strategy to study metabolite induction by fungal co-cultivation on solid media in petri dishes. In this example, Fusarium solani (Sin58) was co-cultivated with
Cladosporium sp. (Sin137). The PI and NI 2D ion map ﬁngerprints are shown. The round insets represent a schematic presentation of the petri dishes of the two mono-cultures
with the co-culture in the middle. Visual inspection of the 2D ion maps already enabled the observation of some of the features induced by co-culturing. The XICs of 2 features
(228.1970 Da at 3.40 min and 414.3226 Da at 3.42 min) were detected in the PI and NI modes, respectively.


information that discriminated co-cultures from mono-cultures      vs. 2 mono-cultures, see below). This indicates that fungal interac-
and that, in addition, some features that were only associated with     tions modulate the biosynthetic pathways that produce secondary
the co-cultures were likely to be present. This was conﬁrmed by    metabolites [9].
further analysis, as features only associated with the co-cultures       As a second step, supervised analysis of the data via partial
were found within the dataset of induced compounds (1 co-culture     least-square regression (PLS) was used to detect overexpressed





Fig. 4. Unsupervised (PCA) and supervised (PLS) multivariate data analysis (UV scaling) of the ﬁngerprint data included in Fig. 3 (interaction of F. solani Sin58 with Cladosporium
sp. Sin137; 9 replicates of mono- and co-cultures). The PCA (A) showed a clear separation between the 3 groups representing the two mono-cultures and their co-culture.
The PLS (B) generated a signiﬁcant model (R2(Y) = 0.97; Q2(Y) = 0.94). The loadings associated with the PLS, and their further biplot localisation, enabled the detection of
metabolites that were signiﬁcantly induced in all of the replicates. Two examples (C and D) of the XICs of such features that are not directly visible on the ion maps are
presented. (C) Example of de novo metabolite induction. (D) Up-regulation in the confrontation zone of metabolites present in the corresponding mono-cultures.


[PDF physical page 8]
226                                                                      S. Bertrand et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1292 (2013) 219–228


compounds in the co-cultures (Fig. 4B). The loadings associated    groups that displayed distinct morphological patterns of interac-
with the PLS separation of the co-cultures and mono-cultures were     tion (interaction types) were deﬁned (Fig. 5).
selected to determine the induced features. A biplot of the loadings        In the ﬁrst type of interaction – referred to as distance-inhibition
and the score plot provided a good means for the ranking of the fea-    type – fungal growth stopped at a distance from the competing
tures responsible for discriminating between the co-cultures and    fungal colony. This pattern strongly suggested the release of an
the two corresponding mono-cultures on the PLS plot. For all of     antifungal substance(s) into the medium that worked to inhibit the
these selected features, the induction rate was estimated by com-    growth of both fungi. In the second type of interaction, which was
paring the mean peak area of given co-culture biomarkers to those    only observed in two cases, the fungal colonies grew large enough
of each mono-culture. Based on this treatment, the most signiﬁcant     to contact one another and produced a dark precipitate similar to
features (those with an induction rate higher than threefold) were    the so-called “zone lines” observed in wood-decaying fungi con-
selected. Finally, the XICs for signiﬁcantly induced features were     frontation fronts [21]. In this type of interaction, the production of
plotted to validate these results.                           new substances is a conﬁrmed observation of the dark precipitate
  An example of the XICs that correspond to the induced features      itself. The third group of interactions included those in which the
is given in Fig. 4C and D. In these ﬁgures, two types of induction pat-     fungi grew large enough to contact one another but produced no
terns are recorded: (i) de novo biosynthesis in which there was no    obvious evidence of substance release. This type of interaction was
detection in mono-cultures of a compound that was clearly present     referred to as the contact inhibition type. In the last group, interac-
in co-cultures (Fig. 4C); and (ii) up-regulation in co-cultures of     tions resulted in the complete invasion of one colony by the other.
compounds that were already present in mono-cultures, which is     This type of interaction was referred to as overgrowth.
expressed as fold changes induction (Fig. 4D).                          For the majority of co-culture experiments, the types of inter-
   In the 6 fungal interactions studied using this method, a few     actions observed evolved over time, which led to the observation
tens of features were detected in the PI and/or NI modes (Table S5).     of intermediate behaviours. Thus, for example, some interactions
When considering the fungal combinations, however, important    yielded colonies that would initially stop their development at a
variations were observed in the number of induced features, a value     distance for a few weeks until one fungal colony would resume its
that ranged from 0 to 29. For example, the interaction between    expansion and produce an overgrowth-type interaction. In other
F. solani (Sin58) and Cladosporium sp. (Sin137) yielded 11 and 29     cases, colonies would develop up to mycelium contact while the
features in the NI and PI modes, respectively (Table S5).               colony’s morphology would change substantially in the vicinity of
   These results further supported the previously reported exist-    the interaction front.
ence of chemical induction in fungal co-cultures [5,7,8].               To verify whether the types of morphological interactions could
                                                           be related to the number of induced metabolites at the interac-
3.1.5. Estimation of chemical novelty generated by fungal               tion zones, only co-cultures displaying one of the 4 well-deﬁned
interactions                                                           interaction types (Fig. 5) were kept for LC–MS ﬁngerprint screening.
   To evaluate whether the induced features described novel NPs,       For this reason, only 138 co-culture experiments (21% of the
the high mass-accuracy of TOF-MS detection was used to ver-      all interactions) and the mono-cultures of the 83 fungal strains
ify matches between the obtained high-accuracy MW and those    involved in these confrontation experiments were analysed. These
recorded in the Dictionary of Natural Product (DNP) database     selected interactions include 31 distance-inhibition types, 1 zone-
[51]. This rapid procedure was preferred over determination of     line type, 45 contact-inhibition types and 61 overgrowth types
the molecular formula of each induced feature for the purpose of     (Tables S1 and S6). In this part of the work, and in view of the large
dereplication, as the latter method, described for the peak annota-    number of interactions to be examined, all samples were analysed
tion of constitutive metabolites in Fig. 2, is a more laborious process.    without replicates to gain rough evaluations of whether a given
   The determination of MWs was performed with a relatively     interaction type could be related to a higher induction of small
large mass-accuracy tolerance (<15 ppm) to improve the chances of    secondary metabolites.
ﬁnding a matching candidate. The main suspected adducts (−H and
+HCOO in NI and +H and +Na in PI) [58] were taken into account      3.2.2. Chemical induction and types of fungal interactions
for these calculations. Rough evaluation of chemical novelty was      To record the ﬁngerprints of all of the 138 co-cultures and opti-
assessed based on the existence of these MW values in the DNP.      mise the concentrations of those substances speciﬁcally released by
   Interestingly, a majority of the peaks (around 80%) from mono-    fungal interactions, the front lines of the co-cultures were excised
culture analysis matched at least one structure recorded in the DNP.    and processed as described above. By observing fungal interactions
This hit number was close to zero when the induced features were    on solid media, access to the exact zones of fungal interactions was
searched (Table S5). Such an approach must be used with care, but    enabled.
it can be used for the rapid preliminary estimation of the chemical      The UHPLC–TOF-MS ﬁngerprints of these co-cultures were ana-
novelty of the induced compounds detected in ﬁlamentous fungi    lysed in both NI and PI modes and were compared to their
co-cultures.                                                     corresponding mono-cultures. For this dataset, only the number
                                                                        of de novo induced metabolites in the interaction zones was con-
3.2. Screening for chemical diversity in fungal interactions               sidered. Thus, only the features of sufﬁcient intensity that were
                                                                 detected in the interaction zones but not in the corresponding
   The results obtained with the strategy described above, which    mono-cultures were taken into consideration. Based on the crite-
was based on a limited set of fungal co-cultures, showed that fun-     ria selected, the number of features induced in each sample (a few
gal interactions on solid media yield chemical novelty. To further     tens) varied strongly according to the fungal combinations.
evaluate the potential for chemical induction in a larger variety of     A mean value for the number of induced compounds detected
fungal interactions, 657 co-culture experiments were examined.       in both PI and NI modes was calculated for each type of inter-
                                                                     action (Fig. 5). For all of the interaction types, the number of
3.2.1. Morphological patterns of fungal interactions on solid            low-molecular-weight compounds induced de novo was not sig-
media                                                              niﬁcantly different. Thus, even co-cultures that led to visible
   This series of co-culture experiments was performed on agar-     antimicrobial activity (distance inhibition) or to the visible forma-
containing petri dishes. The front zone of each interaction was     tion of new products in the form of dark precipitates were not found
observed over a period of 8 weeks. From these observations, 4     to have produced more induced features. This result demonstrates


[PDF physical page 9]
                                                                           S. Bertrand et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1292 (2013) 219–228                                           227





Fig. 5. Colony morphologies of fungal co-cultures. 4 “Interaction types” (distance-inhibition, zone-line, contact-inhibition and overgrowth) were deﬁned from observations of
657 co-culture experiments performed on solid agar plates. Mean values of the numbers of induced compounds detected by NI or PI UHPLC–TOF-MS are displayed below
the corresponding interaction types. Only well-ﬁltered de novo induced features were considered. A schematic of the interaction side-view is provided at the bottom of the
ﬁgure.


that there is no correlation between the morphological aspects    samples achieved broad extraction of fungal metabolites from solid
of the interacting colonies and the production of new low MW    agar media with no major interferences from the culture media and
metabolites detectable with the method used.                   no problematic carryover effects. UHPLC ﬁngerprinting conditions
   Conversely, these results also demonstrate that the large major-    were generic and were optimised using high-resolution metabolite
ity of fungi grown on agar plates reacted to the presence of another     proﬁling. This enabled the acquisition of 10 fungal ﬁngerprints per
microorganism by producing substances that were not produced in    hour. The high mass and spectral accuracy of the TOF-MS detector
mono-cultures.                                          was used for dereplication of the main fungal metabolites and for
                                                                 the rough estimation of the novelty of features induced by fungal
4. Conclusions                                                         interactions.
                                                            The method was found to be repeatable and generated accept-
   The strategy that was developed in this work regarding co-     able datasets that were used for further metabolomic analysis.
culture experiments of ﬁlamentous fungi grown on solid media    Furthermore, the advantage of using a proﬁling method based on
and subsequent LC–MS ﬁngerprinting has revealed induction   UHPLC for this type of study is that this technique is amenable
phenomena in these microorganisms that may be linked to the     to the possibility of scaling up the separation for the isolation of
activation of cryptic biosynthetic pathways.                        biomarkers of interest for full identiﬁcation by NMR and for further
   The protocol was optimised for co-culturing of fungi on solid     characterisation of their bioactivity proﬁles [21].
media and was found to efﬁciently generate samples in which      The application of this method to a large collection of co-cultures
metabolite-induction phenomena could be easily observed. Solid-    grown on solid media demonstrated that most fungal interactions
media co-cultures were found to provide a good means of easily     resulted in the production of compounds that were not produced
following the morphological development of fungal colonies and    by the corresponding fungal mono-cultures grown under identical
excise zones in which fungal confrontations occur. The study     conditions. No correlation between the morphologies of the inter-
of more than 600 fungal strains subjected to such co-culturing     acting colonies – deﬁned as the interaction type – and the number
revealed 4 main morphological types of fungal interactions.            of induced compounds could be made.
   To proﬁle the low-molecular-weight metabolites produced      The screening results did indicate, however, that the compounds
by this large collection of fungi and their co-cultures, a high-     speciﬁcally produced at the fungal interaction zones in co-cultures
throughput UHPLC–TOF-MS method was devised. The sample    seem to correspond to novel chemical compounds that are scarcely
preparation process developed for the analysis of a large series of    represented in natural products databases. These ﬁndings indicate


[PDF physical page 10]
228                                                                      S. Bertrand et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1292 (2013) 219–228


that fungal interaction may be a new and promising source of lead      [21] G. Glauser, K. Gindro, J. Fringeli, J.-P. De Joffrey, S. Rudaz, J.-L. Wolfender, J. Agric.
compounds.                                                                Food Chem. 57 (2009) 1127.
                                                                                       [22] F. Mela, K. Fritsche, W. de Boer, J.A. van Veen, L.H. de Graaff, M. van den Berg,
    Finally, as these low MW compounds seem to be released as a              J.H.J. Leveau, ISME J. 5 (2011) 1494.
response to microbial interactions, it can be speculated that they      [23] D. Peiris, W. Dunn, M. Brown, D. Kell, I. Roy, J. Hedger, Metabolomics 4 (2008)
may possess antimicrobial activities, a speculation that has been           52.
                                                                                       [24]  J. Zhou, Q. Ma, H. Yi, L. Wang, H. Song, Y.-J. Yuan, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77
previously reported [12,14,17,20,21]. In this respect, continuing                                                                                     (2011) 7023.
work is under way to measure the differential bioactivity proﬁles      [25] R.J. Seviour, B. McNeil, M.L. Fazenda, L.M. Harvey, Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 31
[59] of a large number of co-cultures and their respective mono-          (2011) 170.
cultures. The metabolomic methods presented here will be applied      [26] R. Bareither, D. Pollard, Biotechnol. Prog. 27 (2011) 2.
                                                                                       [27] J.A. Zahn, R.E. Higgs, M.D. Hilton, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67 (2001) 377.
in combination with the bioactivity results to detect the induced      [28] E. Adelin, N. Slimani, S. Cortial, I. Schmitz-Alfonso, J. Ouazzani, J. Ind. Microbiol.
compounds responsible for such antimicrobial activities.                      Biotechnol. 38 (2011) 299.
                                                                                       [29] G. Glauser, D. Guillarme, E. Grata, J. Boccard, A. Thiocone, P.-A. Carrupt, J.-L.
                                                                                    Veuthey, S. Rudaz, J.-L. Wolfender, J. Chromatogr. A 1180 (2008) 90.
Acknowledgements                                                             [30] V.V. Phelan, W.-T. Liu, K. Pogliano, P.C. Dorrestein, Nat. Chem. Biol. 8 (2012) 26.
                                                                                       [31]  J. Watrous, P. Roach, T. Alexandrov, B.S. Heath, J.Y. Yang, R.D. Kersten, M. van der
   Roland Todd and Philippe Eugster are acknowledged for their           Voort, K. Pogliano, H. Gross, J.M. Raaijmakers, B.S. Moore, J. Laskin, N. Bandeira,
                                                                                                         P.C. Dorrestein, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109 (2012) E1743.
contributions to agar extraction and UHPLC–TOF-MS analysis,      [32] P.J. Eugster, D. Guillarme, S. Rudaz, J.L. Veuthey, P.A. Carrupt, J.L. Wolfender, J.
respectively. Nadia Marcon  of HES-SO  (Sion, Switzerland)  is        AOAC Int. 94 (2011) 51.
thanked for her help with preliminary tests of the Automated Sol-      [33] E. Grata, D. Guillarme, G. Glauser, J. Boccard, P.-A. Carrupt, J.-L. Veuthey, S.
                                                                                    Rudaz, J.-L. Wolfender, J. Chromatogr. A 1216 (2009) 5660.
vent Extraction System. This work was supported by the Swiss      [34] E.J. Want, I.D. Wilson, H. Gika, G. Theodoridis, R.S. Plumb, J. Shockcor, E. Holmes,
National Science Foundation Sinergia Grant CRSII3 127187, which              J.K. Nicholson, Nat. Protoc. 5 (2010) 1005.
was awarded to J.-L. W., M. M. and K. G.                                      [35] T. Ito, T. Odake, H. Katoh, Y. Yamaguchi, M. Aoki, J. Nat. Prod. 74 (2011) 983.
                                                                                       [36]  J. Varga, M. Due, J.C. Frisvad, R.A. Samson, Stud. Mycol. 59 (2007) 89.
                                                                                       [37]  J. Verrier, M. Pronina, C. Peter, O. Bontems, M. Fratti, K. Salamin, S. Schürch, K.
Appendix A. Supplementary data                                               Gindro, J.-L. Wolfender, K. Harshman, M. Monod, J. Clin. Microbiol. 50 (2012)
                                                                                       553.
                                                                                       [38] P. Zhang, B. Bao, H.T. Dang, J. Hong, H.J. Lee, E.S. Yoo, K.S. Bae, J.H. Jung, J. Nat.
   Supplementary  data  associated with  this  article can be          Prod. 72 (2009) 270.
found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chroma.      [39] D. Guillarme, D.T.T. Nguyen, S. Rudaz, J.L. Veuthey, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 68
2013.01.098.                                                                      (2008) 430.
                                                                                       [40] D.  Guillarme,  D.T.T.  Nguyen,  S.  Rudaz,   J.-L.  Veuthey, HPLC  calcula-
                                                                                                tor 3.0, http://www.unige.ch/sciences/pharm/fanal/lcap/telechargement.htm,
References                                                                         consulted 11.07.12.
                                                                                       [41] T. Pluskal, S. Castillo, A. Villar-Briones, M. Oresic, BMC Bioinformatics 11 (2010)
 [1] D.J. Newman, G.M. Cragg, J. Nat. Prod. 75 (2012) 311.                                  395.
 [2] F.E. Koehn, G.T. Carter, Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 4 (2005) 206.                        [42] S. Jørn, J. Chromatogr. A 760 (1997) 264.
 [3]  J.L. Wolfender, G. Marti, E.F. Queiroz, Curr. Org. Chem. 14 (2010) 1808.             [43] E. Grata, J. Boccard, D. Guillarme, G. Glauser, P.-A. Carrupt, E.E. Farmer, J.-L.
 [4] M. Nett, H. Ikeda, B.S. Moore, Nat. Prod. Rep. 26 (2009) 1362.                         Wolfender, S. Rudaz, J. Chromatogr. B 871 (2008) 261.
 [5] J.M. Winter, S. Behnken, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 15 (2011) 22.                      [44] P. Petersson, A. Frank, J. Heaton, M.R. Euerby, J. Sep. Sci. 31 (2008) 2346.
 [6] E.K. Schmitt, C.M. Moore, P. Krastel, F. Petersen, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 15 (2011)      [45] D. Guillarme, E. Grata, G. Glauser, J.-L. Wolfender, J.-L. Veuthey, S. Rudaz, J.
     497.                                                                          Chromatogr. A 1216 (2009) 3232.
 [7] Y.-M. Chiang, S.-L. Chang, B.R. Oakley, C.C.C. Wang, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 15      [46] P.J. Eugster, D. Biass, D. Guillarme, P. Favreau, R. Stöcklin, J.-L. Wolfender, J.
     (2011) 137.                                                                    Chromatogr. A 1259 (2012) 187.
 [8] K. Scherlach, C. Hertweck, Org. Biomol. Chem. 7 (2009) 1753.                      [47]  J. Schappler, R. Nicoli, D. Nguyen, S. Rudaz, J.-L. Veuthey, D. Guillarme, Talanta
 [9] V. Schroeckh, K. Scherlach, H.-W. Nützmann, E. Shelest, W. Schmidt-Heck, J.         78 (2009) 377.
    Schuemann, K. Martin, C. Hertweck, A.A. Brakhage, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.      [48] D. Guillarme, J. Schappler, S. Rudaz, J.-L. Veuthey, Trends Anal. Chem. 29 (2010)
    106 (2009) 14558.                                                                     15.
[10] D.Y. Kobayashi, J.A. Crouch, Ann. Rev. Phytopathol. 47 (2009) 63.                   [49] T. Kind, O. Fiehn, BMC Bioinformatics 8 (2007) 105.
[11] A.E. Rodriguez Estrada, A. Hegeman, G. May, Fungal Genet. Biol. 48 (2011) 874.      [50] T. Kind, O. Fiehn, BMC Bioinformatics 7 (2006) 234.
[12] M. Cueto, P.R. Jensen, C. Kauffman, W. Fenical, E. Lobkovsky, J. Clardy, J. Nat.      [51] Dictionary of Natural Products on DVD (20:1), CRC Press, Taylor & Francis
     Prod. 64 (2001) 1444.                                                           Group, 2001.
[13] K.M. Zuck, S. Shipley, D.J. Newman, J. Nat. Prod. 74 (2011) 1653.                    [52] K.F. Nielsen, J. Smedsgaard, J. Chromatogr. A 1002 (2003) 111.
[14] D.-C. Oh, C.A. Kauffman, P.R. Jensen, W. Fenical, J. Nat. Prod. 70 (2007) 515.         [53] S. Naiker, B. Odhav, Mycoses 47 (2004) 50.
[15] S. Angell, B.J. Bench, H. Williams, C.M.H. Watanabe, Chem. Biol. 13 (2006) 1349.      [54] S.E. MacKenzie, M.E. Savard, B.A. Blackwell, J.D. Miller, J.W. ApSimon, J. Nat.
[16] K. Nonaka, T. Abe, M. Iwatsuki, M. Mori, T. Yamamoto, K. Shiomi, S. Omura, R.          Prod. 61 (1998) 367.
    Masuma, J. Antibiot. 64 (2011) 769.                                               [55] G. Gürdeniz, M. Kristensen, T. Skov, L.O. Dragsted, Metabolites 2 (2012) 77.
[17] F. Zhu, G. Chen, X. Chen, M. Huang, X. Wan, Chem. Nat. Compd. 47 (2011) 1.        [56] L. Boddy, FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 31 (2000) 185.
[18] D.-C. Oh, P.R. Jensen, C.A. Kauffman, W. Fenical, Bioorg. Med. Chem. 13 (2005)      [57]  J. Boccard, J.-L. Veuthey, S. Rudaz, J. Sep. Sci. 33 (2010) 290.
     5267.                                                                            [58] K.F. Nielsen, M. Månsson, C. Rank, J.C. Frisvad, T.O. Larsen, J. Nat. Prod. 74 (2011)
[19] W. Jonkers, A.E. Rodriguez Estrada, K. Lee, A. Breakspear, G. May, H.C. Kistler,          2338.
     Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78 (2012) 3656.                                         [59] O. Schumpp, N. Bruderhofer, M. Monod, J.L. Wolfender, K. Gindro, Mycoses 55
[20] C. Li, J. Zhang, C. Shao, W. Ding, Z. She, Y. Lin, Chem. Nat. Compd. 47 (2011) 382.          (2012) 507.