
[PDF physical page 1]
Angewandte Chemie International Edition



                                                  How to cite: Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2026 , 65, e3445735
                                                                                                       doi.org/10.1002/anie.3445735


 COMMUNICATION


Electrochemically Driven Enzymatic Oxidative
Desymmetrization for the Enantioselective Construction of
Silicon Stereocenter

Jiayu Wu1    Qin Zhu1    Shuai Liu1     Jinhai Yu1     Beibei Zhao1    Bin Chen1    Aokun Liu2    Fengming Shi1
Lu Yu2      Yan Zhang1       Xiaoqiang Huang1

1 State Key Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry, Chemistry and Biomedicine Innovation Center (ChemBIC), School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering,
Frontier Interdisciplinary Science Research Center, Nanjing University, Nanjing, P. R. China   2 Department of Environmental Science and Engineering,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, P. R. China


Correspondence: Lu Yu ( luyuesr@ustc.edu.cn)  Yan Zhang ( njuzy@nju.edu.cn)   Xiaoqiang Huang ( huangx513@nju.edu.cn)

Received: 7 January 2026   Revised: 24 March 2026   Accepted: 3 April 2026

Keywords: biocatalysis | desymmetrization | electrochemical synthesis | radicals | silicon-stereogenic


 ABSTRACT
  Chiral silicon-stereogenic organosilanes are finding increasingly widespread applications in pharmaceutical science and
  biomedical materials. However, the enzymatic construction of silicon chiral centers remains underdeveloped. Here, we report the
   integration of thiamine diphosphate (ThDP)-dependent radical biocatalysis and mediated electrochemical oxidation to unlock
  non-natural enzymatic oxidative desymmetrization, enabling the highly enantioselective synthesis of silicon stereocenters. Using
  symmetric silane dialdehydes as substrates, variants of benzaldehyde lyase from Pseudomonas fluorescens ( Pf BAL) together with
  ferrocene methanol (FcMeOH) as a redox mediator facilitate selective oxidation. This method features a broad substrate scope,
  producing a range of enantioenriched silicon-containing carboxylic acids with excellent enantioselectivity (22 examples, up
   to > 99.5% ee). Mechanistic investigations confirm substrate binding, explain the origin of enantioselectivity, and validate the
  mediated electron transfer pathway. This study expands the enzyme reactivity repertoire by merging electrochemical synthesis
  with biocatalysis, establishing an effective biocatalytic strategy for constructing silicon chirality.




1    Introduction                                            poration of silicon atoms into molecules through biocatalytic
                                                            methods, the biosynthesis of stereodefined silicon-centered chi-
Organosilicon compounds bearing a silicon-stereogenic center     rality remains an unmet challenge [ 15, 16 ] (Figure 1B ). Early
play an important role in drug discovery [ 1 ], and several chiral    examples utilized hydrolases to produce chiral silanes through
organosilicon derivatives have been developed as antidepressant     esterification/hydrolysis, yet their selectivity and scope remain
agents [ 2 ], muscarinic antagonists [ 3, 4 ], and anti-bacterial agents    unsatisfying [ 17–20 ]. Very recently, Liu, Yang, and coworkers
[ 5 ] (Figure 1A ). While chemical approaches for asymmetric    engineered P450BM3 to enable the selective oxidation of dihy-
synthesis of Si-stereogenic compounds have been extensively    drosilanes for the synthesis of Si-stereogenic silanols, through
investigated [ 6, 7 ], enzymatic construction of silicon-stereogenic    a heme-mediated hydrogen atom abstraction/oxygen ‑rebound
centers remains largely underdeveloped. Although Arnold [ 8–10 ],    pathway  [ 21 ]. Chen and Huang’s group used ene ‑reductases
Hollmann  [ 11 ], and Zong  [ 12–14 ] have pioneered the incor-     to prepare a series of enantioenriched silacyclohexadienones




Jiayu Wu and Qin Zhu contributed equally to this work.




© 2026 Wiley-VCH GmbH



Angewandte Chemie International Edition , 2026; 65:e3445735                                                                                        1 of 10
https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.3445735


[PDF physical page 2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2026,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           21,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.3445735
                                                                                                                                                             by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               University
                                                                                                                                                             Of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      China,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Library
                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [25/05/2026].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Conditions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rules
                                                                                                                                                             of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         use;
FIGURE  1     Silicon ‑stereogenic synthesis via electroenzymatic oxidative desymmetrization. (A) Selected examples of bioactive molecules featuring           OA
silicon stereocenters. (B) Biocatalysis for silicon-stereogenic center constructions. (C) Schematic diagram of our previous work on electroenzymatic                                           articles
dynamic kinetic resolution. (D) This work : access to silicon stereogenicity via electricity-driven enzymatic oxidative desymmetrization. k , rate constant.                are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  governedthrough a biocatalytic flavin mononucleotide (FMN) mediated    Reshaping natural enzymes  to enable non-natural  transfor-
                                                                                                                                                             by
hydride transfer pathway [ 22 ]. Despite these elegant advance-    mations has established a powerful platform for asymmetric                the
ments,     new             biocatalytic                          strategies                              with distinct mechanisms are    synthesis                                                                                                [ 23–32 ]. The                                                                                                 evolvability                                                                                                            of enzymes                                                                                                               allows                                                                                                                                    for pre-                                                      applicabledesirable          to build                  Si-stereogenic                                 centers.                                                                         cise stereocontrol                                                                                      in complex                                                                                          molecules                                                                                                                that are                                                                                                                  challenging
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Creative

2 of 10                                                                                               Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 2026                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    License


[PDF physical page 3]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15213773,
to access through conventional chemical catalysis [ 33–39 ]. Our    chemical mediator in an undivided cell. Screening of multiple                           2026,
group has long focused on repurposing thiamine diphosphate    thiamine-dependent enzymes heterologously expressed in our                21,
(ThDP)-dependent enzymes to explore new-to-nature catalytic    laboratory (Figure 2C ) revealed that only benzaldehyde lyase
modes [ 40–43 ]. Widely distributed in nature, ThDP-dependent    from Pseudomonas fluorescens ( Pf BAL, PDB: 3D7K [ 74 ]) afforded                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Downloaded
enzymes [ 44–47 ] utilize the cofactor ThDP to covalently activate    the desired product, yielding ( R )- 2a in 9% yield with 90% ee                     from
acyl donors (e.g., aldehydes), forming the carbanion–enamine    (Figure 2B , entry 1). This stands in contrast to our previous
intermediate (known as the Breslow intermediate) [ 48 ] to enable    dynamic kinetic oxidation work [ 59 ], where common ThDP-
diverse bond-forming/cleavage reactions, such as the classic    dependent enzymes such as Pp BFD and Ec MenD were effective.
benzoin condensation and the Stetter reaction [ 49–54 ]. We [ 40–    Using wild-type Pf BAL as the parent enzyme, we then iden-
43 ] and others [ 55–58 ] have successfully expanded the reactivity     tified two beneficial single-site-mutated variants: Pf BAL_T481L
of ThDP-dependent enzymes from a two-electron umpolung    and Pf BAL_L395A (Figure 2B , entries 2 and  3, and Tables
mechanism to single-electron radical pathways via the enzymatic    S16 and S23 ). Consequently, the double-site-mutated variant
ketyl radical intermediates. This advancement has enabled the    Pf BAL_T481L_L395A provided 2a in 64% yield with 99% ee
construction of diverse carbon stereocenters and broadened the    (Figure 2B , entry 4).
scope of ThDP-dependent enzymatic catalysis.                                                       With the optimal enzyme variant for the oxidative desymmetriza-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.3445735
Very recently, we reported the integration of electrochemical    tion of the model substrate, we further explored the effect of           by
synthesis with ThDP-dependent radical biocatalysis, enabling the    reaction parameters (Tables S17–S22 ). Various electrochemical                           Ocean
dynamic kinetic oxidation of aldehydes to construct carbon stere-    mediators were evaluated (Figure 2C ), among which FcMeOHocenters (Figure 1C ) [ 59 ]. In contrast to earlier electrobiocatalysis    delivered the best overall performance. The choice of electrode                                                      University
                                                                                                                                                             Of
based on electrochemical/enzymatic cascades [ 60–62 ] or cofactor    material was also investigated: replacing the graphite anode with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      China,regeneration  [ 63–69 ], our strategy exploits unnatural ThDP-    glassy carbon (GC) or boron-doped diamond (BDD) still afforded
bound radical intermediates, thereby expanding the enzymatic    the silicon-stereogenic product, albeit with diminished efficiency                           Wiley
reactivity. We subsequently explored whether this electroenzy-    (Figure 2B , entries 5 and 6, Table S17 ). Control experiments                                Online
matic platform could be generalized to address challenges in bio-    confirmed that the presence of the enzyme, electrical current,                                      Librarycatalysis, such as the construction of silicon stereocenters. Here,    and redox mediator is all essential for the reaction (Figure 2B ,
                                                                                                                                                             on
we present a cooperative electroenzymatic desymmetrization     entries 7–9). Notably, the transformation also proceeded effi-
strategy that merges thiamine-dependent enzymology with medi-     ciently under ambient atmosphere, with only a slight decreaseated electrochemical oxidation to assemble silicon stereocenters    in yield (Figure 2B , entry 10). In addition, our enzyme stability                                                                      [25/05/2026].
enantioselectively (Figure 1D ). Through highly selective oxidative    studies demonstrated that the protein is stable within a constant                See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the
desymmetrization of one of two aldehydic groups, a series of    current range (0.3–1.0 mA) and can withstand up to 8.25 F of                           Terms
enantioenriched silicon-stereogenic aldehydic carboxylic acids    charge (see Tables S28–S30 ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and
was obtained with up to > 99.5% ee.
                                                                 Next, we explored the substrate scope of this electroenzymatic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Conditions
                                                             desymmetrization (Figure 3 ). The oxidation products catalyzed
2    Results and Discussion                            by Pf BAL_T481L_L395A were determined to be predominantly
                                                                the ( R) ‑isomer, as confirmed by single ‑crystal X ‑ray diffraction
Our designed catalysis (Figure 2A ) begins with the selective dis-    analysis of 2a . A range of symmetric silane dicarbaldehydes with
crimination between the two aldehyde moieties of the symmetric    substituents at various positions ( 2c , 2f , 2l , 2o ) was efficiently
substrate by the ThDP cofactor within the enzyme active site.    converted. The system tolerated both electron ‑donating groups
This key step leads to the selective formation of the enzymatic      (e.g., methoxy in 2b , 2k ) and electron ‑withdrawing substituents
Breslow intermediate ( Int. B , Si-stereogenic center either in      (e.g., trifluoromethyl in 2h ), generally affording medium yields,
R or S ). Subsequently, two successive single-electron transfers    with two examples ( 2f and 2h ) achieving > 99.5% ee. These results
from enzyme/substrate intermediates to the anode, mediated    demonstrate the adaptability of the engineered enzyme active                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
by an electrochemical mediator such as ferrocene methanol     site to diverse electronic environments. Halogen ‑functionalized           on
(FcMeOH), generate the enzymatic ketyl radical ( Int. C ) and the    substrates—including fluorine ( 2g , 2i , 2m , 2p ), chlorine ( 2d ),                           Wiley
corresponding acyl azolium cation ( Int. D ). Finally, hydrolysis    and bromine ( 2e )—were also compatible, with no observable                                Online
of Int. D releases the enantioenriched carboxylic acid bearing    dehalogenation. Notably, sterically demanding groups such as
a silicon stereocenter and regenerates the catalytically active     tert ‑butyl  ( 2j ) and extended polycyclic aromatics  ( 2q ) were                                      Library
enzymatic carbene species ( Int. A ).                           accommodated, yielding products with excellent enantioselectiv-                for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rules
                                                                                       ities, albeit with moderate yields. Oxidation ‑sensitive functional           of
Several critical challenges, however, must be considered: (1)    groups ( 2n ) remained intact under the mild electroenzymatic                      use;
the unnatural, bulky silane substrates may prove difficult for    conditions, highlighting the chemoselectivity of the system. Het-           OA
enzyme to accommodate and differentiate; (2) the successive    erocycle ‑containing substrates, including those with piperonyl                                           articles
single electron transfers require careful tuning to align with     ( 2r , 2s ), benzothiophene ( 2t ), and thiophene ( 2u ) moieties, also                are
enzymatic kinetics; and (3) over-oxidation of the second aldehyde    underwent successful desymmetrization, further confirming the                                           governed
moiety could result in re ‑symmetrization—a common limitation    broad applicability of this platform.                                           by
in conventional chemocatalytic desymmetrization [ 70, 71 ].                                                                                                                                           the
                                           We                                                                        further                                                                                investigated                                                                                       modifications                                                                                                             of the                                                                                                                    alkyl                                                                                                        groups                                                                                                                     attached
                                                                       to the                                                                                silicon                                                                                 ‑stereogenic                                                                                                   center. Replacing                                                                                                  a                                                                                                 methyl                                                                                                       group                                                                                                               with a                                                      applicableWe commenced our study with symmetric backbone 1a as the
model substrate [ 72 ], employing FcMeOH [ 73 ] as the electro-    vinyl group afforded product 2v with excellent enantioselectivity,                                           Creative

Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 2026                                                                                  3 of 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    License


[PDF physical page 4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2026,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           21,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.3445735
                                                                                                                                                             by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               University
                                                                                                                                                             Of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      China,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Library
                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [25/05/2026].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Conditions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rules
                                                                                                                                                             of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         use;
                                                                                                                                                             OA
FIGURE  2    ThDP-enzymatic catalysis for electroenzymatic construction of silicon chirality. (A) Envisioned mechanism and potential challenges.
(B) Optimal reaction conditions and variations on the conditions. (C) Screening of ThDP-dependent enzymes and redox mediators. a Standard condition:                                           articles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           are
1a (0.006 mmol), Pf BAL_T481L_L395A (1 mol%), ThDP (50 mol%), FcMeOH (50 mol%), DMSO (10 v/v%) in Tris buffer (50 mM, pH = 8.5, containing
2.5 mM MgSO4 ), 0.3 mA constant current, 8.3 F mol− 1 , graphite electrodes, undivided cell, and total volume of reaction is 3.0 mL. b Yield (average                                           governed
of duplicate measurements) was determined by reverse-phase HPLC using 1,3,5-tribromobenzene as the internal standard. c Enantiomeric excess           by
                                                                     d                                                                                                                                         thewas determined by HPLC analysis on a chiral stationary phase.  Pf BAL_T481L (1 mol%), ThDP (40 mol%), FcMeOH (25 mol%), 0.4 mA constant
current, 5.0 F mol− 1 were used. GC, glassy carbon electrode; BDD, boron-doped diamond electrode; α-FcEtOH, α-ferrocenylethanol; Fc(MeOH)2 ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               applicable
1,1 ′ -ferrocenedimethanol; Cp2 Fe, ferrocene; Cp2 FePF6 , ferrocenium hexafluorophosphate; FcNMeCl3 , ( N , N , N -trimethyl-1-ferrocenyl methanaminium
chloride; AQ, anthraquinone; TEMPO, 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine 1-oxide.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Creative

4 of 10                                                                                               Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 2026                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    License


[PDF physical page 5]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2026,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           21,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.3445735
                                                                                                                                                             by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               University
                                                                                                                                                             Of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      China,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Library
                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [25/05/2026].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Conditions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                                                                                                                             on
FIGURE  3     Substrate promiscuity of the electroenzymatic synthesis of silicon-chirality. Condition A: Standard conditions as shown in Figure 2B ,                           Wiley
entry 4. Condition B: Pf BAL_T481L_L395A (2 mol%), FcMeOH (100 mol%) were used instead. Condition C: Pf BAL_L395A (2 mol%), FcMeOH (100                                Online
mol%) were used instead. Yields were determined by reverse-phase HPLC as the average of duplicates using two different batches of the enzyme. The                                     Library
enantiomeric excess was determined by HPLC analysis on a chiral stationary phase.                                                                                                                 for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rules
                                                                                                                                                             of
although conversion remained low. In contrast, substrates bear-     nistic studies (Figure 4 ). First, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was                      use;
ing iso -butyl ( 2w ) attached to silicon or phenyl ( 2x ) substituents    used to investigate the electron ‑transfer pathway (Figure 4A ). No           OA
located on the aromatic ring did not yield the desired product    Faradaic response was detected for the substrate–enzyme mix-                                           articles
under the current conditions. These results delineate the present    ture alone, indicating inefficient direct heterogeneous electron                are
limits of substrate compatibility and point toward potential     transfer. Although FcMeOH showed a reversible redox wave, its                                           governeddirections for future enzyme engineering.                         voltammetric profile remained unchanged upon the addition of
                                                                                                                                                             by
                                                                     substrate only. In contrast, when all three components were com-                the
To   elucidate         how                   this ThDP-dependent                                     electroenzymatic                                                  system                                                                  bined,                                                                   a slight                                                                                  increase                                                                                           in the                                                                                         anodic                                                                                         peak and a corresponding
addresses          the              previously                         outlined challenges                                      and enables                                                                 this                                                                decrease                                                                            in the cathodic                                                                              peak                                                                                 were                                                                                            observed—consistent                                                                                                              with the                                                      applicable
non-natural transformation, we performed a series of mecha-    proposed mediated electron-transfer process.                                                                                                                                 Creative

Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 2026                                                                                      5 of 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    License


[PDF physical page 6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2026,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           21,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.3445735
                                                                                                                                                             by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               University
                                                                                                                                                             Of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      China,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Library
                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [25/05/2026].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Conditions





FIGURE 4    Mechanistic studies. (A) Cyclic voltammetry curves. The mixture of 0.02 mM Pf BAL_T481L_L395A and 2.0 mM 1a (violet), 1.0 mM
FcMeOH (gray), the mixture of 1a and FcMeOH (red), as well as the mixture of 1a , Pf BAL_T481L_L395A, and FcMeOH (blue) in the buffer containing50 mM Tris, 2.5 mM MgSO4, and 1.0 mM ThDP. Scan rate: 5 mV s− 1 . (B) Low temperature EPR experiments. Condition A: Standard conditions: 1a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
(0.006 mmol), Pf BAL_A28G_E553L (1 mol%), FcMeOH (50 mol%) in a solvent mixture of Tris buffer (50 mM, pH = 8.5, containing 1.0 mM ThDP and           on
2.5 mM MgSO4 ), total volume of the reaction was 3.0 mL. The reaction mixture was operated at a constant current of 0.3 mA and equipped with a graphite                           Wiley
anode and a graphite cathode. Condition B: Condition A, without electrolysis, the reaction mixture was stirred under air conditions. EPR parameters:                                Online
microwave           frequency,                       9.4                   GHz;                          microwave                                      power,                                                  2.0                                 mW; temperature,                                                               100                                                                   K.                                                                         (C) Representative                                                                                     molecular-dynamics                                                                                                           snapshots                                                                                                     and computed                                                                                                                                 binding
free energies             (kcal/mol)                          for                           the                                              distinct                                                 configurations                                                          with                                                                   the                                                      3D7K                                                                        double mutant                                                                                   T481L_L395A. The distances                                                                                                         were                                                                                                                           given in Å.                                                                                                                              Q113 ′                                     Library                                Int. B in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for
indicates that Glutamine 113 originates from the other chain of the homodimer, L112 ′ , T73 ′ , W163 ′ and A28 ′ follow the same numbering system. (D)                           rules
Kinetic parameters of enzymes. (E) Isotope labelling experiment. (F) Electrolysis of the product 2a . (G) Other chemical oxidants. rac , racemic.                   of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         use;
                                                                                                                                                             OA
Second, low ‑temperature electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)    To understand the relatively subtle changes observed in the                                           articles
experiments provided evidence for the involvement of an enzy-   CV and low-temperature EPR experiments, we determined the                are
matic radical intermediate (Figure 4B ). Although no distinct    kinetic parameters for the three variants (Figure 4D ). All three                                                                                                                                                                                    2                                            governedradical signal was detected under standard electrolytic condi-    exhibited comparably low  kcat values (on the order of 10−            by
tions, its generation was observed under air with continuous    per second), which are significantly lower than the kcat values                the
stirring.      And             control               EPR experiments                                      indicated                                                 that                                                  the radical    reported                                                                             in                                                                      our previous                                                                             dynamic kinetic                                                                                                            oxidation                                                                                                                 study                                                                                                                                                              [                                                                                                                        59 ]                                                      applicablesignal was         enzyme,                ThDP,                     and aldehyde                                        substrate                                             dependent.                                                                             (1.22 per                                                                    second                                                                                           for Pf BAL_T481L).                                                                                                This could                                                                                                        account                                                                                                                                     for                                                                                                                          the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Creative

6 of 10                                                                                               Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 2026                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    License


[PDF physical page 7]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15213773,
limited electrochemical and spectroscopic responses observed in    further exploration of electrochemically driven biocatalysis for                           2026,
the CV and EPR measurements.                                   accessing novel enzyme reactivities.                                                               21,


To explore the origin of the stereo-discrimination, molecular                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Downloaded
dynamics (MD) simulations were performed on four possible                                                                                                                                                                            from
conformations of the enzymatic Breslow intermediate ( Int. B    Acknowledgments
in Figure 2A ), derived from ( S )- 2a and ( R )- 2a bound to the
                                                 We appreciate the financial support from the National Key Research
double mutant Pf BAL_T481L_L395A (Figure 4C ). The simu-                                                              and Development Program of China (2023YFA1506500 to Y.Z.), National
lations reveal that the A1E-R configuration of the Breslow     Natural Science Foundation of China (22277053 to X.H., 224B2705 to
intermediate exhibits the lowest binding free energy ( ΔG =     B.Z., 22437005 to Q.Z.), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
8.2 kcal /mol), outperforming the other three pathways. In this     Universities (KG202503, and 0205/14380346 to X.H.), the Fundamental
low-energy conformation, hydrogen-bonding interactions with    and Interdisciplinary Disciplines Breakthrough Plan of the Ministry of
Q113 ′ (Figure S17 ), C ═ O ⋅⋅⋅π and C ─H ⋅⋅⋅π interactions with M421,    Education of China (JYB2025XDXM507 to Y.Z.), the New Cornerstone
                                                                        Science Foundation through an XPLORER PRIZE (X.H.) and resources
and a C ─H ⋅⋅⋅π interaction with L112 ′ play important roles in
                                                                from the High Performance Computing Center of Nanjing University
the preferential binding of the ( R )-configuration (Figure S18 ).     are gratefully acknowledged. We thank Wenzheng Xie, Yingzhi Ren,Subsequent single-electron transfer to the A1R-R radical further    Xichao Peng, and Jianlin Chun from Nanjing University for their helpful                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.3445735
lowers the binding free energy to − 51.6 kcal /mol, which is     discussions.                                                                      by
substantially lower than that of the competing pathways (Figure                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ocean
S11 ), thereby establishing the R -configured route as thermo-    Conflicts of Interestdynamically favored. Collectively, these findings support that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               University
                                                            The authors declare no conflict of interest.                                        Of
stereo-induction originates from initial selective activation of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      China,aldehyde moiety, thus governing the high enantiopurity observed
                                                           Data Availability Statement                                                                                                                                 Wileyexperimentally.
                                                            The data supporting this study’s findings are available in the Supporting                                Online
                                                                      Information of this article. All the enzymatic reactions in Figure 3 wereAdditionally, molecular docking and molecular dynamics sim-
                                                                        repeated independently using different batches of enzymes. Crystallo-                                      Libraryulations have also suggested that FcMeOH can bind within a
                                                                        graphic data for the structures reported in this communication have           on
cavity proximal to residues A394, A395, and L481 (Figure S12 ).    been deposited at the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre under
This binding site is located near the Breslow intermediate, and     deposition no. CCDC 2489988 ( 2a ).the short distance between the FcMeOH complex and A1E-R may                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [25/05/2026].
enhance electron transfer efficiency.                                                                                                                                                                                See                                                               References                                                                                                        the
                                                                                     1 . A. K. Franz and S. O. Wilson, “Organosilicon Molecules With Medicinal                           Terms
Finally, to verify that this biocatalytic system overcomes the
                                                                           Applications,” Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 56 (2013): 388–405, https://                and
general limitation of product over-oxidation in conventional                                                                           doi.org/10.1021/jm3010114 .
chemocatalysis, we performed deuterium ‑labeling experiments                                                                      2 . G. Luo, L. Chen, Y. Li, et  al., “Asymmetric Total Synthesis and                                                      Conditions
[ 75 ] and assessed product stability (Figure 4E,F , and Table S1 ).
                                                                       Antidepressant Activity of ( − )-Sila-Mesembranol Bearing a Silicon Stere-
Under conditions with a deuterated buffer, no deuterium incor-                                                                              ocenter,” Organic Chemistry Frontiers 8 (2021): 5941–5947, https://doi.org/
poration was observed in product 2a . Furthermore, subjecting    10.1039/D1QO00682G .
racemic 2a or ( R )- 2a to the standard electroenzymatic conditions
                                                                      3 . R. Tacke, D. Reichel, M. Kropfgans,  et  al., “Biological Recogni-
led to quantitative recovery of 2a , without formation of any     tion   of   Enantiomeric   Silanes:   Syntheses  and   Antimuscari-
dicarboxylated by ‑product (also not observed in the standard     nic Properties of Optically Active (2-Aminoethyl)Cyclohexyl(hydroxy-
catalysis). These results indicate that the aldehyde group in the     methyl)Phenylsilanes and Related Quaternary Ammonium Derivatives,”
product is no longer recognized by the enzyme, thereby effectively     Organometallics 14 (1995): 251–262, https://doi.org/10.1021/om00001a038 .
suppressing over ‑oxidation.                                       4 . W.  S. Sheldrick, H. Linoh, R. Tacke, G. Lambrecht, U. Moser,
                                                              and E. Mutschler, “Sila–Pharmaca. Part  32. Crystal and Molecular                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                                            Structures of the (R)-Enantiomer and the Racemate of the Antimus-           on
3    Conclusion                                                       carinic Agent (cyclohexyl)Phenyl[2-(pyrrolidin-1-yl)ethyl]Silanol (sila–                           Wiley                                                                              procyclidine),” Journal of the Chemical Society, Dalton Transactions 9
                                                                                     (1985): 1743–1746, https://doi.org/10.1039/DT9850001743 .                                                                                  Online
In conclusion, we have established an electroenzymatic desym-
                                                                          5 . C. Fu, B. Fu, X. X. Peng, and G. J. Liao, “Discovery of an Octahedralmetrization platform for the construction of silicon-stereogenic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Library
                                                                               Silicon Complex as a Potent Antifungal Agent,” Molecules 22 (2017): 637,                forcenters, efficiently converting 22 symmetric dialdehydes into
                                                                          https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules22040637 .                                                                                                  rulesenantioenriched  silicon ‑chiral molecules with up to > 99.5%                                                                                      of
                                                                    6 . Z.-T. Ye, Z.-W. Wu, X.-X. Zhang, J. Zhou, and J.-S. Yu, “Organocatalytic
ee. A comparison with chemical oxidants (Figure 4G ), where                                                                                                                                                                            use;
                                                                           Enantioselective Construction of Si-stereocenters: Recent Advances and
only H2 O2 afforded a trace product, further underscores the     Perspectives,” Chemical Society Reviews 53 (2024): 8546–8562, https://doi.           OA
unique synergy of the integrated electroenzymatic system. By    org/10.1039/D4CS00417E .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  articles
merging the inherent  selectivity of ThDP-dependent radical                                                                                                                                 are
                                                                        7 . Y. Wu, L. Zheng, Y. Wang, and P. Wang, “Catalytic Asymmetric
biocatalysis with the tunable  potential  of  electrochemistry,                                                                          Synthesis of Silicon-Stereogenic Organosilanes,” Chemistry 9 (2023):                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  governed
we have unlocked this new-to-nature reactivity. Mechanistic     3461–3514, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chempr.2023.09.024 .                           by
investigations—including cyclic voltammetry, EPR spectroscopy,                                                                                                                                 the
                                                                       8 . S. B. J. Kan, R. D. Lewis, K. Chen, and F. H. Arnold, “Directed Evolution
and  MD simulations—confirmed                                   substrate                                           binding,                                                    elucidated                                                                                of                                                                 Cytochrome                                                           C                                                                                                     for Carbon–silicon                                                                                       Bond                                                                                                             Formation: Bringing Silicon                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               applicablethe origin            of enantioselectivity, and                                        validated                                               the                                               mediated                                                                               to                                                                                       Life,” Science                                                                                      354                                                                                                         (2016): 1048–1051,                                                                                                                           https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
electron-transfer pathway. We anticipate this work will stimulate    aah6219 .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Creative

Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 2026                                                                                    7 of 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    License


[PDF physical page 8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15213773,
9 . N. S. Sarai, T. J. Fulton, R. L. O’Meara, et al., “Directed Evolution     25 . M. A. Emmanuel, S. G. Bender, C. Bilodeau, et al., “Photobiocatalytic                           2026,
of  Enzymatic   Silicon-Carbon  Bond   Cleavage   in   Siloxanes,”     Strategies for Organic Synthesis,” Chemical Reviews 123 (2023): 5459–5520,                21,
Science    383    (2024):    438–443,    https://doi.org/10.1126/science.     https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00767 .
adi5554 .
                                                                     26 . R. Buller, S. Lutz, R. J. Kazlauskas, R. Snajdrova, J. C. Moore, and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Downloaded
10 . Z. Zhang, T. J. Fulton, R. R. Maar, J. M. Roberts, D. E. Katsoulis, and F.    U. T. Bornscheuer, “From Nature to Industry: Harnessing Enzymes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fromH. Arnold, “A Biocatalytic Platform for the Synthesis of Organofunctional     for Biocatalysis,” Science 382 (2023): eadh8615, https://doi.org/10.1126/
Silanes and Siloxanes,” Angewandte Chemie International Edition 65     science.adh8615 .
(2025): e22762.
                                                                        27 . U. Hanefeld, F. Hollmann, and C. E. Paul, “Biocatalysis Making
11 . X. Xu, J. M. A. Van Hengst, Y. Mao, et al., “Peroxygenase-Catalysed    Waves in Organic Chemistry,” Chemical Society Reviews 51 (2022): 594–627,
Selective Oxidation of Silanes to Silanols,” Angewandte Chemie Inter-     https://doi.org/10.1039/D1CS00100K .
national Edition 62  (2023): e202302844,  https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.
                                                                      28 . E. L. Bell, A. E. Hutton, A. J. Burke, et al., “Strategies for Designing
202302844 .                                                                              Biocatalysts With New Functions,” Chemical Society Reviews 53 (2024):
12 . N. Li, M.-H. Zong, C. Liu, H.-S. Peng, and H.-C. Wu, “(R)-Oxynitrilase-     2851–2862, https://doi.org/10.1039/D3CS00972F .
Catalysed Synthesis of Chiral Silicon-Containing Aliphatic (R)-Ketone-
                                                                     29 . E. N. Kissman, M.  B.  Sosa,  D.  C.  Millar,  E.  J.  Koleski,  K.
Cyanohydrins,” Biotechnology Letters 25 (2003): 219–222, https://doi.org/
                                                                 Thevasundaram, and M. C. Y. Chang, “Expanding Chemistry Through In
10.1023/A:1022316919552 .                                                                            Vitro and In Vivo Biocatalysis,” Nature 631 (2024): 37–48, https://doi.org/                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.344573513 . N. Li, M.-H. Zong, H.-S. Peng, H.-C. Wu, and C. Liu, “(R)-Oxynitrilase-     10.1038/s41586-024-07506-w.
                                                                                                                                                             by
Catalyzed Synthesis of (R)-2-Trimethylsilyl-2-Hydroxyl-Ethylcyanide,”
                                                                  30 . X. Yang, J. Huang, J. Guo, et al., “Bridging Chemistry and Biology                           OceanJournal of Molecular Catalysis B: Enzymatic 22 (2003): 7–12, https://doi.
                                                                                  for Light-Driven New-to-Nature Enantioselective Photoenzymatic Catal-
org/10.1016/S1381-1177(02)00283-7 .                                                                                       ysis,” Chemical Society Reviews 54 (2025): 5157–5188, https://doi.org/10.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               University14 . R. Xu, M.-H. Zong, Y.-Y. Liu, J. He, Y.-Y. Zhang, and W.-Y. Lou, “Enzy-    1039/D4CS00561A .
                                                                                                                                                             Of
matic Enantioselective Transcyanation of Silicon-Containing Aliphatic
                                                                             31 . E. L. Bell, W. Finnigan, S. P. France, et al., “Biocatalysis,” Nature                                China,Ketone With (S)-hydroxynitrile Lyase From Manihot esculenta,” Applied                                                                        Reviews Methods Primers 1 (2021): 46, https://doi.org/10.1038/s43586-021-
Microbiology and Biotechnology 66 (2004): 27–33, https://doi.org/10.1007/                                                                   00044-z .                                                                                                                                                                                      Wiley
s00253- 004- 1708- 1 .
                                                                       32 . Y. Xu, F. Liu, B. Zhao, and X. Huang, “Repurposing Naturally                                Online
15 . M. B. Frampton and P. M. Zelisko, “Organosilicon Biotechnology,”                                                                    Occurring Enzymes Using Visible Light,” Chinese Journal of Chemistry
Silicon 1 (2009): 147–163, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12633- 009- 9021- 3 .                                                                   42 (2024): 3553–3558, https://doi.org/10.1002/cjoc.202400656 .                                                                                Library
                                                                                                                                                             on
16 . E. García-Urdiales, I. Alfonso, and V. Gotor, “Update 1 of: Enantios-
                                                                        33 . F. H. Arnold, “Innovation by Evolution: Bringing New Chemistry to
elective enzymatic desymmetrizations in organic synthesis,” Chemical                                                                                Life (Nobel Lecture),” Angewandte Chemie International Edition 58 (2019):
Reviews 111 (2011): PR110–PR180.                                                                        14420–14426, https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201907729 .                                                                                                                                                                                                     [25/05/2026].
17 . T. Fukui, T. Kawamoto, and A. Tanaka, “Enzymatic Preparation of                                                                                                                                 See
                                                                   34 . M. T. Reetz, G. Qu, and Z. Sun, “Engineered Enzymes for the Synthesis                theOptically Active Silylmethanol Derivatives Having a Stereogenic Silicon                                                                                of Pharmaceuticals and Other High-Value Products,” Nature Synthesis 3Atom by Hydrolase-catalyzed Enantioselective Esterification,” Tetrahe-                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Terms                                                                               (2024): 19–32, https://doi.org/10.1038/s44160- 023- 00417- 0 .
dron: Asymmetry 5 (1994): 73–82, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0957-4166(00)                                                                                                                                 and
80486-3 .                                                                 35 . F. Schwizer, Y. Okamoto, T. Heinisch, et al., “Artificial Metalloen-
                                                                   zymes: Reaction Scope and Optimization Strategies,” Chemical Reviews18 . A.-H. Djerourou and L. Blanco, “Synthesis of Optically Active 2-sila-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Conditions
                                                                                 118 (2018): 142–231, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00014 .
1,3-propanediols Derivatives by Enzymatic Transesterification,” Tetrahe-
dron Letters 32 (1991): 6325–6326, https://doi.org/10.1016/0040-4039(91)    36 . R. B. Leveson-Gower, C. Mayer, and G. Roelfes, “The Importance of
80159-4 .                                                                      Catalytic Promiscuity for Enzyme Design and Evolution,” Nature Reviews
                                                                      Chemistry 3 (2019): 687–705, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41570- 019- 0143- x.
19 . P. Huber, S. Bratovanov, S. Bienz, C. Syldatk, and M. Pietzsch, “Chiral
Silicon Groups as Auxiliaries for Enantioselective Synthesis: Access     37 . S. Jain, F. Ospina, and S. C. Hammer, “A New Age of Biocatalysis
to Optically Active Silanes by Biotransformation and the Enantiospe-    Enabled by Generic Activation Modes,” Journal of the American Chemical
cific Preparation of (R)-( + )-1-phenylethanol,” Tetrahedron: Asymmetry 7     Society Gold 4 (2024): 2068–2080.
(1996): 69–78, https://doi.org/10.1016/0957-4166(95)00422-X .                38 . S. Simic, E. Zukic, L. Schmermund, K. Faber, C. K. Winkler, and W.
20 . X. Lu, L. Li, W. Yang, et al., “Catalytic Synthesis of Functional Silicon-     Kroutil, “Shortening Synthetic Routes to Small Molecule Active Pharma-
Stereogenic Silanes Through Candida Antarctica Lipase B Catalyzed     ceutical Ingredients Employing Biocatalytic Methods,” Chemical Reviews                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)Remote Desymmetrization of Silicon-Centered Diols,” European Journal     122 (2022): 1052–1126, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00574 .
                                                                                                                                                             on
of  Organic          Chemistry 2013 (2013): 5814–5819, https://doi.org/10.1002/ejoc.     39                                                                                                                                         . Y. Wang,                                                                                                          P. Xue, M. Cao,                                                                                                                   T.                                                                                                   Yu, S. T. Lane,                                                                                                    and H.                                                                                                                     Zhao,                                                                                                                                   “Directed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wiley201300932                 .                                                                                                         Chemical                                                                                                                          Reviews                                                                          Evolution:                                                                              Methodologies                                                                                  and                                                                                                         Applications,”                                                                                                                                               121                                                                                                                                                        (2021):
21 . S. Y. Dai, X. Chen, Y. F. Yang, and Z. Liu, “An Enzymatic Platform for     12384–12444, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00260 .                                                                           Online
Asymmetric Synthesis of Si-Stereogenic Silanols,” Angewandte Chemie    40 . Y. Xu, H. Chen, L. Yu, et al., “A Light-driven Enzymatic Enantioselec-                                      Library
International Edition 64 (2025): e202501524.                                      tive Radical Acylation,” Nature 625 (2023): 74–78, https://doi.org/10.1038/                for
22 . X. Wu, F. Hou, L. Zhang, Q. Wu, Z. Huang, and F. Chen, “Enan-     s41586- 023- 06822- x.                                                                                                                                                           rules
tiocomplementary Access to Silicon-Stereogenic Silacyclohexenones via     41 . Z. Xing, F. Liu,  J. Feng, et  al., “Synergistic Photobiocatalysis for           of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         use;
Ene-Reductase-Catalyzed Desymmetrization of Silacyclohexadienones,”     Enantioselective Triple-Radical Sorting,” Nature 637 (2025): 1118–1123,           OA
CS Catalysis  15  (2025): 10982–10990,  https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-08399-5 .
5c02391 .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   articles
                                                                   42 . X. Peng,  J. Feng, F. Liu, et  al., “Photobiocatalytic Benzylic C–H                are
23 . K. Chen and F. H. Arnold, “Engineering New Catalytic Activities     Acylation Enabled by the Synergy of a Thiamine-dependent Enzyme, an
in Enzymes,” Nature Catalysis 3 (2020): 203–213, https://doi.org/10.1038/     Organophotocatalyst and Hydrogen-Atom Transfer,” Nature Synthesis 4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  governed
s41929- 019- 0385-5 .                                                             (2025): 1453–1461, https://doi.org/10.1038/s44160-025-00866-9 .                     by
24 . W. Harrison, X. Huang, and H. Zhao, “Photobiocatalysis for Abiologi-    43 . Y. Ming, Z. Wu, Y. Xu, et al., “Photobiocatalytic Radical Repositioning                the
cal Transformations,” Accounts of Chemical Research 55 (2022): 1087–1096,     for Enantioselective Acylation of Remote C–C/C–H Bonds,” Nature                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               applicablehttps://doi.org/10.1021/acs.accounts.1c00719 .                                 Catalysis 8 (2025): 1198–1207, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929- 025- 01435- 1 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Creative

8 of 10                                                                                               Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 2026                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    License


[PDF physical page 9]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15213773,
44 . X. Chen, T. Li, Y. Gan, et al., “N-Heterocyclic Carbene (NHC) Catalysis    Chemie International Edition 61 (2022): e202203666, https://doi.org/10.                           2026,
in Enzymatic Organic Synthesis,” Coordination Chemistry Reviews 549     1002/anie.202203666 .                                                                                           21,
(2026): 217319, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2025.217319 .
                                                                            61 . X. Duan, D. Cui, M. Wang, et al., “Deracemization of Sulfoxides Com-
45 . H. C. Hailes, D. Rother, M. Müller, et al., “Engineering Stereoselec-     bining Electrocatalysis and Biocatalysis,” Chinese Journal of Chemistry 42                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Downloaded
tivity of ThDP-dependent Enzymes,” Federation of European Biochemical     (2024): 3107–3112, https://doi.org/10.1002/cjoc.202400567 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fromSocieties Journal 280 (2013): 6374–6394, https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.12496 .
                                                                      62 . G.-Y. Li, S.-C. Song, H.-X. Song, et al., “Biphasic Electroenzymatic
46 . S. Prajapati, F. Rabe von Pappenheim, and K. Tittmann, “Frontiers in     Catalysis-Enabled Chiral Alkyl Aldehydes Synthesis From Allylic Alco-
the Enzymology of Thiamin Diphosphate-Dependent Enzymes,” Current     hols,” Science China Chemistry 69 (2026): 1879–1884, https://doi.org/10.
Opinion in Chemical Biology 76 (2022): 102441.                              1007/s11426-025-2902-8 .

47 . H. Dobiašová, V. Jurkaš, P. Both, and M. Winkler, “Recent Progress in    63 . F. Hollmann, A. Schmid, and E. Steckhan, “The First Synthetic
the Synthesis of α-Hydroxy Carbonyl Compounds With ThDP-dependent     Application  of a Monooxygenase Employing  Indirect Electrochem-
Carboligases,” Chemcatchem 16 (2024): e202301707.                              ical NADH  Regeneration,” Angewandte Chemie  International  Edi-
                                                                                 tion 40 (2001): 169–171, https://doi.org/10.1002/1521-3773(20010105)40:1%
48 . R. Breslow, “On the Mechanism of Thiamine Action. IV. 1 Evidence
                                                                    3c169::AID-ANIE169%3e3.0.CO;2-T .From Studies on Model Systems,” Journal of the American Chemical
Society 80 (1958): 3719–3726, https://doi.org/10.1021/ja01547a064 .            64 . F. Hollmann, K. Hofstetter, T. Habicher, B. Hauer, and A. Schmid,
                                                                           “Direct Electrochemical Regeneration of Monooxygenase Subunits for49 . X. Chen, Z. Wang, Y. Lou, et  al., “Intramolecular Stereoselective                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.3445735                                                                               Biocatalytic Asymmetric Epoxidation,” Journal of the American ChemicalStetter Reaction Catalyzed by Benzaldehyde Lyase,” Angewandte Chemie                                                                                      by
                                                                                Society 127 (2005): 6540–6541, https://doi.org/10.1021/ja050997b .
International Edition 60 (2021): 9326–9329, https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ocean
202100534 .                                                              65 . X. Wang, T. Saba, H. H. P. Yiu, R. F. Howe, J. A. Anderson, and J. Shi,
                                                                        “Cofactor NAD(P)H Regeneration Inspired by Heterogeneous Pathways,”
50 . L. C. Z. Lanza, F. R. von Pappenheim, D. Bjarnesen, et al., “Identifi-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               University                                                                      Chemistry 2  (2017): 621–654,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chempr.2017.04.cation and Characterization of Thiamine Diphosphate-Dependent Lyases                                                                                      Of
                                                                009 .
With an Unusual CDG Motif,” Angewandte Chemie International Edition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  China,
63 (2024): e202404045.                                                 66 . H. Chen, R. Cai,  J. Patel, F. Dong, H. Chen, and S. D. Minteer,
                                                                “Upgraded Bioelectrocatalytic N2 Fixation: From N2 to Chiral Amine                           Wiley51 . Y. Zhang,  Y.  Li,  Y. Chen,  et  al., “Manipulating  Activity and
                                                                           Intermediates,” Journal of the American Chemical Society 141 (2019):Chemoselectivity of a Benzaldehyde Lyase for Efficient Synthesis of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Online
                                                                         4963–4971, https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.9b00147 .α-Hydroxymethyl                Ketones                      and One-Pot                                   Enantio-Complementary                                                       Con-
               ACS Catalysisversion to 1,2-Diols,”                                   14 (2024):                                          9687–9700, https://doi.org/                                                                        67 . S. Ruccolo, G. Brito, M. Christensen, et al., “Electrochemical Recycling                                      Library
                                                                                                                                                             on
10.1021/acscatal.4c01804 .                                                      of Adenosine Triphosphate in Biocatalytic Reaction Cascades,” Journal of
                                                                              the American Chemical Society 144 (2022): 22582–22588, https://doi.org/10.
52 . A. MacAulay, E. Klemencic, R. C. Brewster, et al., “Installation of an
                                                                             1021/jacs.2c08955 .Organocatalyst Into a Protein Scaffold Creates an Artificial Stetterase,”                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [25/05/2026].
Chemical Communications 60 (2024): 13746–13749, https://doi.org/10.    68 . C. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Pi, L. Zhang, and A. Kuhn, “Bulk Electro-                See
1039/D4CC05182C .                                                               catalytic NADH Cofactor Regeneration With Bipolar Electrochemistry,”                the
                                                                Angewandte Chemie International Edition 61 (2022): e202111804, https://                           Terms53 . T. Liu, G. Wang, J. Yu, et al., “Structural Insights Into Two Thiamine
                                                                            doi.org/10.1002/anie.202111804 .                                                                            andDiphosphate-Dependent Enzymes and Their Synthetic Applications in
Carbon–Carbon Linkage Reactions,” Nature Chemistry 17 (2025): 1107–    69 . R. Siedentop, T. Prenzel, S. R. Waldvogel, K. Rosenthal, and S.1118, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557- 025- 01822-y.                             Lütz, “Reaction Engineering and Comparison of Electroenzymatic and                                                      Conditions
                                                                 Enzymatic ATP Regeneration Systems,” ChemElectroChem 10 (2023):
54 . C. Zhu, D. Wu, Y. Lai, et al., “Enzyme- Catalyzed Intramolecular C–C
                                                                       e202300332.Coupling Transformation of Nitriles,” Journal of the American Chemical
Society 148 (2026): 10257–10265, https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.6c02210 .         70 . H. Liu, H. Zhou, X. Chen, and  J. Xu, “N-Heterocyclic Carbene-
                                                                       Catalyzed Desymmetrization of Siladials To Access Silicon-Stereogenic
55 . X. Liu, S. Xu, H. Chen, and Y. Yang, “Unnatural Thiamine Radical
                                                                         Organosilanes,” Journal of Organic Chemistry 87 (2022): 16127–16137,
Enzymes for Photobiocatalytic Asymmetric Alkylation of Benzaldehydes
                                                                               https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.2c02184 .and α-Ketoacids,” ACS Catalysis 14 (2024): 9144–9150, https://doi.org/10.
1021/acscatal.4c02752 .                                                        71 . Y. Wu, M. Li, J. Sun, G. Zheng, and Q. Zhang, “Synthesis of Axially
                                                                          Chiral Aldehydes by N-Heterocyclic- Carbene- Catalyzed Desymmetriza-
56 . Y.-C. Lu, R. D. Adukure, S. Roy, et al., “Photobiocatalytic Enantios-
                                                                             tion Followed by Kinetic Resolution,” Angewandte Chemie Internationalelective Benzylic C(sp3 )–H Acylation Enabled by Thiamine-Dependent
                                                                           Edition 61 (2022): e202117340, https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202117340 .Enzymes via Intermolecular Hydrogen Atom Transfer,” Journal of the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
American Chemical Society 147 (2025): 17804–17816, https://doi.org/10.     72 . M. Zhou, J. Liu, R. Deng, et al., “Construction of Tetrasubstituted           on
1021/jacs.5c01642 .                                                           Silicon-Stereogenic Silanes via Conformational Isomerization and N-                           Wiley
                                                                          Heterocyclic Carbene-Catalyzed Desymmetrization,” ACS Catalysis 12
57 . S. Kato,  S. Fujisawa, Y. Adachi, et  al., “NHC-Mediated Radical                                                                                (2022): 7781–7788, https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.2c01082 .                                                                          Online
Acylation Catalyzed by Thiamine- and Flavin-Dependent Enzymes,”
Journal of the American Chemical Society 147 (2025): 14 837–14 844.            73 . D. G. Boucher, E. Carroll, Z. A. Nguyen, et al., “Bioelectrocatalytic                                      Library
                                                                             Synthesis: Concepts and Applications,” Angewandte Chemie International                for
58 . X. Chen, M. Zhou, X. Duan, Y. Zhang, X. Chu, and J. Xu, “ThDP-
                                                                           Edition 62 (2023): e202307780.                                                                                                                                   rules
dependent Enzyme Catalyzed Oxidation of Aldehydes,” Chemical Science                                                                                      of
16 (2025): 15977–15981, https://doi.org/10.1039/D5SC03250D .                 74 . G. S. Brandt, N. Nemeria, S. Chakraborty, et al., “Probing the Active                     use;
                                                                     Center of Benzaldehyde Lyase With Substitutions and the Pseudosub-           OA59 . B. Zhao, Y. Xu, Q. Zhu, et al., “Electricity-driven Enzymatic Dynamic
                                                                                    strate Analogue Benzoylphosphonic Acid Methyl Ester,” Biochemistry 47Kinetic Oxidation,” Nature 643 (2025): 699–704, https://doi.org/10.1038/                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        articles                                                                              (2008): 7734–7743, https://doi.org/10.1021/bi8004413 .
s41586- 025- 09178- 6 .                                                                                                                                                                                                               are
                                                                           75 . J. Xu, Y. Lou, L. Wang, et  al., “Rational Design of Biocatalytic
60 . C.-J. Long, H. Cao, B.-K. Zhao, et al., “Merging the Non-Natural                                                                       Deuteration Platform of Aldehydes,” ACS Catalysis 11 (2021): 13348–13354,                                           governedCatalytic Activity of Lipase and Electrosynthesis: Asymmetric Oxida-
                                                                               https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.1c03659 .                                          by
tive Cross-Coupling of Secondary Amines With Ketones,” Angewandte                                                                                                                                 the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               applicable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Creative

Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 2026                                                                             9of10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    License


[PDF physical page 10]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15213773,
Supporting Information                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2026,
Additional supporting information can be found online in the Supporting                                                                                                                                 21,
Information section.
Supporting File 1 : anie72203-sup-0001-SuppMat.Pdf.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Downloaded
Supporting File 2 : anie72203-sup-0002-Data.Zip.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.3445735
                                                                                                                                                             by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               University
                                                                                                                                                             Of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      China,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Library
                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [25/05/2026].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Conditions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rules
                                                                                                                                                             of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         use;
                                                                                                                                                             OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  articles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  governed
                                                                                                                                                             by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               applicable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Creative

10 of 10                                                                                              Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 2026                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    License