10 of 15 Chunna Yu et al.





Figure 8. A model for the regulatory roles of MYB1L in Taxol biosynthesis.
MYB1L play important regulatory roles in Taxol biosynthesis by activating the expression of TBT and BAPT genes.


of MYB1L on the expression of the DBTNBT and T13OH       et al., 2002). For example, the tissue culture from young
genes was observed (Figure S6). Collectively, our ﬁndings      trees contains more C14-OH taxoids and Yunnanxane than
predict a model for the regulatory roles of MYB1L in Taxol       that from old trees (Demidova et al., 2023). Furthermore, a
biosynthesis and indicate that TBT and BAPT are down-      decrease in taxoid levels was associated with increasing
stream target genes of MYB1L (Figure 8).                          tree age in the twigs and needles from T. mairei, suggest-
                                                              ing the important role of young twigs in the extraction of
DISCUSSION
                                                            Taxol (Li et  al., 2021). In our study, signiﬁcantly higher
Despite ongoing research on the  synthetic biology  of       levels of taxoids, including 10-DAB  III, BAC, Taxol, 10-
Taxol, natural yew resources remain the primary raw mate-      deacetylTaxol C, and cephalomannine, were found to accu-
rial for Taxol extraction (Kou et al., 2024). The accumula-     mulate in young stems, consistent with previous reports.
tion of taxoids varies signiﬁcantly among different species,     Our data indicate that newly sprouted branches are the
environments, and plant tissues (Nasiri et al., 2016). Our      best source of raw material for extracting Taxol. However,
ﬁndings provide detailed insights into the distribution of      current knowledge regarding the effects of stem tissue and
taxoids in T. mairei stems and may enhance the utilization     age on the accumulation of Taxol remains limited.
of Taxus trees.                                                 Recent advances  in MS-based proteomic  analysis
    Due to its high content of Taxol, the Taxus stem is     have signiﬁcantly enhanced the study of plant tissue sam-
currently one of the most important raw materials for the       ples, thereby promoting the understanding of the regula-
industrial extraction of Taxol. Modern chemical analysis      tion  of  secondary  metabolism  (Yan  et   al.,  2022).
techniques have indicated that the distribution of taxoids      Investigating the spatial distribution of enzymes across dif-
varies   greatly  among   different  stem   tissues  (Ge      ferent tissues is essential for an in-depth study of second-
et al., 2010). For example, in T. media, a high concentration      ary  metabolism  regulation  (Blackburn  et   al.,  2022).
of BAC was found in the wood, while Taxol was shown to     However, separating plant tissues is a very challenging
accumulate in the phloem and outer bark (Soliman & Rai-      task in spatial proteomics analysis. To improve accuracy,
zada, 2020). In T. mairei, Taxol enrichment occurred in the     LCM-DDA-MS/MS was used to analyze the spatial localiza-
phloem,  whereas BAC  accumulated  in  the  pith  (Yu      tion information of the target proteins involved in the
et al., 2020). In the current study, we found that two impor-      Taxol biosynthetic pathway. Recent applications of LCM-
tant intermediates (10-DAB  III and BAC) for Taxol biosyn-    DDA-MS/MS in plant proteomes have identiﬁed 6575 quan-
thesis were signiﬁcantly enriched in the pith, while the end      tiﬁable proteins in tomato root tips, 3879 quantiﬁable pro-
product (Taxol) was signiﬁcantly enriched in the phloem       teins in cherry tomatoes, and 210–800 peptides in maize
(Figure 2b,c). Furthermore, two Taxol analogues (10-deace-      kernels (Chen, Huang, et al., 2020; Potts et al., 2022; Yang
tyl-7-xylosylpaclitaxel and 10-deacetylTaxol C) were found       et  al., 2020). Here, LCM-DDA-MS/MS analysis identiﬁed
to display a similar distribution pattern with Taxol. Our     3145 proteins in various T. mairei stem tissues, establish-
data  indicate  that  intermediates may  be  transported      ing a foundation for a comprehensive analysis of the meta-
among different stem tissues.                                     bolic pathways. Although the number of proteins identiﬁed
    The accumulation of taxoids has also been shown to       in different sample groups was relatively uniform, almost
be affected by stem age (Mukherjee et al., 2002). In T. bac-     no protein was detected in the pith of T stems, indicating
cata, a signiﬁcant difference in the Taxol content of bark       that the pith of T stems has become hollow. The MEP path-
from  trees  of  different ages was  observed (Nadeem     way  supplies  the most  critical  precursor,  diterpenoid


                                                   2025 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
                                                                       The Plant Journal (2025) 122 e70135