12 of 15 Chunna Yu et al.


indicating that Taxol biosynthesis-related enzymes are pre-
                                                               Protein extraction and data-dependent acquisition (DDA)
dominantly localized in the endodermis of young stems.
                                                         sampling
Moreover, the endodermis-speciﬁc expression of MYB1L
and its regulator, miR858b, were identiﬁed, suggesting a       Protein  was  extracted  from  frozen  stem  samples  using
potential function of the miR858b-MYB1L module in regu-      TCA/acetone  buffer, then added to SDT buffer (4% SDS and
                                                               100 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.6), sonicated, and boiled for 10 min. Sam-
lating secondary metabolism. DAP-seq analysis identiﬁed
                                                                        ples were then centrifuged at 14000g for 30 min. The protein con-
many potential targets of MYB1L, including four Taxol       centration in the supernatants was determined using a Protein
biosynthesis-related genes (TBT, DBTNBT, T13OH, and      Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). The digested peptide solution was frac-
BAPT ). Our data revealed that the miR858b-MYB1L axis       tionated  into  several  fractions using  the Thermo  Scientiﬁc TM
                                                                         Pierce TM High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. Each
plays a signiﬁcant role in the transcriptional regulation of                                                                        TM
                                                                              fraction was desalted using C18 Cartridges (Empore  SPE Car-
Taxol biosynthesis by enhancing the expression of the TBT
                                                                           tridges C18, bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 mL, Sigma) and reconsti-
and BAPT genes in the endodermis.                                tuted in 40 lL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid solution.

MATERIAL AND METHODS                           DDA-MS/MS analysis

Plant material and datasets                                                All fractions used for the construction of the DDA library were
                                                               uploaded to a Thermo Scientiﬁc Q-Exactive HF-X-MS with an
Seven-year-old T. mairei plants were grown in an experimental      Easy-nLC 1200 chromatography platform (Thermo Scientiﬁc). The
ﬁeld at the campus of Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou,       peptide solution was separated using an ES802 C18 analytical
China. 1-year-old (O) and 2-year-old (T) twigs were collected for     HPLC column (Thermo Scientiﬁc) with a concentration gradient of
MS imaging and LCM experiments. Tissue-speciﬁc gene expres-       buffer B containing 84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. MS fea-
sion was analyzed using a previously published single-cell tran-       tures were detected in the positive ion mode, with a scan range of
scriptome dataset (PRJNA909435). Three independent biological      350–1800 m/z and an MS1 scan resolution of 60 000 (200 m/z).
replicates were used for MS imaging and LCM-MS/MS analysis.      The automatic gain control (AGC) target was 1E6 with a maximum
Chemical structures were drawn using ChemDraw software (ver.       injection time (IT) of 50 ms and dynamic exclusion of 10 s. The
19.0).                                                                        isolation window was set to 1.5 m/z, the MS2 scan resolution was
                                                                            set to 30 000 with a maximum IT of 50 ms and normalized colli-
Sample preparation and MS imaging                              sion energy of 30 eV.

Stem samples were ﬁxed, then cryosectioned to 20 lm slides      Bioinformatic analysis of the DDA library data
using a pre-cooled freezing microtome (Leica CM1950). The slides
were placed onto a MALDI-2 conductive glass slide and trans-       For DDA library data analysis, the FASTA sequence database was
ferred to a vacuum dryer for 30 min for vacuum sealing. MALDI-2      searched using Biognosys SpectronautTM software (https://www.
matrix (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) was gently sprayed onto the       uniprot.org). For peptide  identiﬁcation, the maximum missed
stem sections using a TM-Sprayer. The substrate-coated slides      cleavage allowed was set at 1, ﬁxed modiﬁcation was set at carba-
were then positioned on a target disk on the TimsTOF FLeX      midomethyl, and dynamic modiﬁcation was set at oxidation and
MALDI-2 platform (Bruker). The sample site was marked using       acetylation. For protein identiﬁcation, the resulting data were
Bruker data imaging software. Following laser  irradiation, the      based on 99% conﬁdence as determined by a false discovery rate
chemical molecules were ionized and released from the target      (FDR) analysis of ≤1%.
sites on the stem section. The ionized molecules were captured
and detected by MS to generate imaging ﬁles.                      Screening and in situ hybridization of tissue-speciﬁc
                                                          expressed members of the MYB family of TFs
Analysis of MS imaging ﬁles
                                                           The same stem samples were harvested and ﬁxed in formalin-
Raw MS imaging ﬁles were uploaded into the SCiLS-Lab software       aceto-alcohol solution at 4°C. Samples were decolorized by incu-
(ver. 2021) for data analysis, including baseline correction, peak       bating in tert-butyl alcohol in 95% alcohol, then placed in an
identiﬁcation, data smoothing, and data normalization. Imaging      embedding box and covered in dissolved wax. Wax-embedded
sites within the target area were clustered using a non-supervised      samples were sliced into 7 lm-thick sections using a slicer at 4°C.
spatial clustering program. Imaging data points exhibiting similar       Slides were dried, placed in xylene to remove the wax, then
metabolite accumulation patterns are shown in the same color.      immersed in a series of alcohol solutions with various concentra-
Resulting features were compared with the theoretical molecular        tions. Finally, slides were incubated with 1 lg/mL Proteinase K at
mass within a 10 ppm mass error in the Bruker MetaboBASE     room temperature for 20 min to remove potentially contaminating
Library metabobase (version 3.0) to identify metabolites. Principal       proteins.
component analysis (PCA) was performed to analyze the distribu-                                                                                    In situ hybridization was carried out using a DIG RNA Label-
tion of metabolites on the slices.                                                                      ing Kit (SP6/T7). Brieﬂy, slides were incubated with DIG Easy Hyb
Slide preparation and LCM                                            buffer for 20 min, followed by incubation with DIG Easy Hyb
                                                                          buffer containing a gene probe (10 pg/mL) for 12 h at 42°C. Slices
O  and T  stems  were  prepared  as  formalin-ﬁxed  parafﬁn-      were washed twice with 2 9 SSC buffer at 25°C and twice for
embedded tissue sections. Slides were dewaxed with xylene,      20 min at 65°C. Slides were then washed with washing buffer for
rehydrated in a series of alcohol solutions, stained with hematoxy-      5 min, incubated in a closed solution for 2 h, and incubated with
lin & eosin, and visualized using the Leica LCM System (Leica      an antibody for 2 h at 37°C. After washing, slides were incubated
LMD7). For each stem tissue, three independent samples were       with detection buffer for 5 min, followed by incubation in a sub-
obtained.                                                                     strate chromogenic solution for signal detection.

                                                   2025 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
                                                                       The Plant Journal (2025) 122 e70135