                                              Regulation of taxol biosynthesis via miR858b-MYB1L  13 of 15


                                                                           tissues was separated by 12% SDS-PAGE and transferred to a
Small RNA (sRNA) library construction and sequencing
                                                                         polyvinyl diﬂuoride membrane. Membranes were incubated with
                                                               a polyclonal antibody against Halo-MYB1L (1:100). The MYB1LTotal RNA was isolated from T. mairei stems using TRIzol reagent
                                                                        protein band was visualized using the ECL Western Blot Detection(Invitrogen, Shanghai, China). Approximately 1 lg RNA was used
                                                           and Analysis System (GE Healthcare) according to the manufac-to construct the sRNA library. sRNAs were generated, then ligated
                                                                                turer’s protocol.to a sequencing adapter. Following reverse transcription and PCR
ampliﬁcation, a cDNA library was generated for miRNA sequenc-
                                                             Construction of the DNA library and DNA-binding assays
ing. Sequencing was carried out using an Illumina HiSeq 2500
platform (San Diego, USA). Three independent sample groups     Genomic DNA was extracted from T. mairei stems, fragmented,
were used.                                                  and ligated to a sequencing adapter to construct a DAP-seq library.
                                                           The MYB1L protein with a Halo afﬁnity tag was produced by pro-
Analysis of sRNAs
                                                                           karyotic expression and puriﬁed using G7281Magne Halo-tag
                                                              beads (Promega). Genomic DNA was incubated with the afﬁnity-Raw reads were processed to remove adapter dimers and low-
                                                         bound MYB1L protein. The T. mairei MYB1L-Halo-tag fusion pro-quality sequences using ACGT101-miR (ver. 4.2) software. Then,
                                                                               tein and 500 ng genomic library DNAs were incubated in 100 lLunique reads were mapped to predicted precursors in miRBase
                                                      PBS buffer with gentle shaking for 2 h at 4°C. Unbound DNA was(ver. 22.1) by searching known and unknown miRNAs. During
                                                          removed by washing ﬁve times with washing buffer (200 lLsequence alignment, length variation at both the 3’ and 5’ ends
                                                      PBS + 0.005% NP40). MYB1L-bound miRNAs were eluted andand one mismatch were allowed. Unmapped sequences were read
                                                               ampliﬁed by PCR to produce an indexed adapter and sequence.against the T. mairei genome, and hairpin structures containing
                                                           The mock DAP-seq libraries were treated as negative controls.sequences were predicted using RNAfold software (http://rna.tbi.
univie.ac.at/).
                                                      DAP-seq data analysis
    The target genes of the most abundant miRNAs were pre-
dicted  using  computational  algorithms  for  target  prediction      DAP-seq was performed on the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 system
(GSTAr, ver. 1.0) that detected miRNA binding sites. Functional      using the PE150 method. The experiment was repeated twice
analysis of the target genes of miRNAs was carried out using GO      (MYB-1 and MYB-2). Clean reads were mapped to the reference
and KEGG bioinformatic tools. GO and KEGG enrichment analyses     genome sequence using BWA software with the MEM method.
were performed using Fisher’s exact test with a P value <0.05.         The length of the inserted segment was calculated based on the
                                                              comparison between the two ends of the reads. The Model-Based
Preparation of Taxus protoplasts                                                                      Analysis of ChIP-Seq algorithm (ver. 2.2.7.1) was used to identify
                                                                   binding peaks. Genes containing binding peaks located within
Approximately 500 mg young stems of Taxus were harvested,
                                                               3 kb upstream of the transcription start site (TSS) or downstream
then incubated with 10 mL enzymatic hydrolysate for 3 h at 25°C
                                                                          of the transcription termination site (TTS) were deﬁned as targets
and centrifuged for 3 min. After discarding the supernatant, the
                                                                          of MYB1L. Motif analysis of the peak region was performed using
remaining sample was incubated with 10 mL washing solution for
                                                                      the HOMER (Hypergeometric Optimization of Motif Enrichment)
30 min on ice. The supernatant was removed, and the remaining
                                                                program. Representative DAPseq peaks were visualized using
sample was incubated with MMG solution, containing 4 mL 0.4 M
                                                                            Integrative Genomics Viewer software (ver. 2.16.0).
mannitol, 2300 mL 15 mM MgCl2, and 400 mL 4 mM MES, up to a
concentration of 2 9 105 protoplasts/mL. Next, 200 lL protoplast      Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and dual-LUC
suspension, 20 lL vector plasmid, and 220 lL PEG solution were
                                                                reporter assay experiments for TF-target validation
mixed and incubated at 25°C for 15 min. The reaction was termi-
nated by adding 1 mL washing solution.                           The full-length sequence of MYB1L was inserted into the pET30a
                                                                        vector and expressed in E.  coli to produce recombinant His-
Dual-luciferase (dual-LUC) reporter assay
                                                    MYB1L protein. Proteins were puriﬁed using Clontech His60 Ni
Cell lysis was carried out by incubating protoplasts in 100 lL cell      Superﬂow Resin. EMSA was carried out using the GS009 Light
lysis buffer for 5 min at 25°C. Following centrifugation at 12500 g        Shift Chemiluminescent EMSA Kit (Beyotime, China) as described
for 10 min, supernatants were collected for subsequent analysis.        in our previous study (Zhan et al., 2023).
Next, 100 lL ﬁreﬂy luciferase substrate was added to the superna-          The 1500 bp promoter regions of four Taxol biosynthesis-
tants in ELISA plates, and the activity of the ﬁreﬂy luciferase       related  genes,  including  TBT  (ctg22099_gene.3),  DBTNBT
reporter gene was immediately detected using a ﬂuorescence       (ctg3030_gene.3), T13OH (ctg593_gene.11), and BAPT (ctg4619_
detector. After, 100 lL freshly prepared Renilla substrate working       gene.1), were extracted and cloned into the pGreenII0800-LUC
buffer was added to the reaction solution, and the activity of the       vector to construct reporters. The full-length sequence of MYB1L
Renilla luciferase reporter gene was quickly detected with a ﬂuo-     was inserted into the pGreenII62-SK vector to generate an effector
rescence detector. Each test was performed in triplicate.                 plasmid. GAL4-BD and VP-16 were treated as positive and nega-
                                                                                  tive controls, respectively. The resulting constructs were trans-
Prokaryotic expression vectors and western blotting              fected into the stems of Taxus by GV3101-mediated transient
analysis                                                              expression. Fireﬂy luciferase (LUC) and Renilla luciferase (REN)
                                                                                    activities were analyzed using a Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay
The  full-length encoding sequence  of  the MYB1L gene was        Kit (Promega, Madison, USA).
inserted into the pET30a vector. The recombinant MYB1L protein
with a Halo-tag was expressed by Escherichia coli cells. Recombi-    AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
nant proteins were puriﬁed using beads with a Halo-tag antibody.
                                               CY and CS conceptualized the initial study; CY, DZ, XZ, YZ,Expression of the MYB1L-Halo protein was determined by western
blotting  analysis. Approximately 10 lg  protein from  different     and ZF were involved in the experimental layout; CY, DZ,


  2025 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal (2025) 122 e70135