2 of 15 Chunna Yu et al.


taxuspine W, located in the vascular tissue, were simulta-     CREs are composed of various DNA motifs, typically rang-
neously detected in the stem tissue of T. baccata (Are-      ing from 6 to 30 base pairs in length, that function as spe-
ndowski & Ruman, 2017). In addition, tissue age has also      ciﬁc binding  sites for TFs (Schmitz et  al., 2022). DNA
been shown to signiﬁcantly affect the biosynthesis of tax-      afﬁnity  puriﬁcation  sequencing  (DAP-seq)  is  a  novel
oids in Taxus trees (Demidova et  al., 2023). Taxol and     method for screening DNA-binding proteins and identify-
10-deacetyl baccatin III (10-DAB III) levels were found to be      ing the transcription regulatory network of speciﬁc TFs
signiﬁcantly higher in 5-year-old T. media trees than in      (O’Malley et al., 2016). This DAP-seq technology allows for
three-year-old trees (Shi et al., 2010). Recent technological      the    identiﬁcation    of   novel    targets    of   Taxol
advancements have allowed researchers to visualize the      biosynthesis-related TFs. However, visual investigations of
distribution of active compounds in various plant tissues      taxoid distribution across stem tissues of trees of varying
(Li et al., 2023).                                           ages remain relatively scarce.
   Many  transcription  factors  (TFs)  are  reportedly            In wild Taxus trees, the highest yield of Taxol was
involved in the hormone-related regulation of Taxol bio-      obtained from the stem bark (speciﬁcally, epidermal cells)
synthesis (Kuang et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2023). For example,      (Das et  al., 2023). In industrial production, branches of
a basic helix-loop-helix TF, MYC2a, controls the jasmonic     Taxus are harvested every year to be used as raw materials
acid (JA)-mediated Taxol biosynthetic pathway by recog-       for Taxol extraction. Which age of stems is suitable as raw
nizing the T/G-box, G-box, and E-box in the promoter      material for Taxol extraction is largely unknown. In our
region of Taxol biosynthesis-related genes (Zhang et al.,      study, 1-year-old and 2-year-old stems were selected for
2018). WRKY33  positively  regulates  the  salicylic  acid    DDA-MS/MS  analysis. From an anatomical  standpoint,
(SA)-mediated    Taxol    biosynthetic   pathway   by      Taxol primarily accumulates in epidermal cells (Yu et al.,
up-regulating the expression of the TS and DBAT genes      2023).   Here,  we   identiﬁed  an  endodermis-speciﬁc
(Chen et  al., 2021). MYB29a is involved in abscisic acid      MYB1-like (MYB1L)  protein and screened  its  potential
(ABA)-related  Taxol  biosynthesis by  up-regulating  the     downstream targets using DAP-seq analysis. Our ﬁndings
expression of the TS, taxane 5a-hydroxylase (T5OH ), and      further the understanding  of the miRNA-TF regulatory
DBTNBT genes (Cao et  al., 2022). Previous studies have     pathway underlying Taxol biosynthesis and offer a poten-
identiﬁed several Taxol biosynthesis-related MYB family        tial explanation  for the tissue-speciﬁc accumulation of
members, including phloem-speciﬁc MYB3, female tree-      Taxol.
speciﬁc MYB39, and stem endodermal cell-speciﬁc MYB47
(Yu et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2023). The identiﬁ-     RESULTS
cation of effective TFs may prove to be beneﬁcial for
                                                              Analysis of MS imaging data
improving the genetic makeup of Taxus species.
    MicroRNAs (miRNAs) function as upstream regulators of      1-year-old (O) and 2-year-old (T) stems of T. mairei were
various TFs.  In  plants, miRNAs are  essential  regulators      harvested   for  MS  imaging   analysis   (Figure   1a).
involved in a range of biological processes, including second-      Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Mass Spec-
ary metabolism (Hobert, 2008). In Taxus, miRNA targets have      trometry Imaging (MALDI-MSI) was performed to examine
been identiﬁed through degradome analysis (Fei et al., 2019).      the tissue-speciﬁc accumulation of taxoids (Figure S1a).
Interestingly, taxane 13b-hydroxylase (T13OH) and taxane 2a-     The average mass spectrogram from the MS analysis is
O-benzoyltransferase (TBT) were identiﬁed as direct targets of     shown in Figure 1b. Taxoid accumulation patterns in the
miR164 and miR171, respectively, in the ﬁrst report describing     stems were examined by segmentation analysis, which
the potential roles of miRNAs in Taxol biosynthesis (Hao      generated various colored maps with an average of 29 866
et al., 2012). In T. media callus cells, miRNAs play essential       site points (Figure S1b,c). K means-based maps revealed
roles in the regulation of secondary metabolite biosynthesis      the presence of several tissue-speciﬁc metabolite accumu-
by targeting several TF genes, including ERF, WRKY, and SPL       lation patterns in the samples (Figure S1d). In total, 8026
(Chen, Zhang, et al., 2020). Recently, miR5298b was shown to    MS features were obtained, 1760 of which were identiﬁed
enhance Taxol accumulation by activating the NPR3-TGA6      using the Bruker Library MS-Metabobase (Table S1).
complex, which directly binds to the TAACG motif within the        PCA separated all identiﬁed MS features into ﬁve prin-
promoter regions of TS, T5OH, and T10OH (Ying et al., 2023).       cipal components (PCs) associated with various known
The screening and identiﬁcation of upstream regulators of     stem tissues: pith (PC1), xylem (PC2), phloem-endodermis
Taxol biosynthesis-related TFs will further the understanding      (PC3), epidermis (PC4), and multi-tissues (PC5) (Figure 1c).
of the Taxol biosynthetic pathway.                          The PC loading data for each MS feature  is shown in
    Understanding how TFs regulate various biological      Figure 1d. The number of tissue-speciﬁc MS features was
processes in plants requires the identiﬁcation and screen-      quantiﬁed. Interestingly, metabolites exhibited a tendency
ing of speciﬁc cis-regulatory elements (CREs) in the pro-      to accumulate in the PC2 (1965 MS features) of O stems
moters of downstream targets (Bobadilla & Tranel, 2024).     and PC3 (1454 MS features) of T stems (Figure 1e).

                                                   2025 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
                                                                       The Plant Journal (2025) 122 e70135