4 of 15 Chunna Yu et al.





Figure 2. Visualization of taxoid accumulation in Taxus mairei stems.
(a) Overview of the Taxol biosynthesis pathway, including enzymes and metabolites.
(b) The accumulation level of taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-yl acetate, 10-deacetylbaccatin III, baccatin III, and Taxol was determined by the MALDI-IMS analysis. The
color scale ranges from 0% to 100%. Blue indicated low accumulation and red indicated high accumulation.
(c) The proportion of Taxol and various taxoids in different stem tissues was shown by histogram.
(d) The accumulation of three Taxol analogues was determined by MALDI-IMS analysis. The color scale ranges from 0% to 100%. Blue indicated low accumula-
tion and red indicated high accumulation.
(e) The proportion of Taxol analogues in different stem tissues was shown by histogram.




imprecise  (Yu   et    al.,   2020).  Here,  we  performed       quality control parameters, protein FDR and protein abun-
data-dependent  acquisition-Tandem  Mass  Spectrometry      dance, indicated the reliability of all samples, with the excep-
(DDA-MS/MS) analysis to examine the genetic mechanisms       tion  of T-1  (Figure  S2a,b). A  total  of 15 046  peptides,
underlying the tissue-speciﬁc accumulation of taxoids in dif-      corresponding to 3145 protein groups, were identiﬁed across
ferent aged stems. LCM was used to collect ﬁve distinct tis-      the various stem samples. Detailed information regarding the
sues  from  each  stem  sample,  labeled  from  1  to  5      identiﬁed proteins is shown in Table S2. PCA separated all
(Figure 3a–c). The precise location of each sampling point in     samples into different groups (Figure S2c), and the quantita-
both O and T stems is shown in Figure 3d. Analysis of two       tive heatmap of total proteins is shown in Figure 3e.



                                                   2025 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
                                                                       The Plant Journal (2025) 122 e70135