                                               Regulation of taxol biosynthesis via miR858b-MYB1L  3 of 15





Figure 1. MS imaging analysis of the 1-year-old (O) and 2-year-old (T) Taxus mairei stems.
(a) A picture of O and T stems.
(b) The average mass spectrogram of MS imaging data.
(c) PCA of all the detected MS features from O and T stems. Five principal components (PCs) indicate different accumulation patterns of detected features in
stems.
(d) Heatmap showing the relative accumulation levels of each detected features in ﬁve principal components (PCs). The heatmap scale ranges from  2 to +2 on
a log2 scale.
(e) The number of tissue speciﬁcally accumulated MS features in O and T stems.


Visualization of taxoids in T. mairei stems
                                                            analogues,  substantial  accumulation  of  10-deacetyl-7-
A total of seven different taxoids were identiﬁed by the      xylosyl paclitaxel and 10-deacetyl Taxol C was observed in
MALDI-MSI analysis, including Taxol, three intermediates      the PC3, whereas cephalomannine accumulated in the PC1
involved in Taxol biosynthesis, and three Taxol analogues     and PC2 (Figure 2d,e).  It is worth mentioning that taxoid
(Figure 2a). Similar patterns of taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-yl      accumulation levels were generally higher in young stems
acetate, a downstream product of TAT, were observed in     compared to old stems for most taxoids.
both O and T stems. High concentrations of 10-DAB  III,
                                                              Analysis of LCM integrated with DDA-MS/MS data
BAC, and Taxol were observed in O stems. Speciﬁcally,
signiﬁcant accumulation of 10-DAB III and BAC was found       Cell types have distinct proteomes that are often underrepre-
in the PC1 of O stems, while signiﬁcant accumulation of      sented and intermixed in whole stem samples comprising
Taxol occurred in the PC3 (Figure 2b,c). Regarding Taxol      multiple cell types. Manual separation of stem tissues can be

  2025 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal (2025) 122 e70135