8 of 15 Chunna Yu et al.





Figure 6. Identiﬁcation of MYB1L-binding regions by DAP-seq.
(a) Using antibody for western blot detection of expressed MYB1L protein.
(b) Establishment of three libraries and quality inspection for enriched products.
(c) Genome-wide location analysis of the MYB1L target peaks.
(d) Venn analysis of overlap target peaks from MYB1L-repeat1 and MYB1L-repeat2 libraries.
(e) Genome-wide location analysis of the target peaks between MYB1L-repeat1 and MYB1L-repeat2 libraries.
(f) The overlap peak frequencies near the transcription start site.
(g) Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of the target genes of MYB1L.
(h) Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis of the target genes of MYB1L.


MYB1L has a molecular weight of 65 kDa (Figure 6a). Next,      Analysis of potential MYB1L targets and binding motifs
we constructed three libraries of input and two MYB1L
                                                   To gain insight into the biological functions of MYB1L tar-
repeats. Quality inspection of the test libraries demon-
                                                              get genes, we next carried out GO and KEGG analyses. GO
strated that they were of high quality (Figure 6b). Using
                                                          enrichment analysis revealed  that the  target genes  of
the Illumina platform, approximately 140 million raw reads
                                              MYB1L were enriched in “nucleic acid metabolic process,”
were generated by DAP-seq (Table S4).
                                                              “organelle organization,” and “DNA metabolic process”
   A substantial number of MYB1L target peaks were
                                                                 (Figure 6g), while KEGG enrichment analysis identiﬁed
identiﬁed (Table S5). Genome-wide analysis revealed that
                                                                “signal transduction” (78 genes), “translation” (75 genes),
the majority of the MYB1L target peaks were situated in
                                                    and “cell growth and death” (73 genes) genes (Figure 6h).
the intergenic regions, with an average of 6.1% of target
                                                                   Analysis of the motifs in the peak regions allows fur-
peaks located in the intron regions and an average of
                                                                  ther prediction of potential downstream target genes of
1.16% found in the promoter regions (Figure 6c). Venn
                                         MYB family members. Motif enrichment analysis showed
analysis  revealed  92 506  overlapping   target  peaks
                                                                    that  the top ﬁve known MYB1L binding motifs were
(Figure 6d), of which 5.15% and 0.87% were located in
                                              “AGGGTTTAGGGTTTA”    (P = 1e-3995),   “TAAACCCT”
intron and promoter regions, respectively (Figure 6e,f).

                                                   2025 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
                                                                       The Plant Journal (2025) 122 e70135