
[PDF physical page 1]
                                      Available online at www.sciencedirect.com



Recent advances in awakening silent biosynthetic gene clusters
and linking orphan clusters to natural products in microorganisms
Yi-Ming Chiang1,3,*, Shu-Lin Chang2,3,*, Berl R Oakley4 and
Clay CC Wang3,5



Secondary metabolites from microorganisms have a broad        therein). It seems that when these microorganisms are
spectrum of applications, particularly in therapeutics. The        cultured under standard laboratory conditions, most bio-
growing number of sequenced microbial genomes has           synthetic gene clusters are either silent or expressed at
revealed a remarkably large number of natural product           very low levels. The chemical or environmental signals
biosynthetic clusters for which the products are still unknown.     necessary for triggering these pathways must be missing.
These cryptic clusters are potentially a treasure house of
medically useful compounds. The recent development of new     In this review we will use the terms ‘orphan’ and ‘silent’
methodologies has made it possible to begin unlock this        gene clusters as suggested by Gross [2]. Orphan biosyn-
treasure house, to discover new natural products and to          thetic gene clusters are clusters for which the correspond-
determine their biosynthesis pathways. This review will           ing metabolite is still undiscovered. Silent clusters are
highlight some of the most recent strategies to activate silent      clusters in which the genes are not expressed or expressed
biosynthetic gene clusters and to elucidate their corresponding      at very low levels. This review article will highlight some
products and pathways.                                        of the most recent developments and strategies to acti-
Addresses                                                 vate  silent  gene  clusters  that  contains  polyketide
1 Graduate Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, Chia Nan University of    synthases (PKSs) and nonribosomal peptide synthetases
Pharmacy         and Science, Tainan 71710, Taiwan, ROC               (NRPSs) and identify the products of orphan pathways.
2
 Department of Biotechnology, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and     For more comprehensive reviews on PKSs and NRPSs,
Science, Tainan 71710, Taiwan, ROC
3 Department of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University    the reader is directed to works authored by Fischbach and
of Southern California, School of Pharmacy, 1985 Zonal Avenue, Los     Walsh [3,4], and Hertweck [5].
Angeles, CA 90089, USA
4 Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, 1200     Recent advances in awakening silent gene
Sunnyside           Ave., Lawrence, KS 66045, USA                     clusters5
 Department of Chemistry, University of Southern California, College of
Letters, Arts, and Sciences, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA              Several strategies for the discovery of novel natural pro-
                                                         ducts by awakening silent gene clusters have been devel-
Corresponding author: Wang, Clay CC (clayw@usc.edu)             oped [1,6–9]. These strategies include the one strain-many
*These authors contributed equally to this work.                                                compounds (OSMAC) approach, where new compounds
                                                      can be elicited by cultivating microorganisms in different
  Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2011, 15:137–143            fermentation  conditions.  Parameters  that have been
                                                      manipulated include media composition, aeration rate,
  This review comes from a themed issue on
  Omics                                                 type of culture vessel, and the addition of enzyme inhibi-
  Edited by Kate Carroll and Pieter Dorrestein                          tors [10]. While very useful, this approach can be laborious
                                                  and there is no certainty that conditions can be found to
  Available online 24th November 2010                            stimulate the synthesis of all the interesting and useful
  1367-5931/$ – see front matter                           compounds that organisms can potentially produce.
 # 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
                                          An alternative strategy takes advantage of the fact that
  DOI 10.1016/j.cbpa.2010.10.011                        many secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters
                                                          contain one or more genes that encode transcription
                                                                 factors that transcribe all the genes of the cluster. In
Introduction                                         organisms amenable to molecular genetic manipulation,
Natural products and their semisynthetic derivatives have    the promoter of the transcription factor can be replaced by
been an important source of drugs in the pharmaceutical   an inducible promoter. The synthesis of the transcription
industry. Efforts to discover new bioactive treasures have    factor  is, thus, removed from natural controls and put
recently beneﬁted from the sequencing of ever-increas-   under the control of the researcher. Induction leads to
ing numbers of genomes from natural-product-producing    high levels of the transcription factor and this, in turn, can
microbes. It is clear from the genome information that    lead to all the genes of the cluster being turned on and the
most of these microorganisms have the potential to pro-    product produced  [11  ,12]. This  approach  has  the
duce a far greater number of natural products than have    advantage that the product is immediately ascribable to
been isolated previously ([1] and the references cited    the target cluster and it offers the potential for production


www.sciencedirect.com                                                          Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2011, 15:137–143


[PDF physical page 2]
138  Omics




of large amounts of the product. Some transcription    expression can only be carried out in organisms with well-
factors are regulated post-translationally [13]; however,   developed molecular  genetic  systems. To use such
and it is possible that this strategy will not work easily for    approaches with gene clusters in other organisms, either
many of the clusters that contain transcription factor    a good molecular genetic system has to be developed for
genes. In addition, many clusters do not contain transcrip-    that organism or secondary metabolism genes or gene
tion factor genes and other approaches must be used.       clusters from the organism have to be introduced into
                                                           appropriate heterologous host organisms. Because PKS-
In addition to cluster-speciﬁc transcription factors, there    containing and NRPS-containing gene clusters can be
are more general regulators of secondary metabolite gene    very large in size, however, introducing these clusters into
expression. One example is LaeA, a nuclear protein that    heterologous hosts can be quite technically challenging
controls secondary metabolite gene expression. Using   and time-consuming. In addition, it may be necessary to
microarray analysis of strains over expressing laeA and    replace the native promoters of the genes that one is
strains carrying a deletion of laeA, the biosynthetic gene    attempting to express with a strong or inducible promoter
cluster of terrequinone A in Aspergillus nidulans was dis-    that functions in the host organism. If there are a large
covered [14].                                     number of genes in the pathway, this could be quite
                                                                 difﬁcult.
Epigenetic regulation/Chromatin-level
remodeling in eukaryotes                         This approach has the advantage, however, that  if a
Histone modiﬁcations such as acetylation, methylation,    cluster is introduced into a host organism, and a new
phosphorylation, ADP-ribosylation,  glycosylation, ubi-    metabolite appears, one can ascribe it with conﬁdence to
quitination and sumoylation that  alter the chromatin    the cluster. An interesting example that combines heter-
landscape have also been shown to regulate gene tran-    ologous expression and cluster speciﬁc activation has
scription (Figure 1a). The Keller group demonstrated the   been published by the Nihira and co-workers [19 ]. They
importance of histone acetylation on the regulation of    engineered a citrinin-producing Aspergillus oryzae strain
natural products in Aspergillus [15]. Disruption of the hdaA   by introducing the entire citrinin biosynthetic gene clus-
gene  encoding  an  A.  nidulans  histone  deacetylase    ter from Monascus purpureus into A. oryzae followed by
(HDAC) led to the increased production of sterigmato-    heterologous expression of the citrinin cluster speciﬁc
cystin and penicillin.                                          activator ctnA. This approach could potentially be used
                                                                  for the determination of other silent gene clusters in
The COMPASS (complex associated with Set1) complex   ﬁlamentous fungi.
has been shown to be responsible for the methylation of
lysine 4 on histone 3 (H3K4) in yeast. Deletion of the cclA   Inter-species crosstalk
gene in A. nidulans, encoding one of the eight COMPASS     It is generally accepted that one of the roles of secondary
complex proteins, led to the activation of at least two silent    metabolites is to provide a biological advantage for the
gene clusters that involved in the biosynthesis of emodin    producer in response to its environment. In some cases
and the  related compounds, monodictyphenone, and    secondary metabolites may protect against non-biological
F9775A/F9775B (Figure 1a) [16   ]. Besides the acetylation    agents such as ultraviolet radiation, but in many cases
and methylation of histones, deletion of the single sumoy-    they will be used to compete against other organisms. Use
lation gene sumO in A. nidulans caused a dramatic increase    of secondary metabolites to compete with other organ-
in asperthecin and a decrease of austinol/dehydroaustinol    isms implies that there must be some sort of sensing
and sterigmatocystin production [17 ]. Although the pre-   mechanism to control the production of the metabolites.
cise mechanism by which epigenetic regulation affects     It follows that by harnessing the interplay between the
secondary metabolite production still awaits elucidation,    producer and the environment, it might be possible to
the examples described above conﬁrm the applicability of    stimulate silent clusters to produce secondary metab-
using  epigenetic modiﬁers  for modulating secondary     olites. Schroeck  et  al. employed  a  microarray-based
metabolite production. Moreover, the Cichewicz group    approach to monitor the selective activation of silent
was able to obtain novel fungal natural products using a    fungal biosynthetic genes via bacterial–fungal interaction
similar concept by culturing a fungus in the presence of    [20 ]. Using a collection of 58 actinomycetes, Schroeck
DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) or HDAC inhibitors      et al. discovered that when A. nidulans is co-cultured with
[18 ]. This chemical epigenetic mining does not require    Streptomyces  rapamycinicus, two  secondary  metabolite
genetic manipulation, and thus it can be applied to many    genes clusters are induced (Figure 1b). One of the gene
cultivable fungal strains.                                       clusters produced the aromatic polyketides  orsellinic
                                                                 acid, lecanoric acid and the cathepsin K inhibitors F-
Heterologous expression  of secondary   9775A/F-9775B. Interestingly, dialysis experiments and
metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters              electron microscopy indicated that a physical contact of
Transcription factor promoter replacement and targeting    the S. rapamycinicus and A. nidulans is required to elicit
of genes involved in chromatin-level regulation of gene    expression of the silent PKS gene. This study provides


Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2011, 15:137–143                                                          www.sciencedirect.com


[PDF physical page 3]
                                         Recent advances in awakening silent biosynthetic gene clusters Chiang et al.  139





Figure 1





Recent advances in awakening silent gene clusters. (a) Chromatin-level remodeling, a proposed model by which relaxed chromatin leads to the de-
repression of secondary metabolite biosynthesis. The COMPASS complex represses the production of emodin and related compounds,
monodictyphenone, and F-9775A/F-9775B. (b) Fungal–bacterial physical interaction induced the silent gene cluster (ors) and the production of
secondary metabolites. (c) Ribosome engineering, mutation of the ribosomal protein S12 (an essential component of the ribosomal 30S subunit) at K88
enhances protein synthesis and a mutation at RNAP at H437 increases the promoter binding affinity in stationary growth phase. This led to the
expression of bacterial silent gene cluster and the production of antibiotic piperidamycins.


evidence that physical interaction among microorganisms   Ribosome engineering in prokaryotes
can lead to the induction of silent biosynthesis genes. It    Great efforts have been committed to improving the yield
also demonstrates the potential of using mixed-cultiva-    of antibiotics in microorganisms, primarily to meet com-
tion of microorganisms for novel secondary metabolite    mercial requirements and demands. The Ochi group
discovery.                                            developed a method, termed ‘ribosome engineering’, to


www.sciencedirect.com                                                          Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2011, 15:137–143


[PDF physical page 4]
140  Omics





Figure 2





Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2011, 15:137–143                                                          www.sciencedirect.com


[PDF physical page 5]
                                         Recent advances in awakening silent biosynthetic gene clusters Chiang et al.  141




increase  antibiotic production by targeting ribosomal    adenylation (A) domain of bacterial NRPSs can be pre-
protein S12 or RNA polymerase (RNAP), with the idea    dicted from the amino acid sequences of the domain by
that bacterial gene expression may be increased dramatic-    bioinformatics [24]. Leucine, for example, was predicted
ally by altering transcription and translation machineries    to be incorporated at four different A domains in the ofa
(Figure 1c) [21]. Since many antibiotics, such as strepto-    cluster, an orphan gene cluster of Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens
mycin, target the ribosome, ribosome mutants that confer    Pf-5. 15N-L-leucine was subsequently fed into cultures of
antibiotic resistance could be obtained by simply select-    this organism early in the exponential growth phase.
ing mutants on streptomycin-containing plates. Similarly,   Because  15N-L-leucine  can be  readily  detected by
RNAP mutants could be obtained by growing on plates   1H–15N HMBC NMR experiments, the major product
containing rifampicin, which binds to RNAP and inhibits    of the ofa cluster, orgamide A, was identiﬁed and isolated
RNA synthesis. Remarkably, these mutants not only had   by isotope-guided  fractionation. The strength of the
increased antibiotic production but also were found to    genomisotopic approach lies in  its potential for rapid
produce novel antibiotics [22   ]. After the screening of    isolation of novel metabolites without the need for any
1068 actinomycetes isolated from soil, 6% of non-Strepto-    genetic manipulation. However, this approach requires
myces actinomycetes species and 43%  of  Streptomyces    that the biosynthetic gene cluster be expressed at ad-
species that did not produce antibacterials were activated    equate levels. If it is poorly expressed or not expressed at
to produce them. A mechanistic study indicated that the     all, OSMAC or other approaches must be used to activate
effect observed was due to a mutation at Lys-88 to either    the cluster.
Glu or Arg in the ribosomal protein S12, which enhances
protein synthesis in stationary growth phase. In addition,   Gene-directed or chemical structure-based
a mutation at His-437 to either Asp or Leu in the RNAP   gene targeting
b-subunit increased its promoter binding afﬁnity. Similar   Even though the genomes of many natural-product-pro-
to co-culture and epigenetic mining approaches, such a    ducing organisms have now been sequenced, the genomes
‘ribosome engineering’ approach triggers the activation of    of the vast majority of organisms have not been sequenced.
one or several but not all biosynthesis clusters in the    In many cases, including many symbionts of marine
organism.  However,  these  approaches,  unlike  the    sponges, the producing microorganism is not known or is
approaches that activate pathway-speciﬁc activators, do    unculturable in the lab. In these instances, gene cloning
not trigger speciﬁc biosynthetic gene clusters.            guided by speciﬁc gene sequences and/or chemical struc-
                                                              tures can, in principle, provide a solution. Examples of
Linking orphan clusters to molecules              screening for new derivatives of pharmacologically import-
Several orphan biosynthetic gene clusters have been    ant natural products include the search for new enediynes
identiﬁed by gene inactivation combined with compara-   by targeting a speciﬁc PKS encoding the ‘warhead’ chro-
tive metabolic proﬁling ([2,7] and the references cited   mophore [25], and the search for new vancomycin-like and
therein). However, several novel strategies that do not    teicoplanin-like glycopeptides by searching for the speciﬁc
require genetic manipulation of the producing organism   enzyme, OxyC, that catalyzes the C–C bond formation
have been introduced recently. They rely on the lesson   between the hydroxyphenylglycine and the dihydroxy-
learned from known biosynthetic pathways and from    phenylglycine groups  [26]. Recently, the  Piel group
developments in bioinformatics and proteomics.            impressively demonstrated an extension of this approach
                                                              in the search for the biosynthetic gene cluster of psymberin
Genomisotopic approach                            (Figure 2c), a highly potent antitumor agent that is pro-
The Loper and Gerwick groups reported an approach   duced from a marine sponge, but at extremely low yields
they termed the ‘genomisotopic approach’ in which iso-    [27   ]. Sponges harbor a number of symbionts and sequen-
tope-labeled precursors are fed to a genome-sequenced    cing of DNA from a sponge harvested in the wild yields a
microorganism followed by isotope-guided fractionation   metagenome, containing sequences from the sponge and
(Figure 2a) [23 ]. This approach takes advantage of the     its symbionts. The Piel group took advantage of the fact
fact that the amino acid substrate that will be used by the    that phylogenetic studies suggest that  it is possible to



(Figure 2 Legend) Linking orphan clusters to molecules. (a) Flowchart of the ‘genomisotopic approach’ for the isotope-guided isolation of orfamide A
biosynthesized from the ofa gene cluster. C, condensation domain; A, adenylation domain; TE, thioesterase domain; small circles symbolize the
thiolation (T) domain. (b) Phylogeny of trans-AT KS domains, KS domains that accept similar substrates fall into the same clade type. (c) Cloning of the
psy gene cluster and the elucidation of its biosynthetic pathway from a highly complicated metagenome by the chemical structure-based gene
targeting approach. The KS (Figure 2 Legend Continued) with one asterisk is rare and no clade exists so far. The KS with two asterisks falls into the
cis-AT group. Domains shown in white lack conserved catalytic residues and are non-functional. For the abbreviation for each domain, see Ref. [27   ].
(d) Flowchart of PrISM for the identification of robustly expressed NRPSs. The high molecular weight proteins from microbial cultures are subjected to
in-gel digestion and proteomics analysis by LC/MSn. Peptides that contain Ppant arms can be traced by the Ppant ejection assay. Peptide sequences
obtained from de novo peptide sequencing are used to design degenerate primers to amplify regions of the expressed gene cluster. The A domains of
the identified NRPS cluster are used to predict the substrates of amino acid incorporated. The metabolites with the predicted amino acid sequences
are ultimately confirmed by LC/MSn in the culture supernatant.


www.sciencedirect.com                                                          Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2011, 15:137–143


[PDF physical page 6]
142  Omics




differentiate trans-AT KS domains from cis-AT systems.    clusters  are  actually  expressed.  Besides  the PrISM
Moreover, the substrate of trans-AT KS domains can be    approach, several ﬂuorescent and biotinylated probes
uniquely predicted by bioinformatic analysis (Figure 2b)    targeting carrier protein or thioesterase domains in PKS
[28  ].Inotherwords,similartrans-ATKSdomainsprocess   and NRPS have also been developed by the Burkart
similar substrates. KS phylogeny of the trans-AT system,   group [33,34 ]. These probes, combined with proteomics
thus, provides detailed information about the polyketide    methodologies, offer valuable tools for comparative pro-
structure, and does not require any knowledge about other    ﬁling of the biosynthesis capabilities as well as identiﬁ-
PKS domains. In the Piel group’s study, diverse KS ampli-    cation of orphan pathways in microorganisms.
con mixtures were ﬁrst generated by degenerate KS pri-
mers from the complicated metagenome of a marine   Conclusions
sponge. Subsequently, PCR with degenerate nested pri-   With various exciting new tools introduced in recent years,
mers that target the speciﬁc clade of trans-ATKS predicted    natural product research has now entered a new promising
from thechemical structure of psymberin was used toclone    age. Development of new expression hosts including new
the psymberin KS domains. Using this strategy, the entire    selection markers and inducible promoters will allow more
psymberin gene cluster (Figure 2c) was identiﬁed after   gene clusters to be successfully expressed in heterologous
screening of more than 400,000 fosmid clones by a pooling    expression systems. Understanding the signaling cascades
strategy in a three-dimensional format [29]. The success of   from inter-species crosstalk, and the regulation at the
this approach relies on ﬁrst, the previous ﬁnding that the    transcription and translation levels will facilitate the dis-
substrate of trans-AT KS domains can be predicted by KS    covery of additional silent natural products. Bioinformatics
phylogeny, and second, the ability to design primers that    will likely play an ever-increasing role as more and more
target speciﬁc trans-AT KS domains.                     orphan gene clusters are linked to their cognate metab-
                                                                        olites. The ultimate goal will be to predict natural products
Proteomics approaches                           from unknown gene clusters using genome sequencing
Proteomic approaches have become an important tool in    information. Proteomics is also beginning to ﬁll the gap in
the identiﬁcation of orphan clusters. The Brakhage group    the identiﬁcation of orphan clusters. With the develop-
elucidated pyomelanin formation in A. fumigatus by com-   ment of an increasingly powerful reparatory of tools, there
paring protein proﬁles in pyomelanin-producing and non-     is every prospect that cryptic biosynthetic pathways will
producing  conditions  [30].  Proteins  upregulated  in   become invaluable resources for new therapeutics.
pyomelanin-producing conditions are good candidates
for being involved in pyomelanin biosynthesis. More   Acknowledgements
sophisticated methodology, termed PrISM (Proteomic     Research in the Wang and Oakley Groups is supported in part by PO1-
Investigation of Secondary Metabolism), has been devel-    GM084077 from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences. The                                                                   Oakley group is additionally supported by the University of Kansas
oped by the Kelleher group (Figure 2d) [31   ]. This    endowment fund. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
method  identiﬁes  robustly  expressed megasynthases     does not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of the National Institute of
                                                                       General Medical Sciences or the National Institutes of Health.
without the requirement for genome sequence infor-
mation a priori. By exploiting the fact that PKSs and
                                           References and recommended reading
NRPSs  are  high  molecular  weight  proteins  (often                                                                  Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review,
>200 kDa), high molecular bands from protein gels were    have been highlighted as:
subjected to proteomic analysis by high resolution tan-
dem mass spectrometry (MSn). The unique ‘top down’          of special interest
                                                                                     of outstanding interest
ions derived from the phosphopantetheinyl (Ppant) arm
                                                                                   1.   Scherlach K, Hertweck C: Triggering cryptic natural product
in the carrier protein domains of PKSs or NRPSs were         biosynthesis in microorganisms. Org Biomol Chem 2009,
then accurately traced by the Ppant ejection assay [32]. A         7:1753-1760.
Bacillus strain, NK2018, isolated from environment with     2.   Gross H: Strategies to unravel the function of orphan
no DNA sequence information was analyzed. By com-         biosynthesis pathways: recent examples and future
                                                                        prospects. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2007, 75:267-277.
bining the de novo peptide sequencing using LC/MSn and
bioinformatics analysis of the high molecular weight     3.   Fischbach MA, Walsh CT: Assembly-line enzymology for                                                                          polyketide and nonribosomal peptide antibiotics: logic,
proteome from NK2018, a novel NRPS cluster that is         machinery, and mechanisms. Chem Rev 2006, 106:3468-3496.
an ortholog to the predicted cluster from Bacillus cereus     4.  Walsh CT, Fischbach MA: Natural products version 2.0:
AH1134 genome was identiﬁed. The DNA sequences of        connecting genes to molecules. J Am Chem Soc 2010,
this cluster in NK2018 were ultimately determined to be         132:2469-2493.
>94% identical to B. cereus AH1134. Several putative     5.   Hertweck C: The biosynthetic logic of polyketide diversity.
                                                           Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2009, 48:4688-4716.
lipoheptapeptides that matched the predicted substrates
of A domains of this novel NRPS cluster were then     6.   Chiang YM, Lee KH, Sanchez JF, Keller NP, Wang CC: Unlocking
                                                                          fungal cryptic natural products. Nat Prod Commun 2009,
identiﬁed from the NK2018 culture supernatant. This         4:1505-1510.
‘protein  ﬁrst’  approach  thus  complements genome                                                                                   7.   Zerikly M, Challis GL: Strategies for the discovery of new natural
mining approaches in that it does not reveal which gene        products by genome mining. Chembiochem 2009, 10:625-633.


Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2011, 15:137–143                                                          www.sciencedirect.com


[PDF physical page 7]
                                         Recent advances in awakening silent biosynthetic gene clusters Chiang et al.  143





8.   Brakhage AA, Schroeckh V: Fungal secondary metabolites —      An important strategy to induce antibiotic biosynthesis. This report
     strategies to activate silent gene clusters. Fungal Genet Biol       provides the mechanistic study of ribosome engineering that could
    2010. doi:10.1016/j.fgb.2010.04.004.                                      potentially activate silent gene clusters.

9.   Hertweck C: Hidden biosynthetic treasures brought to light.        23.  Gross H, Stockwell VO, Henkels MD, Nowak-Thompson B,
    Nat Chem Biol 2009, 5:450-452.                                      Loper JE, Gerwick WH: The genomisotopic approach: a
                                                                       systematic method to isolate products of orphan biosynthetic
10. Bode HB, Bethe B, Hofs R, Zeeck A: Big effects from small           gene clusters. Chem Biol 2007, 14:53-63.
    changes: possible ways to explore nature’s chemical          A study that demonstrates that the isotope-labeled precursor predicted
     diversity. Chembiochem 2002, 3:619-627.                         from A domains of NRPS that can be used to identify the metabolites of
                                                                          the orphan gene cluster.
11. Bergmann S, Schumann J, Scherlach K, Lange C, Brakhage AA,
    Hertweck C: Genomics-driven discovery of PKS-NRPS hybrid       24. Rausch C, Weber T, Kohlbacher O, Wohlleben W, Huson DH:
    metabolites from Aspergillus nidulans. Nat Chem Biol 2007,            Speciﬁcity prediction of adenylation domains in nonribosomal
     3:213-217.                                                          peptide synthetases (NRPS) using transductive support vector
This study shows that ectopic overexpression of a regulator within the        machines (TSVMs). Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:5799-5808.
biosynthetic gene cluster results in the concerted activation of the whole
gene cluster.                                                              25.  Liu W, Ahlert J, Gao Q, Wendt-Pienkowski E, Shen B, Thorson JS:
                                                                  Rapid PCR ampliﬁcation of minimal enediyne polyketide
12.  Chiang YM, Szewczyk E, Davidson AD, Keller N, Oakley BR,             synthase cassettes leads to a predictive familial classiﬁcation
   Wang CC: A gene cluster containing two fungal polyketide            model. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003, 100:11959-11963.
    synthases encodes the biosynthetic pathway for a polyketide,
    asperfuranone, in Aspergillus nidulans. J Am Chem Soc 2009,       26.  Banik JJ, Brady SF: Cloning and characterization of new
    131:2965-2970.                                                     glycopeptide gene clusters found in an environmental DNA
                                                                          megalibrary. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008, 105:17273-17277.
13.  Shimizu K, Hicks JK, Huang TP, Keller NP: Pka, Ras and RGS
     protein interactions regulate activity of AﬂR, a Zn(II)2Cys6         27.  Fisch KM, Gurgui C, Heycke N, van der Sar SA, Anderson SA,
     transcription factor in Aspergillus nidulans. Genetics 2003,          Webb VL, Taudien S, Platzer M, Rubio BK, Robinson SJ et al.:
    165:1095-1104.                                                       Polyketide assembly lines of uncultivated sponge symbionts
                                                                 from structure-based gene targeting. Nat Chem Biol 2009,
14. Bok JW, Hoffmeister D, Maggio-Hall LA, Murillo R, Glasner JD,            5:494-501.
     Keller NP: Genomic mining for Aspergillus natural products.      An excellent study that shows that the genes responsible for the synthesis
   Chem Biol 2006, 13:31-37.                                               of complex marine natural products produced from trans-AT PKS that
                                                               can be cloned from highly complex metagenomic DNA by structure-
15. Shwab EK, Bok JW, Tribus M, Galehr J, Graessle S, Keller NP:
                                                              based gene targeting.
    Histone deacetylase activity regulates chemical diversity in
     Aspergillus. Eukaryot Cell 2007, 6:1656-1664.                         28. Nguyen T, Ishida K, Jenke-Kodama H, Dittmann E, Gurgui C,
                                                               Hochmuth T, Taudien S, Platzer M, Hertweck C, Piel J: Exploiting
16. Bok JW, Chiang YM, Szewczyk E, Reyes-Domingez Y,
                                                                        the mosaic structure of trans-acyltransferase polyketide
    Davidson AD, Sanchez JF, Lo HC, Watanabe K, Strauss J,
                                                                    synthases for natural product discovery and pathway
    Oakley BR et al.: Chromatin-level regulation of biosynthetic
                                                                             dissection. Nat Biotechnol 2008, 26:225-233.
    gene clusters. Nat Chem Biol 2009, 5:462-464.
                                                          An important study that highlights the chemical structural information of
This report revealed that silent biosynthetic gene clusters are activated by
                                                                        trans-AT PKS is encoded in the trans-AT KS domain, thus, providing new
the disruption of the COMPASS complex.
                                                                               strategies for dissecting polyketide biosynthetic pathways.
17. Szewczyk E, Chiang YM, Oakley CE, Davidson AD, Wang CC,
                                                                           29.  Hrvatin S, Piel J: Rapid isolation of rare clones from highly
    Oakley BR: Identiﬁcation and characterization of the
                                                               complex DNA libraries by PCR analysis of liquid gel pools. J
    asperthecin gene cluster of Aspergillus nidulans. Appl Environ
                                                                                Microbiol Methods 2007, 68:434-436.
     Microbiol 2008, 74:7607-7612.
This report shows that sumoylation alters secondary metabolite proﬁles.     30.  Schmaler-Ripcke J, Sugareva V, Gebhardt P, Winkler R,
                                                                     Kniemeyer O, Heinekamp T, Brakhage AA: Production of
18.  Williams RB, Henrikson JC, Hoover AR, Lee AE, Cichewicz RH:
                                                                      pyomelanin, a second type of melanin, via the tyrosine
    Epigenetic remodeling of the fungal secondary metabolome.
                                                                      degradation pathway in Aspergillus fumigatus. Appl Environ
    Org Biomol Chem 2008, 6:1895-1897.
                                                                                Microbiol 2009, 75:493-503.
This report shows silent secondary metabolites that can be induced by a
chemical epigenetic mining approach.                                     31. Bumpus SB, Evans BS, Thomas PM, Ntai I, Kelleher NL: A
                                                                   proteomics approach to discovering natural products and
19.  Sakai K, Kinoshita H, Shimizu T, Nihira T: Construction of a
                                                                                     their biosynthetic pathways. Nat Biotechnol 2009, 27:951-956.
     citrinin gene cluster expression system in heterologous
                                                                    PrISM, a protein ﬁrst strategy that combines proteomics, bioinformatics
     Aspergillus oryzae. J Biosci Bioeng 2008, 106:466-472.
                                                             and the property of megasynthase to elucidate expressed orphan bio-
This is the ﬁrst report that combines the heterologous expression and
                                                                             synthetic gene clusters.
induction of a regulator within the biosynthetic gene cluster.
                                                                           32.  Dorrestein PC, Bumpus SB, Calderone CT, Garneau-Tsodikova S,
20.  Schroeckh V, Scherlach K, Nutzmann HW, Shelest E, Schmidt-
                                                                      Aron ZD, Straight PD, Kolter R, Walsh CT, Kelleher NL: Facile
    Heck W, Schuemann J, Martin K, Hertweck C, Brakhage AA:
                                                                         detection of acyl and peptidyl intermediates on thiotemplate
     Intimate bacterial–fungal interaction triggers biosynthesis of
                                                                                  carrier domains via phosphopantetheinyl elimination
    archetypal polyketides in Aspergillus nidulans. Proc Natl Acad
                                                                          reactions during tandem mass spectrometry. Biochemistry
     Sci U S A 2009, 106:14558-14563.
                                                                          2006, 45:12756-12766.
The ﬁrst study that demonstrates that physical interactions contribute to
the communication among microorganisms and induction of silent bio-     33.  Meier JL, Mercer AC, Burkart MD: Fluorescent proﬁling of
synthetic gene clusters.                                              modular biosynthetic enzymes by complementary
                                                                      metabolic and activity based probes. J Am Chem Soc 2008,
21.  Ochi K, Okamoto S, Tozawa Y, Inaoka T, Hosaka T, Xu J,
                                                                         130:5443-5445.
    Kurosawa K: Ribosome engineering and secondary metabolite
    production. Adv Appl Microbiol 2004, 56:155-184.                    34.  Meier JL, Niessen S, Hoover HS, Foley TL, Cravatt BF, Burkart MD:
                                                         An orthogonal active site identiﬁcation system (OASIS) for
22. Hosaka T, Ohnishi-Kameyama M, Muramatsu H, Murakami K,
                                                                   proteomic proﬁling of natural product biosynthesis. ACS
    Tsurumi Y, Kodani S, Yoshida M, Fujie A, Ochi K: Antibacterial
                                                       Chem Biol 2009, 4:948-957.
    discovery in actinomycetes strains with mutations in RNA
                                                     A valuable pulldown-based tool for PKS and NRPS proﬁling by labeling
    polymerase or ribosomal protein S12. Nat Biotechnol 2009,
                                                                                     carrier protein and thioesterase domains.
     27:462-464.





www.sciencedirect.com                                                          Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2011, 15:137–143