
[PDF physical page 1]
Downloaded from orbit.dtu.dk on: Jul 29, 2026





Enhancing Saccharomyces cerevisiae Taxane Biosynthesis and Overcoming
Nutritional Stress-Induced Pseudohyphal Growth


Walls, Laura Ellen; Martinez, José L; Rios-Solis, Leonardo



Published in:
Microorganisms

Link to article, DOI:
10.3390/microorganisms10010163

Publication date:
2022

Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record

Link back to DTU Orbit



Citation (APA):
Walls, L. E., Martinez, J. L., & Rios-Solis, L. (2022). Enhancing Saccharomyces cerevisiae Taxane Biosynthesis
and Overcoming Nutritional Stress-Induced Pseudohyphal Growth. Microorganisms, 10(1), Article 163.
https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms10010163





General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.

     Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
     You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
     You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal

If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.


[PDF physical page 2]
    microorganisms



Article
Enhancing Saccharomyces cerevisiae Taxane Biosynthesis and
Overcoming Nutritional Stress-Induced Pseudohyphal Growth

Laura Ellen Walls 1,2,3, José L. Martinez 3  and Leonardo Rios-Solis 1,2,*


                                            1   Institute for Bioengineering, School of Engineering, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3DW, UK;
                                       laura.walls@ed.ac.uk
                                            2   Centre for Synthetic and Systems Biology (SynthSys), University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK
                                            3  Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Section for Synthetic Biology,
                                       Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark; jlmr@dtu.dk
                                     *   Correspondence: Leo.Rios@ed.ac.uk


                                Abstract: The recent technological advancements in synthetic biology have demonstrated the exten-
                                  sive potential socio-economic beneﬁts at laboratory scale. However, translations of such technologies
                                  to industrial scale fermentations remains a major bottleneck. The existence and lack of understanding
                                 of the major discrepancies in cultivation conditions between scales often leads to the selection of
                             suboptimal bioprocessing conditions, crippling industrial scale productivity. In this study, strategic
                             design of experiments approaches were coupled with state-of-the-art bioreactor tools to character-
                                  ize and overcome nutritional stress for the enhanced production of precursors to the blockbuster
                            chemotherapy drug, Taxol, in S. cerevisiae cell factories. The batch-to-batch variation in yeast extract
                             composition was found to trigger nutritional stress at a mini-bioreactor scale, resulting in profound
                            changes in cellular morphology and the inhibition of taxane production. The cells shifted from the
                                 typical budding morphology into striking pseudohyphal cells. Doubling initial yeast extract and
Citation: Walls, L.E.; Martinez, J.L.;     peptone concentrations (2×YP) delayed ﬁlamentous growth, and taxane accumulation improved
Rios-Solis, L. Enhancing              to 108 mg/L. Through coupling a statistical deﬁnitive screening design approach with the state-of-
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Taxane          the-art high-throughput micro-bioreactors, the total taxane titers were improved a further two-fold,
Biosynthesis and Overcoming        compared to the 2×YP culture, to 229 mg/L. Filamentous growth was absent in nutrient-limited
Nutritional Stress-Induced
                                microscale cultures, underlining the complex and multifactorial nature of yeast stress responses. Vali-
Pseudohyphal Growth.
                               dation of the optimal microscale conditions in 1L bioreactors successfully alleviated nutritional stress
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163.
                          and improved the titers to 387 mg/L. Production of the key Taxol precursor, T5αAc, was improved
https://doi.org/10.3390/
                               two-fold to 22 mg/L compared to previous maxima. The present study highlights the importance of
microorganisms10010163
                               following an interdisciplinary approach combining synthetic biology and bioprocessing technologies
Academic Editor: Benedetta Turchetti     for effective process optimization and scale-up.

Received: 29 November 2021
Accepted: 10 January 2022          Keywords: Saccharomyces cerevisiae; Taxol; pseudohyphae; nutritional stress; bioprocess optimization;
Published: 13 January 2022           high-throughput microbioreactor; scale-up; taxadiene-5α-ol; taxadien-5α-yl acetate


Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

with regard to jurisdictional claims in

published maps and institutional afﬁl-
                                   1. Introduction
iations.
                              Recent technological advancements within the ﬁeld of synthetic biology [1–4] have
                                 facilitated the acceleration of efforts to develop an alternative, more sustainable source of
                            diterpenoid-based pharmaceuticals, such as Taxol. Reconstruction of the early steps of the
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.   highly complex Taxol biosynthetic pathway in microbial cell factories has been achieved at
Licensee MDPI, Basel,  Switzerland.   laboratory scale [5–8] (Figure 1). However, low yields of the early taxadiene, T5αol and
This article is an open access article  T5αAc intermediates remains a major bottleneck in biosynthetic pathway development.
distributed  under  the  terms  and  Work to reconstruct the pathway has revealed deviations in the microbial host, media
conditions of the Creative Commons   composition and processing conditions can have a profound impact on the performance
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://   of early pathway enzymes [7–9]. Deviations in the medium composition, temperature
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                       and pH had a substantial impact on the product spectra and titers obtained in S. cerevisiae
4.0/).





Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms10010163               https://www.mdpi.com/journal/microorganisms


[PDF physical page 3]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                     2 of 16



                              cultures [7–9]. Such ﬁndings are likely the result of a lack of understanding of the down-
                          stream effects associated with the heterologous overproduction of small molecules, such
                            as those resulting from the expression of the early Taxol pathway. The overexpression of
                            native and heterologous genes can induce changes in physiology, intracellular pH, redox
                           balance and viability [10,11], and further understanding of the nature of these changes
                        and their effect on stress tolerance is essential to ensuring robust performance under harsh
                              industrial conditions.



                                                                                    ~16 steps


                                 Galactose
                                                                         Taxol                          Taxadien-5α-yl acetate

                                 Acetyl-CoA                                                          TAT
                               ERG10
                                     GGOH
                               Acetoacetyl-CoA         LPP1                       CYP725A4                                                         MBP-TASY-            CPR                               ERG13           DPP1                                                                                               mvaS           ERG20 x2
                           HMG-CoA                                                         TASY-GFP
                            HMG1                                                              Taxadien-5α-ol
                            HMG2
                                 Mevalonate                                   Taxadiene
                              ERG12

                                       GGPP                                Mevalonate-P                                                                                                                         crtE                                       Iso-OCT                                               BTS1                             ERG8                                                            x3
                               Mevalonate-PP       FPP                     Iso-Taxadiene
                               ERG19           ERG20
                                  IPP    DMAPP   GPP                    Monocyclic
                                              IDI1                               Cembrenes               OCT
                                              ERG20                                    Monooxygenated
                                                                                          Dicyclic                    diterpenes
                                                                                              Verticillienes

                              Figure 1. Engineered biosynthetic pathway in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain LRS6. Galactose
                                        is converted to the universal diterpenoid precursor, GGPP, via the mevalonate pathway. The ﬁrst
                         enzyme in the paclitaxel pathway, TASY, catalyzes the conversion of GGPP to taxadiene and small
                          amounts of its isomer, iso-taxadiene. The second enzyme, CYP725A4, coupled with its cognate
                               reductase subsequently catalyzes the oxidation of taxadiene to T5αol. The third enzyme, TAT, then
                                 catalyzes the acetylation of T5αol. The native, overexpressed genes are highlighted in green, whilst
                               heterologous genes are highlighted in red. The dashed arrows highlight the undesirable side-products;
                                the structures of the two well-characterized by-products, OCT and iso-OCT are shown.

                          Undeﬁned complex materials, such as yeast extract and peptone, are often preferred
                               for industrial bioprocesses, due to their relatively low cost and richer supply of nutrients
                       compared to deﬁned substrates [12,13]. However, lot-to-lot variations in the composition
                              of yeast extract have been found to cause nutritional stress with a major impact on strain
                         performance [13,14]. As the scale is increased during bioprocess scale-up, the mixing
                             efﬁciency is reduced and spatiotemporal substrate, oxygen, pH and temperature gradients
                         develop across the reactor volume [15,16], exacerbating such effects. S. cerevisiae makes
                          use of complex signal transduction pathways to adapt to changes in the availability of
                              essential nutrients [17]. Such pathways stimulate proliferation under nutrient-rich con-
                             ditions and induce entry into a quiescent “stationary phase” under nutrient scarcity [17].
                          For example, upon the depletion of glucose, the Crabtree-positive yeast, S. cerevisiae has
                          evolved to enter a short stationary phase, whilst it reprograms its metabolism for growth
                       on ethanol. Another interesting characteristic response to nutrient stress in many fungal
                              species, including S. cerevisiae, is ﬁlamentous growth [18]. In diploid cells, nitrogen star-
                           vation triggers a profound change in cellular morphology, from normal budding yeast


[PDF physical page 4]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                     3 of 16



                        form to elongated pseudohyphal cells, which are separated by cytokinesis but attached
                          through adhesion proteins [19]. In haploid cells, a similar but distinct phenomenon, termed
                            invasive growth, occurs in response to glucose starvation [19]. This elongated growth has
                          been predominantly reported on solid nutrient-limited agar cultures and is believed to be a
                            foraging mechanism to scavenge for nutrients when availability is scarce [20]. Interestingly,
                            the presence of quorum-sensing molecules in the cultivation medium has been found to
                                      elicit a similar response, even in liquid media [21]. Quorum sensing is a means of cell-to-cell
                            microbial communication and the detection of quorum sensing molecules has been found
                               to trigger profound changes in gene expression in a wide range of microbial species [22,23].
                          Fungal quorum sensing was ﬁrst discovered in C. albicans when the sesquiterpene alcohol,
                               farnesol, was found to inhibit the yeast to hyphal switch in the species [24]. In S. cerevisiae,
                              fusel alcohols, including tryptophol and phenylethanol, have been found to be quorum-
                            sensing molecules [22]. The secretion of tryptophol and phenylethanol is tightly controlled
                       by cell density and is subject to positive feedback [22]. The expression of key genes in-
                         volved in amino acid metabolism, aromatic amino acid aminotransferase 2 (ARO9) and
                           transaminated amino acid decarboxylase (ARO10) was upregulated up to around 50-fold
                              in high density (5 × 107 cells/mL), compared to low density (105 cells/mL) cultures [22].
                       The resulting aromatic alcohol products induce the expression of the FLO11 gene [22], the
                          product of which is a cell surface ﬂocculin that is vital for ﬁlament formation in the strain.
                        The production of these aromatic alcohols is further regulated by nitrogen, and the pathway
                                     is repressed by ammonia and activated under nitrogen-poor conditions.
                           The limited insight and understanding of the process during preliminary screening,
                        and the failure to account for discrepancies in critical cultivation conditions, such as nutrient
                                 availability, can cause major scale-up challenges [25]. Detailed process characterization
                             in these early stages of bioprocess development is therefore crucial to understand how
                         such factors can affect the adaptation of optimization strategies to large-scale bioreactor
                              cultivations [16,26]. In this study, a statistical deﬁnitive screening design (DSD) approach
                                    is coupled with state-of-the-art micro and mini bioreactor technologies with the aim of
                          developing a robust, scalable bioprocess for heterologous taxane production. A particular
                         emphasis was made on overcoming the nutritional stress-induced ﬁlamentous growth in
                          engineered S cerevisiae cells to improve process scalability and reliability. The statistical
                             relationships between factors and performance were determined in line with quality by
                           design principles. The optimal conditions elucidated at a microscale were validated using
                            highly instrumented benchtop bioreactors.

                                   2. Materials and Methods
                                   2.1. Yeast Strains

                            The yeast strains used in this study were LRS6 (MATa, leu2-3, 112::HIS3MX6-GAL1p-
                         ERG19/GAL10p-ERG8;ura3-52::URA3-GAL1p-MvaSA110G/GAL10p-MvaE (codon optimized);
                        his3∆1::hphMX4-GAL1p-ERG12/GAL10p-   IDI1;    trp1-289::TRP1_GAL1p-CrtE(X.den)/
                         GAL10p-ERG20;YPRCdelta15::NatMX-GAL1p-CrtE(opt)/GAL10p-CrtE; ARS1014::GAL1p-
                        TASY-GFP; ARS1622b::GAL1p-MBP-TASY-ERG20; ARS1114a::TDH3p-MBP-TASY-ERG20;
                       ARS511b::GAL1p-CYP725A4-PGK1t/GAL3p-CPR-ENO2t; RKC3::GAL1p-TAT-CYC1t), as
                            previously described [7,8], originating from CEN.PK2-1C (EUROSCARF collection).

                                   2.2. MiniBio 500 Bioreactor Cultivation

                            The cultivations were conducted in MiniBio 500 bioreactors (Applikon Biotechnology,
                               Delft, The Netherlands) with a working volume of 250 mL. Pre-inoculum cultures were
                           prepared by transferring from a single colony to 5 mL of YPD (yeast extract 10 g/L; peptone
                           20 g/L, glucose 20 g/L) and incubating at 30 ◦C and 250 rpm for 8 h. The resulting culture
                      was subsequently used to inoculate a secondary culture to an OD600 = 1 and incubated
                             overnight. An aliquot of the resulting culture was diluted with YPG (yeast extract 10 g/L,
                         peptone 20 g/L, galactose 20 g/L) to give a 200 mL culture with an initial OD600 = 1. In
                            the 2×P culture, the concentration of peptone was doubled to 40 g/L, whilst in the 2×YP


[PDF physical page 5]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                     4 of 16



                              cultivation both the yeast extract and peptone concentrations were doubled to 20 and
                          40 g/L, respectively.
                            To prevent excess foam production, polypropylene glycol P2000 (Alfa Aesar, Lough-
                           borough, UK) was added to a concentration of 0.01% (v/v) and a Rushton turbine was placed
                               at the medium–air interface. A 20% dodecane overlay was also added. The temperature,
                 DO and pH were measured online. The adaptive my-control system (Applikon Biotechnol-
                             ogy, Delft, The Netherlands) was used to control the DO and temperature to setpoints of
                     30% saturation and 30 ◦C, respectively. Medium pH was maintained above 6 through the
                           automatic addition of 1 M NaOH. Where the biomass was measured online, a BE2100 OD
                           scanner (BugLab, Concord, MA, USA) was employed, and ofﬂine measurements were per-
                        formed twice daily using a Nanodrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc,
                         Loughborough, UK). Samples were taken twice daily for the analysis of taxanes via GC-MS
                       and galactose using the DNS method [27]. All the chemicals were purchased from Fisher
                               Scientiﬁc, UK, at the highest available purity, unless otherwise stated.

                                   2.3. Microscale Complex Media Optimization

                           The effect of six key factors, initial OD600, yeast extract lot along with yeast extract,
                           peptone, galactose and additional uracil concentrations on the total taxane and biomass
                          accumulation was investigated. A deﬁnitive screening design (DSD) was created using
                     JMP Pro 15 statistical software, as summarized in Table S1.
                            Inoculum cultures were prepared by transferring a single colony of LRS6 to 5 mL of
                   YPD media and incubating at 30 ◦C and 250 rpm overnight. Aliquots of the inoculum
                              cultures were diluted with each of the 14 media to give an 800 µL culture with the desired
                                    initial OD600, as indicated in Table S1. A 200 µL dodecane overlay was also added to each
                              well, to prevent the loss of the volatile taxane products due to air stripping, giving a total
                        working volume of 1 mL. The temperature was maintained at 30 ◦C under an agitation of
                          1000 rpm with a shaking diameter of 3 mm in 48-well Flowerplates (mp2-labs, Beasweiler,
                        Germany). The temperature, biomass, dissolved oxygen (DO) and pH were monitored
                             online using the inbuilt optical sensors. Taxane production was analyzed via GC-MS at the
                        end of the cultivation.

                                   2.4. Bioreactor Cultivation

                           The optimal conditions from the microscale optimization study were validated using
                        1L BIOSTAT Q plus bioreactors (Sartorius-Stedim Biotech S.A, Goettingen, Germany), with
                           a working volume of 500 mL. Pre-inoculum cultures were prepared by transferring a single
                       LRS6 colony to 5 mL of YPD and incubating at 30 ◦C and 250 rpm overnight. The resulting
                              cultures were subsequently diluted with 45 mL of fresh YPD medium in 500 mL Erlenmeyer
                          ﬂasks and incubated at 30 ◦C for 24 h. An aliquot of the resulting culture was diluted
                          with the optimized media to give a 400 mL culture with an initial OD600 = 0.79. Antifoam
                          204 (Sigma-Aldrich, Goettingen, Germany) was added as needed to control excess foam
                           production. A 100 mL dodecane overlay equivalent to 20% of the total volume was also
                         added. Temperature, DO and pH were measured online. MFCS software (Version 3.0,
                             Sartorius-Stedim Biotech S.A, Goettingen, Germany) was employed to control the BIOSTAT
                               cultivation, pH was maintained at 6 through the automatic addition of 2 M NaOH or
                          2 M H2SO4 and the temperature was maintained at 30 ◦C. A constant airﬂow of 1 vvm
                      was maintained and the stirrer speed was adjusted manually to maintain the dissolved
                        oxygen above 30%. Off-gas analysis was performed online via mass spectrometry (Prima
                             Pro, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Loughborough, UK). Samples were taken twice daily for
                           taxane and metabolite quantiﬁcation via GC-MS and HPLC, respectively.

                                   2.5. Taxane and Metabolite Identiﬁcation and Quantiﬁcation

                             Taxane identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation was achieved via GC-MS. The organic do-
                         decane layer was separated from the culture medium through centrifugation, and a 1 µL
                         sample was injected into a TRACE™1300 Gas Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc,


[PDF physical page 6]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                     5 of 16



                         Loughborough, UK) coupled to an ISQ LT single quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo
                             Fisher Scientiﬁc, Loughborough, UK). Chromatographic separation was achieved using a
                             Trace Gold TG-SQC gas chromatography column using a previously described method [28].
                        To identify and quantify the production of compounds by LRS6, standards of taxadiene,
                           kindly supplied by Baran Lab (The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, CA,
                         USA), and GGOH obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Gillingham, UK) were used. Additional
                          product concentrations were estimated relative to the standard taxadiene concentrations.
                            In the BIOSTAT cultivation, ethanol, acetate and glycerol production were analyzed via
                           ion-exchange HPLC. Following ﬁltration using a 0.45 µm ﬁlter, 20 µL samples were injected
                             into a Bio-Rad Aminex HPX-87H column (Hercules, CA, USA) for analysis. The eluent
                      was 5 mM H2SO4, the ﬂowrate was 0.6 mL/min and the temperature was 60 ◦C. An RID
                             detector was used for quantiﬁcation.

                                   2.6. Statistical Analysis

                           The design of experiments and statistical analyses were performed using JMP Pro 15
                                  statistical software. A DSD with a two-level categorical factor was used [29]. Statistical
                       model development involved the use of forward stepwise regression in JMP Pro 15 using
                             the combine option and a p-value of 0.1, and all terms up to the second order were consid-
                           ered [29]. The null hypothesis considered that there was no signiﬁcant difference between
                            the cultures; hence, if p ≤0.05, the null hypothesis was rejected.

                                   3. Results and Discussion
                                   3.1. Reproducibility and Factor Determination

                            The lack of reproducibility within the life sciences has recently been deemed a “crisis”
                              in the biological sciences; in particular, over 77% of research scientists admitted to having
                               tried and failed to repeat another’s laboratory experiment in a recent survey [30,31]. This
                             greatly hinders bioprocess development and the translation of biotechnological advance-
                         ments to industrial processes. In order to assess process repeatability and provide a starting
                            point for the optimization in this study, a previous LRS6 cultivation [8] was repeated. The
                               results of this experiment are summarized in Figure 2.
                        When the LRS6 YPG cultivation was repeated, the ﬁnal OD600 value increased 3.5-fold
                             to 119.6, compared to the previous cultivation under the same conditions [8], as shown
                              in Figure 2A. A signiﬁcant amount of bioﬁlm formation was observed on the surfaces of
                             the probes and agitator within the bioreactor, as shown in Figure 2E. This unusual growth
                       was also highly detrimental to heterologous gene expression, as the maximum total taxane
                                   titer was ﬁve-fold lower than the previous cultivation [8], at just 10.9 mg/L (Figure 2B).
                       The visualization of the cells using oil immersion bight ﬁeld microscopy at the end of the
                                cultivation, revealed a ﬁlamentous morphology (Figure 2D). As the visualization of the cells
                                at 32 h (Figure 2C) revealed the expected budding morphology, the observed morphological
                             aberrations were likely a response to the stress within the bioreactor. Biomass was measured
                            as absorbance at 600 nm, and was therefore inherently sensitive to such changes in the
                               cellular morphology. As the abnormally high OD600 readings observed in Figure 2A
                           occurred in the ﬁnal 48 h, at which point over 80% of the primary carbon source had been
                             depleted, they are likely the result of interference due to cellular elongation.


[PDF physical page 7]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                     6 of 16





                              Figure 2.  MiniBio 500 bioreactor cultivation.  LRS6 was cultivated in the Applikon Minibio
                             500 bioreactors in YPG prepared with yeast extract lot 175915. (A) The temperature (×), pH (o)
                          and dissolved oxygen (+) were monitored and controlled online to the set points of 30 ◦C, 6 and 30%,
                                   respectively. The biomass (⋄) was monitored online using a BE2100 OD scanner (BugLab, Concord,
                         CA, USA). The galactose consumption (□) was monitored ofﬂine via sampling twice daily. (B) Total
                              taxane (o) and diterpenoid 1 (⋄) accumulation was measured via the GCMS analysis of dodecane
                                   extracts of ofﬂine samples. Oil immersion brightﬁeld microscope images taken at 32 h (C) and at the
                           end of the cultivation (D) using a 100× lens. (E) Bioﬁlm formation observed on the bioreactor probes.

                                   3.2. Effect of the Medium on Pseudohyphal Growth in the Minibio 500 Reactor

                              Filamentous growth is a characteristic response to nutrient stress in S. cerevisiae; in
                           haploid cells it is commonly the result of glucose starvation, whilst nitrogen starvation is
                            often the cause in diploid cells [32]. As the parent yeast strain used in this study was a
                           haploid uracil auxotroph derived from CEN.PK2-1C, glucose starvation could be a potential
                           cause of the observed ﬁlamentous growth. However, although sub-optimal carbon sources,
                           including galactose and ethanol, have been shown to enhance ﬁlamentous growth [32],
                         ﬁlamentous growth was not observed in the previous cultivations [8]. In addition, the
                           previous cultivation of the strains at microscale, in YP media supplemented with 0.2% sugar
                               that was ten-fold lower than the 2% sugar added in the bioreactor cultivations, revealed no
                            signs of ﬁlamentous morphology [8]. The nature and concentration of the carbon source
                      was therefore unlikely to be the sole cause of the ﬁlamentous morphology observed.
                              Nitrogen limitation has been commonly reported to induce ﬁlamentous growth in
                            diploid S. cerevisiae cells [20]. Although the cells in this study were haploid, an additional
                               cultivation was performed in which the concentration of the main nitrogen source (peptone)


[PDF physical page 8]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                     7 of 16



                      was doubled to rule out nitrogen limitation as the cause of the nutritional stress response
                          observed in this study, as shown in Figure 3A,B.





                              Figure 3. The 2×P and 2×YP bioreactor cultivation results. The initial concentration of peptone (2×P)
                         and both yeast extract and peptone (2×YP) in the YPG media were doubled in LRS6 cultivations.
                             Temperature (×), pH (o) and dissolved oxygen (⋄) were monitored and controlled online. Biomass (+),
                                galactose (□) and ethanol (∆) concentration were monitored via ofﬂine sampling twice daily for
                       2×P (A) and 2×YP (C) cultivations. The taxane concentration was measured via the GCMS analysis
                                 of dodecane samples taken twice daily for 2×P (B) and 2×YP (D).

                                  Cellular morphology was monitored throughout the cultivations via oil immersion
                             bright ﬁeld microscopy, as summarized in Figure 4. In the 2×P cultivation, the cells were
                           mostly in the budding yeast form in the sample taken at 54 h (Figure 4C); however, by 71 h,
                      some elongation of the cells could be observed (Figure 4D). At this point, over half of the
                         primary carbon source was still available (Figure 3A). By 77 h, substantial pseudohyphae
                          formation was observed (Figure 4E) and the cells remained in the ﬁlamentous formation
                               for the remainder of the cultivation (Figure 4F). Taxane production was detected through
                    GC-MS analysis of the dodecane extracts (Figure 3B); however, the maximum total tax-
                         ane titer was 20 mg/L, almost three-fold lower than that achieved in the previous YPG
                              cultivation [8].
                             Although all cultivation conditions were kept the same as in the previous cultivation,
                             the use of a fresh lot of yeast extract (Fisher Scientiﬁc Loughborough, UK, lot: 175915) was
                            necessary to prepare the YPG media. Yeast extract commonly forms a major component of
                              industrial fermentations [13]; however, lot-to-lot variations in its composition can have a
                         major impact on productivity. Such variations resulted in differences of up to 50% in the
                           accumulation of biomass [14]. Previous work revealed a strong correlation between biomass
                       and taxane accumulation in the S. cerevisiae strain, LRS6 [8]. It was therefore hypothesized
                               that the variations in the yeast extract composition could have contributed to the deviations
                             in the performance observed. A further scoping cultivation was therefore performed, in
                       which the concentration of both the yeast extract (Fisher Scientiﬁc, Loughborough, UK,
                                     lot: 175915) and peptone were doubled. The results of this experiment are summarized in
                           Figure 3C,D.


[PDF physical page 9]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                     8 of 16





                              Figure 4. Microscope images taken during 2×YP and 2×P cultivation. Brightﬁeld images were
                             taken using a 100× oil immersion lens. Image taken from the 2×YP cultivation at 79 (A) and
                             119 (B) hours. Images taken of the samples taken from the 2×P cultivation at 54 (C), 71 (D), 79 (E)
                          and 142 (F) hours, respectively.

                                    Interestingly, when both the initial yeast extract and peptone concentrations were
                          doubled, the total taxane titer improved 5.4-fold to 108 mg/L, as shown in Figure 3D.
                       The cells displayed the expected budding morphology in the samples taken between 0
                       and 77 h (Figure 4A). Morphological aberrations were observed in the ﬁnal 48 h of the
                             culture (Figure 4B); however, in contrast to the previous cultivations (Figures 2 and 3B),
                                this did not inhibit the taxane titers. The maximum titer of the major oxygenated taxane
                        compound, diterpenoid 1 and the critical Taxol intermediates taxadiene and T5αol, were 37,
                          22 and 5 mg/L (Figure 3D), respectively, 1.9-, 2.2- and 1.6-fold higher than those achieved


[PDF physical page 10]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                     9 of 16



                             in the controlled cultivation with the original yeast extract lot [8]. Ethanol production
                      was monitored during this experiment, as shown in Figure 3C. Aerobic fermentation of
                            the galactose occurred between 29 and 71 h with a maximum ethanol titer of 3.2 g/L
                          being reached. After 71 h, the majority of the galactose had been consumed and growth
                         proceeded via aerobic ethanol metabolism. Upon the depletion of the two main carbon
                              sources, a substantial increase in pH and a morphologic switch was observed. An increase
                             in the extracellular pH in the latter stages of cultivation has been associated with the
                              release of highly basic ammonia during amino acid catabolism [33]. Upon the depletion
                              of more preferable nitrogen sources, such as ammonium and glutamine in the cultivation
                       medium, S. cerevisiae will catabolize the less preferable branched chain and aromatic amino
                            acids producing fusel alcohols as by-products [34]. Certain fusel alcohols are known as
                         quorum-sensing molecules in S. cerevisiae, and have an important role in the induction of
                            genes, such as FLO11, which are responsible for morphogenesis in the species [22]. It was
                              therefore hypothesized that the accumulation of certain quorum-sensing molecules could
                         have played a role in the morphological changes observed.

                                   3.3. Quorum Sensing in S. cerevisiae

                           The nitrogen source used in this investigation was peptone from casein (pancreatic
                                digest), which is a rich source of tryptophan with a 2.7-fold higher content than that from
                            the enzymatic digest of animal protein [35]. Interestingly, the quorum-sensing molecule
                            tryptophol, which promotes ﬁlamentous growth, is the product of the assimilation of
                          tryptophan via the Ehrlich pathway [36]. In C. albicans cultures, supplementation of the
                        media with tryptophan was found to increase tryptophol biosynthesis 2.5-fold [37]. The use
                              of casein peptone could have therefore enhanced tryptophol production in the cultivations
                        performed in this study, and contributed to the unusual growth observed; however, as
                       no evidence of high level accumulations of these compounds was detected in the solvent
                                extracts, further investigation is needed to conﬁrm this.
                            The detailed investigation of the dodecane extracts of the bioreactor samples revealed
                            the accumulation of several compounds exclusively during ﬁlamentous growth, as sum-
                         marized in Figure S1. For the 2×P cultivation, the chromatograph was similar to that of
                            the solvent blank (Figure S1A) at 71 h, at the retention times between 3 and 5 min; how-
                               ever, an additional peak was observed at 79 h, at 3.55 min (Figure S1D). This compound
                      showed a high degree of similarity to 5-dodecanol in the NIST mass spectral library. By
                             119.5 h, additional peaks at 3.38, 3.63 and 3.66 min can also be seen (Figure S1E). Through
                          comparison of the corresponding mass spectra, the peaks were identiﬁed by the NIST mass
                              spectral library as 5-dodecaone (72% probability), 2-dodecanone (85% probability) and
                           3-dodecanol (61% probability), respectively. Interestingly, the twelve-carbon alcohol, dode-
                              canol, has been found to inﬂuence cellular morphology in Candida albicans, with a potent
                              inhibitory effect on ﬁlamentous growth through a mechanism involving the transcription
                                 factor, SFL1 [38]. A similar effect was observed when C. albicans was cultivated; in the
                            presence of phenylethanol [22] and isoamyl alcohol [39], ﬁlamentous growth was inhibited.
                           This quorum-sensing effect is opposite to that observed in S. cerevisiae [22,39]. According
                             to recent reports, many alcohols, including dodecanol, have opposing quorum-sensing
                                effects in S. cerevisiae, compared to C. albicans [39]. The exclusive detection of the dode-
                            canol and dodecanone compounds in samples taken from LRS6 cultivations demonstrating
                        pseudohyphal growth, suggests that they could have had a quorum-sensing effect in the
                               cultivations of this study. However, it is worth noting the high similarity of the compounds
                              to the biocompatible solvent, dodecane, which was employed for the in situ liquid–liquid
                             extraction of the taxane products. It is therefore difﬁcult to determine whether the com-
                       pounds were secreted by the yeast or are the result of the reaction of other compounds
                             released by the ﬁlamentous cells with the dodecane overlay, and further study is needed to
                       conﬁrm this.
                           The ﬁlamentous growth of the S. cerevisiae strain LRS6 observed in the MiniBio
                          500 cultivations was highly unusual. Previous studies have found that the growth of


[PDF physical page 11]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                    10 of 16



                       LRS6 was reduced, compared to the LRS5 strain, which was genetically identical to LRS6,
                            except that it did not possess the CYP725A4, CPR and TAT genes responsible for the second
                       and third steps in the Taxol biosynthetic pathway. This suggested that the integration of
                            additional genes resulted in a decreased cellular ﬁtness. In addition, the LRS5 strain was
                             recently found to have a reduced mechanical stress tolerance compared to the wild-type,
                       CEN.PK-1C, strain [40]. In the presence of an in situ solid phase adsorbent resin with a
                             concentration of 12% w/v, the growth of LRS5 was completely inhibited, whilst the growth
                              of the parental CEN.PK-1C was not signiﬁcantly affected, further suggesting that metabolic
                           engineering has a detrimental effect on cellular ﬁtness and stress tolerance. The unusual
                                 stress response observed in this study was therefore likely to have been exacerbated by the
                            reduction in ﬁtness resulting from metabolic engineering.

                                   3.4. Complex Media Optimization
                                   3.4.1. Microscale Media Optimization Using a Deﬁnitive Screening Design

                           The miniBio 500 cultivation results (Figures 2 and 3) indicate that the composition
                       and source of the nutrients in the cultivation broth had a major effect on both cellular
                        morphology and taxane production by LRS6. As a result, a design of experiments guided,
                          high throughput microscale optimization study was performed to screen a wider range of
                        media compositions. An efﬁcient three-level deﬁnitive screening design (DSD) was selected
                               for this study, as this class of experimental design is capable of estimating the main effects
                          without confounding with second order effects in just 2N + 1 runs for N factors. Unlike
                              traditional resolution IV designs, each second order effect is not completely aliased with
                        any other second order effect. In addition, the designs with 6–12 factors were found to be
                            capable of the efﬁcient estimation of all possible full quadratic models involving ≤3 active
                               factors [41]. This has the potential to dramatically reduce time and resource requirements,
                            as it is possible to progress to optimization without further experimentation. A DSD
                             (Table S1) was created to investigate the effect of six key factors on taxane production by
                          LRS6. Based on the initial experiments, the yeast extract lot, along with the concentrations
                              of galactose, yeast extract and peptone, were deemed important factors. A strong positive
                              correlation between biomass and taxane accumulation has also been observed for this
                                strain [8], and the initial biomass concentration was therefore considered. Finally, as LRS6 is
                           a uracil auxotroph and the composition of industrially manufactured yeast extract has been
                        found to be susceptible to deviations in nucleobase availability [13], it was hypothesized
                              that additional uracil supplementation could help alleviate nutritional stress. A DSD was
                            created using JMP Pro 15 (Table S1), to investigate the effect of these six factors on taxane
                            production, the results of this experiment are summarized in Figure 5.
                           Of the 14 media combinations tested, medium one presented the highest total taxane
                                   titer of 229 ± 6 mg/L. Media combinations 11 and 14 also produced high taxane titers
                             of 195 ± 26 and 218 ± 32 mg/L, respectively. Forward stepwise linear regression was
                        performed using JMP Pro 15 statistical software with a p-value to enter of 0.1. A full
                            quadratic analysis was performed, thereby considering all the main effects and any second
                           order interactions. This revealed that initial OD600 (p = 0.011) along with yeast extract
                               (p = 0.028) and galactose concentrations (p = 0.011) were the signiﬁcant main effects. The
                              non-linearity of the effect of initial OD600 (p = 0.007) was also elucidated, a major advantage
                             of using a three-level screening design. According to the statistical model, the optimal
                                   initial yeast extract and galactose concentration was 45 g/L, and initial OD600 had an
                          optimal value of around 0.74 (Figure 6). Increasing the concentration of peptone, and
                            additional uracil supplementation resulted in no signiﬁcant improvement to the taxane
                                       titer. Interestingly, no signiﬁcant difference in the performance was observed due to the
                             deviations in the yeast extract lot at this scale. At the end of the cultivations, the cells were
                             visualized using oil immersion light microscopy and none of the cells exhibited ﬁlamentous
                         morphology, indicating that the phenomenon was not solely due to the initial nutrient
                           composition of the medium. In addition, none of the dodecanol or dodecanone compounds
                        were detected in the dodecane extracts.


[PDF physical page 12]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                    11 of 16





                              Figure 5. Microscale complex media screening results. Final total taxane and biomass titers obtained
                             with each of the 14 media combinations in the BioLector. The values are mean ± standard deviation
                                  for triplicate cultivations.





                              Figure 6. Optimization of taxane production using statistical modeling. The prediction proﬁler in
                       JMP Pro 15 was used to determine the optimal factor combination according to the statistical model.

                               This experiment was conducted using the microscale bioreactor (BioLector Flow-
                                erplates), the unique design of which effectively overcomes oxygen limitation in LRS6
                               cultivations by introducing a bafﬂe-like structure [42]. Although the dissolved oxygen was
                             controlled above 30% in the miniBio 500 reactor through automatic air sparging, oxygen
                               availability was likely reduced compared to the FlowerPlate, in which it remained above
                     80% throughout all cultivations (Figure S2). S. cerevisiae is known to adapt to external


[PDF physical page 13]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                    12 of 16



                        oxygen availability by altering the amount of ﬂux through respiratory and fermentation
                         pathways [43] at a lower oxygen availability ﬂux through respiratory pathways, and, hence,
                          biomass accumulation is reduced and fermentation is increased [43]. In the original miniBio
                           500 cultivation, an OD600 of 21 was reached after 72 h of cultivation, signiﬁcantly lower than
                             the 37 ± 4 achieved in the equivalent microscale cultivation at 72 h [8]. Taxane accumulation
                      was also reduced 1.5-fold at the larger scale [8]. Decreasing the rate of airﬂow from 1 vvm
                               to 0.5 vvm or 0.25 vvm in the bioreactor cultivations was also found to reduce the terpenoid
                                        titer, 1.4-fold and 2.2-fold, in another S. cerevisiae strain [44]. In addition, the production of
                           higher alcohols, including isobutanol and 3-methyl-butanol, which are known to induce
                          ﬁlamentous growth [45], was found to have doubled in cultivations grown under anaerobic
                              conditions, compared to those with higher dissolved oxygen tension [46]. Reduced oxygen
                                availability at an increased scale may have therefore played a role in the observed response.

                                   3.4.2. Validation of Optimized Conditions in Highly Instrumented 1L Bioreactors

                                 In order to validate the optimized complex media elucidated at microscale, LRS6 was
                             cultivated in larger scale 1 L bioreactors. As it was hypothesized that reduced oxygen
                                availability may have played a role in the stress response observed in previous bioreactor
                              cultivations (Figures 2 and 3), a constant airﬂow of 1 vvm was applied at this scale to
                         minimize oxygen limitation. The results of this experiment are summarized in Figure 7.





                              Figure 7. Optimized complex media in 1L BIOSTAT Bioreactor at 30 ◦C. (A) Biomass (∗), ethanol
                                    (∆), DO (⋄), temperature (×), pH (), acetate (–□) and glycerol (–□) production. (B) Total taxane
                              production.  (C) Accumulation of key Taxol intermediates. Biomass and taxane values are the
                        mean ± standard deviation for two bioreactor cultivations. Other parameter values are from one
                                   replicate only.

                            During the ﬁrst 21 h, an initial growth phase was observed in which the OD600
                            increased from 0.7 to 15.2 (Figure 7A). This was not coupled with ethanol production,
                       and the respiratory quotient (RQ) was close to unity at 1.2. This may have therefore been
                       due to the aerobic respiration of more favorable carbon sources present in the complex
                     medium used. Respiratory-fermentative catabolism of the galactose occurred between
                          30 and 50 h, with a maximum ethanol concentration of 7.83 g/L. Acetate and glycerol
                        were also produced with the maximum concentrations of 1.05 and 1.97 g/L, respectively.
                           Following the depletion of galactose, the aerobic respiration of ethanol and acetate occurred
                         between 50 and 72 h. At 72 h, all metabolizable carbon sources had been consumed and the
                              stationary phase of growth was reached with an OD600 of 43.8.


[PDF physical page 14]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                    13 of 16



                                 In the GC-MS extracts, 10 diterpene products resulting from the heterologous expres-
                             sion of TASY were detected. The main diterpene product was taxadiene, with a maximum
                                     titer of 71 ± 8 mg/L observed at a cultivation time of 95 h (Figure 7B). The structural isomer,
                             Iso-taxadiene [47], the known side-product verticilliene [47], and previously observed diter-
                         pene 1 [7,8], were also detected with maximum titers of 9 ± 1.7, 11 ± 0.1 and 12 ± 1 mg/L,
                               respectively. An additional 6 compounds with a molecular ion peak of m/z = 272 were
                             detected. A further 12 diterpenoid products of the CYP725A4 and TAT enzymes were ob-
                             served. The major CYP725A4 product was the previously identiﬁed potential T5αol isomer,
                            diterpenoid 1 [8,48], with a maximum titer of 97 ± 2 mg/L; Iso-OCT, OCT and T5αol were
                              also detected with titers of 16 ± 3, 44 ± 3 and 42 ± 4 mg/L, respectively. The desired TAT
                           product, T5αAc, was detected with a maximum titer of 21 ± 0.3 mg/L, representing an
                          almost 6-fold improvement, compared to the previous literature [8]. An additional com-
                      pound with a molecular ion peak of m/z = 304, equivalent to taxadiene (Mr = 272 g/mol)
                           plus O2 (Mr = 32 g/mol), and a base peak of m/z = 245, was also produced with a maxi-
                mum titer of 11 ± 5 mg/L. The mass spectrum of this compound was similar to that of a
                             taxadiendiol that was produced as a result of the heterologous expression of CYP725A4 in
                              E. coli [6]. An additional six unknown diterpenoid products were also detected. The total
                           taxane titer was 387 ± 6 mg/L, representing a 1.7-fold improvement compared with that
                           predicted by the statistical model (Figure 6). The endogenous side-product, GGOH, was
                              also produced, along with a small quantity (~1 mg/L) of GGAc, resulting from acetylation
                        by TAT.
                               Brightﬁeld microscopy revealed no signs of ﬁlamentous growth throughout the 1L
                              cultivations with the optimized media combination. In addition, none of the dodecanol
                           or dodecanone compounds were detected in the solvent extracts, suggesting that the
                     medium optimization successfully alleviated the nutritional stress and maximized taxane
                          production by LRS6. However, as the observed stress response was likely multifactorial,
                              further investigation is needed to fully characterize it and ensure the optimal performance
                              of the engineered strain.

                                   4. Conclusions

                                 Batch-to-batch variation in the yeast extract composition was found to trigger nutri-
                              tional stress in the S. cerevisiae strain, LRS6. Profound changes in the cellular morphol-
                       ogy accompanied with bioﬁlm formation was observed in YPG MiniBio 500 cultivations,
                            severely hindering heterologous taxane production. Through doubling the initial yeast
                              extract and peptone concentration (2×YP), ﬁlamentous growth was delayed and taxane
                          accumulation improved to 108 mg/L. By coupling a statistical deﬁnitive screening design
                         approach with the state-of-the-art, highly oxygenated microscale bioreactors, the total tax-
                         ane titers were improved a further two-fold, compared to the 2×YP culture, to 229 mg/L.
                          Filamentous growth was absent in the microscale cultivations, which conﬁrmed that the
                            deviations in the nutrient composition were not solely responsible for the phenomenon.
                       The optimal conditions elucidated at microscale were validated in the 1L BIOSTAT culti-
                             vations. The production of the key Taxol precursors, T5αAc, was improved two-fold to
                          22 mg/L, compared to the previous maxima for the strain. The results highlighted the
                          importance of maximizing process insight in the earliest stages of bioprocess development
                               for effective optimization and scale-up. Although the sensitivity of the engineered strain to
                             external processing conditions has been recognized in recent studies, here it was found to
                         be more severe and less predictable than previously anticipated. Whilst deﬁned media is
                                 likely to ensure more reliable taxane production, further investigation into the mechanisms
                         behind ﬁlamentous growth are likely to prove beneﬁcial to robust bioprocess optimiza-
                                tion. Furthermore, as alcohols, including ethanol, the fermentation product, are major
                               stress factors, future work should focus on minimizing their accumulation. This can be
                          achieved through transitioning the mode of operation from batch to fed-batch through
                            feeding the substrate at the rate of uptake, accumulation can be minimized and the overﬂow
                         metabolism circumvented.


[PDF physical page 15]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                    14 of 16




                           Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/
                             10.3390/microorganisms10010163/s1, Figure S1: Gas chromatographs resulting from solvent extracts
                             taken from the 2×YP and 2×P cultivations. Figure S2: Online BioLector data. Table S1: Deﬁnitive
                               screening experimental design used to optimize taxane production at microscale.

                           Author Contributions: Conceptualization, L.E.W. and L.R.-S.; methodology, L.E.W.; validation,
                                L.E.W.; formal analysis, L.E.W.; investigation, L.E.W.; resources, L.R.-S. and J.L.M.; data curation,
                                 L.E.W.; writing—original draft preparation, L.E.W.; writing—review and editing, L.E.W., J.L.M. and
                                     L.R.-S.; visualization, L.E.W.; supervision, L.R.-S. and J.L.M.; funding acquisition, L.R.-S. and J.L.M.
                                All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

                            Funding: This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
                              (Grant number EP/R513209/1), the Royal Society (Grant Number RSG\R1\180345), The British
                             Council (Grant Number: 527429894) and the Novo Nordisk Foundation, within the frame of the
                             Fermentation Based Biomanufacturing initiative (Grant Number: NNF17SA0031362).

                                 Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

                           Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

                           Data Availability Statement: Data available in supplementary information upon request.

                          Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Stuart Martin and Mark Lauchlan at the School
                                  of Engineering, University of Edinburgh, UK and Aaron John Christian Andersen and Mette Amfelt at
                                the DTU Metabolomics Core, DTU, Denmark for their kind assistance and technical support with the
                      GC-MS analysis. Thanks to Tina Johansen and Pablo Torres Montero at the DTU Fermentation Core,
                        DTU, Denmark for their assistance with the BIOSTAT cultivations and HPLC analyses. Thanks to
                                 Phil Baran’s Lab at The Scripps Research Institute, San Diego, California for providing the taxadiene
                               standard. Thanks to the Edinburgh Genome Foundry at the University of Edinburgh for providing
                                access to the BioLector platform.

                             Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
                                 of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or
                                 in the decision to publish the results.

References

1.    Jinek, M.; Chylinski, K.; Fonfara, I.; Hauer, M.; Doudna, J.A.; Charpentier, E. A Programmable Dual-RNA–Guided DNA
     Endonuclease in Adaptive Bacterial Immunity. Science 2012, 337, 816–821. [CrossRef]
2.    Malcı, K.; Walls, L.E.; Rios-Solis, L. Multiplex Genome Engineering Methods for Yeast Cell Factory Development. Front. Bioeng.
      Biotechnol. 2020, 8, 1264. [CrossRef]
3.   Wong, J.; de Rond, T.; d’Espaux, L.; van der Horst, C.; Dev, I.; Rios-Solis, L.; Kirby, J.; Scheller, H.; Keasling, J. High-titer production
     of lathyrane diterpenoids from sugar by engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Metab. Eng. 2018, 45, 142–148. [CrossRef]
4.   Wong,  J.; Rios-Solis, L.; Keasling, J.D. Microbial Production of Isoprenoids.  In Consequences of Microbial Interactions with
     Hydrocarbons, Oils, and Lipids: Production of Fuels and Chemicals; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2016; pp. 1–24.
5.   Ajikumar, P.K.; Xiao, W.-H.; Tyo, K.E.J.; Wang, Y.; Simeon, F.; Leonard, E.; Mucha, O.; Phon, T.H.; Pfeifer, B.; Stephanopoulos, G.
     Isoprenoid pathway optimization for Taxol precursor overproduction in Escherichia coli. Science 2010, 330, 70–74. [CrossRef]
6.    Biggs, B.W.; Lim, C.G.; Sagliani, K.; Shankar, S.; Stephanopoulos, G.; De Mey, M.; Ajikumar, P.K. Overcoming heterologous
     protein interdependency to optimize P450-mediated Taxol precursor synthesis in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016,
     113, 3209–3214. [CrossRef]
7.   Nowrouzi, B.; Li, R.A.; Walls, L.E.; d’Espaux, L.; Malcı, K.; Lungang, L.; Borrego, N.J.; Escalera, A.; Morones-Ramirez, J.R.;
     Keasling, J.; et al. Enhanced production of taxadiene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microb. Cell Fact. 2020, 19, 200. [CrossRef]
8.    Walls, L.E.; Malcı, K.; Nowrouzi, B.; Li, R.A.; d’Espaux, L.; Wong, J.; Dennis, J.A.; Semião, A.J.C.; Wallace, S.; Martinez, J.L.; et al.
     Optimizing the biosynthesis of oxygenated and acetylated Taxol precursors in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using advanced
     bioprocessing strategies. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2021, 118, 279–293. [CrossRef]
9.   Edgar, S.; Zhou, K.; Qiao, K.; King, J.R.; Simpson, J.H.; Stephanopoulos, G. Mechanistic Insights into Taxadiene Epoxidation by
     Taxadiene-5α-Hydroxylase. ACS Chem. Biol. 2016, 11, 460–469. [CrossRef]
10.   Dietrich, J.A.; McKee, A.E.; Keasling, J.D. High-Throughput Metabolic Engineering: Advances in Small-Molecule Screening and
      Selection. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 2010, 79, 563–590. [CrossRef]
11.  Nowrouzi, B.; Rios-Solis, L. Redox metabolism for improving whole-cell P450-catalysed terpenoid biosynthesis. Crit. Rev.
      Biotechnol. 2021, 1–25. [CrossRef]


[PDF physical page 16]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                    15 of 16




12.  Stanbury, P.F.; Whitaker, A.; Hall, S.J. Chapter 4—Media for industrial fermentations. In Principles of Fermentation Technology,
     3rd ed.; Stanbury, P.F., Whitaker, A., Hall, S.J., Eds.; Butterworth-Heinemann: Oxford, UK, 2017; pp. 213–272, ISBN 978-0-08-
     099953-1.
13.  Zhang, J.; Reddy, J.; Buckland, B.; Greasham, R. Toward consistent and productive complex media for industrial fermentations:
     Studies on yeast extract for a recombinant yeast fermentation process. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2003, 82, 640–652. [CrossRef]
14.   Potvin, J.; Fonchy, E.; Conway, J.; Champagne, C.P. An automatic turbidimetric method to screen yeast extracts as fermentation
     nutrient ingredients. J. Microbiol. Methods 1997, 29, 153–160. [CrossRef]
15.  Wilk, P.; Halim, M.; Rios-Solis, L. Recent Advances and Impacts of Microtiter Plate-Based Fermentations in Synthetic Biology
    and Bioprocess Development. In Fermentation Microbiology and Biotechnology, 4th ed.; El-Mansi, E.M.T., Nielsen, J., Mousdale, D.,
     Carlson, R.P., Eds.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2019; p. 14.
16.  Theodoropoulos, C.; Sun, C. 2.45–Bioreactor Models and Modeling Approaches. In Comprehensive Biotechnology, 3rd ed.; Moo-
     Young, M.B.T., Ed.; Pergamon: Oxford, UK, 2019; pp. 663–680, ISBN 978-0-444-64047-5.
17.  Smets, B.; Ghillebert, R.; De Snijder, P.; Binda, M.; Swinnen, E.; De Virgilio, C.; Winderickx, J. Life in the midst of scarcity:
     Adaptations to nutrient availability in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Curr. Genet. 2010, 56, 1–32. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.   Cullen, P.J.; Sprague, G.F., Jr. The Regulation of Filamentous Growth in Yeast. Genetics 2012, 190, 23–49. [CrossRef]
19.   Pothoulakis, G.; Ellis, T. Synthetic gene regulation for independent external induction of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae pseudohy-
     phal growth phenotype. Commun. Biol. 2018, 1, 7. [CrossRef]
20.  Song, Q.; Kumar, A. An Overview of Autophagy and Yeast Pseudohyphal Growth: Integration of Signaling Pathways during
     Nitrogen Stress. Cells 2012, 1, 263–283. [CrossRef]
21.  Lorenz, M.C.; Cutler, N.S.; Heitman, J. Characterization of Alcohol-induced Filamentous Growth inSaccharomyces cerevisiae.
     Mol. Biol. Cell 2000, 11, 183–199. [CrossRef]
22.  Chen, H.; Fink, G.R. Feedback control of morphogenesis in fungi by aromatic alcohols. Genes Dev. 2006, 20, 1150–1161. [CrossRef]
23.  Hogan, D.A. Talking to Themselves: Autoregulation and Quorum Sensing in Fungi. Eukaryot. Cell 2006, 5, 613–619. [CrossRef]
24.  Hornby, J.M.; Jensen, E.C.; Lisec, A.D.; Tasto, J.J.; Jahnke, B.; Shoemaker, R.; Dussault, P.; Nickerson, K.W. Quorum Sensing in the
    Dimorphic Fungus Candida albicans Is Mediated by Farnesol. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2001, 67, 2982–2992. [CrossRef]
25.  Funke, M.; Buchenauer, A.; Schnakenberg, U.; Mokwa, W.; Diederichs, S.; Mertens, A.; Müller, C.; Kensy, F.; Büchs, J. Microﬂuidic
     biolector—microﬂuidic bioprocess control in microtiter plates. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2010, 107, 497–505. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.   Beal,  J.; Goñi-Moreno, A.; Myers, C.; Hecht, A.; de Vicente, M.d.C.; Parco, M.; Schmidt, M.; Timmis, K.; Baldwin, G.;
      Friedrichs, S.; et al. The long journey towards standards for engineering biosystems. EMBO Rep. 2020, 21, e50521. [Cross-
     Ref] [PubMed]
27.   Miller, G.L. Use of Dinitrosalicylic Acid Reagent for Determination of Reducing Sugar. Anal. Chem. 1959, 31, 426–428. [CrossRef]
28.  Reider Apel, A.; Sachs, D.; Tong, G.J.; D’Espaux, L.; Wehrs, M.; Garber, M.; Nnadi, O.; Mukhopadhyay, A.; Keasling, J.D.; Hillson,
      N.J.; et al. A Cas9-based toolkit to program gene expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016, 45, 496–508.
     [CrossRef]
29.   Jones, B.; Nachtsheim, C.J. Deﬁnitive Screening Designs with Added Two-Level Categorical Factors. J. Qual. Technol. 2013, 45,
     121–129. [CrossRef]
30.   Baker, M. 1500 scientists lift the lid on reproducibility. Nature 2016, 533, 452–454. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.   Jessop-Fabre, M.M.; Sonnenschein, N. Improving Reproducibility in Synthetic Biology. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2019, 7, 18.
     [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.   Palecek, S.P.; Parikh, A.S.; Huh, J.H.; Kron, S.J. Depression of Saccharomyces cerevisiae invasive growth on non-glucose carbon
     sources requires the Snf1 kinase. Mol. Microbiol. 2002, 45, 453–469. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.  Palková, Z.; Janderová, B.; Gabriel, J.; Zikánová, B.; Pospíˆsek, M.; Forstová, J. Ammonia mediates communication between yeast
      colonies. Nature 1997, 390, 532–536. [CrossRef]
34.  Dickinson, J.R. Filament formation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae—A review. Folia Microbiol. 2008, 53, 3. [CrossRef]
35.  BD Biosciences. BionutrientsTM Technical Manual; BD Biosciences: Miami, FL, USA, 2006.
36.  Hazelwood, L.A.; Daran, J.-M.; van Maris, A.J.A.; Pronk, J.T.; Dickinson, J.R. The Ehrlich pathway for fusel alcohol production: A
     century of research on Saccharomyces cerevisiae metabolism. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2008, 74, 2259–2266. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37.  Ghosh, S.; Kebaara, B.W.; Atkin, A.L.; Nickerson, K.W. Regulation of aromatic alcohol production in Candida albicans. Appl.
     Environ. Microbiol. 2008, 74, 7211–7218. [CrossRef]
38.   Hall, R.A.; Turner, K.J.; James, C.; Fabien, C.; Luisa, D.S.; Dominique, S.; Levin, L.R.; Jochen, B.; Mühlschlegel, F.A. The Quorum-
     Sensing Molecules Farnesol/Homoserine Lactone and Dodecanol Operate via Distinct Modes of Action in Candida albicans.
     Eukaryot. Cell 2011, 10, 1034–1042. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.  Chauhan, N.M.; Mohan Karuppayil, S. Dual identities for various alcohols in two different yeasts. Mycology 2021, 12, 25–38.
     [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.  Santoyo-Garcia, J.H.; Walls, L.E.; Nowrouzi, B.; Ochoa-Villareal, M.; Loake, G.J.; Dimartino, S.; Rios-Solis, L. In situ solid-liquid
     extraction enhances recovery of taxadiene from engineered S. cerevisiae cell factories. bioRxiv 2021. [CrossRef]
41.   Jones, B.; Nachtsheim, C.J. A Class of Three-Level Designs for Deﬁnitive Screening in the Presence of Second-Order Effects. J.
     Qual. Technol. 2011, 43, 1–15. [CrossRef]


[PDF physical page 17]
Microorganisms 2022, 10, 163                                                                                                    16 of 16




42.  Funke, M.; Diederichs, S.; Kensy, F.; Müller, C.; Büchs, J. The bafﬂed microtiter plate: Increased oxygen transfer and improved
     online monitoring in small scale fermentations. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2009, 103, 1118–1128. [CrossRef]
43.   Jouhten, P.; Rintala, E.; Huuskonen, A.; Tamminen, A.; Toivari, M.; Wiebe, M.; Ruohonen, L.; Penttilä, M.; Maaheimo, H. Oxygen
    dependence of metabolic ﬂuxes and energy generation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae CEN.PK113-1A. BMC Syst. Biol. 2008, 2, 60.
     [CrossRef]
44.  Ding, M.; Yan, H.; Li, L.; Zhai, F.; Shang, L.; Yin, Z.; Yuan, Y. Biosynthesis of Taxadiene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: Selection of
     Geranylgeranyl Diphosphate Synthase Directed by a Computer-Aided Docking Strategy. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e109348. [CrossRef]
45.  Egbe, N.E.; Dornelles, T.O.; Paget, C.M.; Castelli, L.M.; Ashe, M.P. Farnesol inhibits translation to limit growth and ﬁlamentation
     in C. albicans and S. cerevisiae. Microb. Cell 2017, 4, 294–304. [CrossRef]
46.  Cowland, T.W.; Maule, D.R. SOME EFFECTS OF AERATION ON THE GROWTH AND METABOLISM OF SACCHAROMYCES
    CEREVISIAE IN CONTINUOUS CULTURE. J. Inst. Brew. 1966, 72, 480–488. [CrossRef]
47.  Sagwan-Barkdoll, L.; Anterola, A.M. Taxadiene-5α-ol is a minor product of CYP725A4 when expressed in Escherichia coli.
      Biotechnol. Appl. Biochem. 2018, 65, 294–305. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.   Walls, L.E.; Martinez, J.L.; del Rio Chanona, E.A.; Solis, L.R. Deﬁnitive screening for accelerated Taxol biosynthetic pathway
     optimization and scale up in Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell factories. Biotechnol. J. 2021, e2100414. [CrossRef] [PubMed]