
[PDF physical page 1]
Phytochemistry Reviews (2006) 5: 75–97                                                                          Springer 2006
DOI: 10.1007/s11101-005-3748-2


Taxol biosynthesis and molecular genetics


Rodney Croteau*, Raymond E. B. Ketchum, Robert M. Long, Ru¨diger Kaspera
& Mark R. Wildung
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, 99164-6340, USA; *Author
for correspondence (Tel: +1-509-335-1790; Fax: +1-509-335-7643; E-mail: croteau@wsu.edu)



Key words: baccatin, cytochrome P450 taxoid hydroxylases, paclitaxel, Taxaceae, taxadiene synthase,
taxane diterpenoids, taxoid acyl transferases, taxoids, Taxol, Taxus, yew.



Abstract

Biosynthesis of the anticancer drug Taxol in Taxus (yew) species involves 19 steps from the universal
diterpenoid progenitor geranylgeranyl diphosphate derived by the plastidial methyl erythritol phosphate
pathway for isoprenoid precursor supply. Following the committed cyclization to the taxane skeleton, eight
cytochrome P450-mediated oxygenations, three CoA-dependent acyl/aroyl transfers, an oxidation at C9,
and oxetane (D-ring) formation yield the intermediate baccatin III, to which the functionally important
C13-side chain is appended in ﬁve additional steps. To gain further insight about Taxol biosynthesis
relevant to the improved production of this drug, and to draw inferences about the organization, regula-
tion, and origins of this complex natural product pathway, Taxus suspension cells (induced for taxoid
biosynthesis by methyl jasmonate) were used for feeding studies, as the foundation for cell-free enzymology
and as the source of transcripts for cDNA library construction and a variety of cloning strategies. This
approach has led to the elucidation of early and late pathway segments, the isolation and characterization
of over half of the pathway enzymes and their corresponding genes, and the identiﬁcation of candidate
cDNAs for the remaining pathway steps, and  it has provided many promising targets for genetically
engineering more eﬃcient biosynthetic production of Taxol and its precursors.

Abbreviations: DD-RT-PCR – diﬀerential display of mRNA-reverse transcription-polymerase chain reac-
tion; DMAPP – dimethylallyl diphosphate; DXP – 1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate; EST – expressed se-
quence tags; GGPP – geranylgeranyl diphosphate; GGPPS – geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase; IPP –
isopentenyl diphosphate; IPPI – isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase; MEP – 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol phos-
phate; NMR – nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy; PAM – phenylalanine aminomutase;
TS – taxadiene synthase.



Taxol, arguably the most successful anti-cancer    yew Taxus brevifolia (the harvest was destructive,
drug of all time, was structurally deﬁned by Wall     the puriﬁcation was complicated, and the yields
and Wani and their colleagues in 1971 (Wani et al.,     were low but, conversely, the politics of supply
1971) and gained ﬁrst marketing approval from     were exceedingly abundant (Goodman and Walsh,
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the      2001)), coupled to formulation problems due to
treatment of refractory ovarian cancer in 1992 and     the very hydrophobic nature of this diterpenoid
metastatic breast cancer in 1994 (Suﬀness and     natural product and concerns about side eﬀects
Wall, 1995). The very long development time for     (Arbuck and Blaylock, 1995). Were it not for the
this drug was a consequence of limited supply     encouragement of Matt Suﬀness and others at the
from the original source, the bark of the Paciﬁc     National Cancer Institute (Wall and Wani, 1995;


[PDF physical page 2]
76

Rowinsky, 1997), the discovery of the novel mode       The supply of Taxol and  its precursors for
of action of Taxol in binding b-tubulin to promote      semi-synthesis  will continue for the foreseeable
microtubule assembly and disrupt mitosis (Schiﬀ      future to rely upon biological methods of produc-
et al., 1979) and, ultimately, the eﬀorts of many      tion, involving intact Taxus plants (Croom, 1995;
clinical scientists in developing suitable formula-     Kikuchi and Yatagai, 2003) for which there remain
tions and treatment regimes (Adams et al., 1993;    some concerns about sustainable harvest (Rikhari
Straubinger, 1995), this plant-derived drug and its      et  al., 1998) or  cell cultures derived therefrom
relatives would not likely have achieved its present     (Gibson et al., 1995; Takeya, 2003) which have now
commercial success as the world’s leading anti-     been shown to be commercially viable (Tabata,
cancer agent (estimated annual  sales exceeding      2004). Improving the biological production yields
three billion USD worldwide).                        of Taxol depends critically upon a detailed under-
   Taxol  (generic name  paclitaxel;  Figure 1)1     standing of the relevant biosynthetic pathway(s),
entered the generic drug market with much fanfare     the enzymes that catalyze the sequence of reactions,
and some controversy in 2000 (Walsh and Good-      especially the slow steps, and the genes encoding
man, 2002), and is now largely produced by Taxus      these enzymes, because only this approach can
cell culture methods (reviewed in Tabata, 2004)      usefully guide eﬀorts to increase yield by classical
or by semi-synthetic means (reviewed in Wuts,      genetic manipulation or by molecular engineering
1998) from advanced precursors (e.g., baccatin III)     of the producing organism.
that are more readily available from the needles of
various yew species as a renewable resource. The      Biogenetic considerations
closely  related  drug  Taxotere  (generic  name
docetaxel; Figure 1) is prepared semi-synthetically     Taxol is but one of the structurally more complex
from 10-deacetyl baccatin III. Several elegant total      representatives of the approximately 400 deﬁned
syntheses of Taxol have been devised (reviewed in     taxoids (i.e., taxane diterpenoids) of Taxus species
Kingston  et  al., 2002; Xiao  et  al., 2003), but     (Baloglu and Kingston, 1999; Itokawa, 2003), all
this approach is not commercially viable due to     of which are based upon the unique taxane (pen-
low yield and high cost considerations. With the     tamethyl [9.3.1.0]3,8 tricyclopentadecane) skeleton
increasing utilization of Taxol for the treatment of      (see Figure 2) or rearrangement products of this
additional cancer types and other human diseases,      tricyclic scaﬀold (i.e., the abeo-taxoids derived by
for  application much  earlier  in  the course  of     rearrangement at the A/B or B/C ring junctures).
intervention, for combination therapies with other    The taxane nucleus bears three stereocenters and
antineoplastic agents (e.g., with anthracyclines and     Taxol itself bears 11 such centers, the large number
platinum compounds) (Goldspiel, 1997; Brown,     of possible stereoisomers aﬀording some appreci-
2003), and as the platform for the development of     ation of the diﬃculty of Taxol total syntheses.
the next generation of more eﬃcacious drugs and       The rationale for the biosynthesis of such a vast
prodrugs (Wang et al., 2003), the market for Taxol     assortment of structurally diverse taxoids by Taxus
and its congeners is expected to expand by three-      species is unknown. A small number of these 400 or
fold within the next 4 years (McCoy, 2004). Drug     so taxoid metabolites are almost certainly relevant
sourcing and patient treatment costs will clearly     Taxol intermediates (the pathway to Taxol is con-
remain important issues.                               sidered to involve 19 steps from primary plant
                                                metabolism (Jennewein et al., 2004b)). Many oth-
                                                            ers may simply  represent the consequences of
     1                                             promiscuous oxygenase and acyltransferase activ-
      Paclitaxel is the generic name for Taxol, which is now a
                                                                         ities, several likely play a role in plant defense inregistered trademark of Bristol-Myers Squibb. Because of the
greater familiarity with the word Taxol, we use it here instead of     possessing antifeedant (Daniewski et al., 1998) or
paclitaxel. The full systematic name of this natural product, from      antibiotic activity (Young et al., 1992; Elmer et al.,
the 11th edition of the Merck Index, is [2aR-[2aa; 4b, 4ab; :6b,      1994), and others are toxic to mammals (Odgen,
9aðaR  ; bS  Þ; 11a; 12a; 12aa; 12ba]]-b  (benzoylamino)  a-hy-      1988). What is clear is that Taxus species, both
droxybenzenepropanoic  acid  6,12b-bis-(acetyloxy)-12-(ben-
                                                           intact plants and derived cell cultures (Ketchum etzoyloxy)-2a,3,4,4a,5,6,9,10,11,12,12a,12b-dodecahydro-4,
11-dihydroxy-4a,8,13,13-tetramethyl-5-oxo-7,11-methano-1       al., 2003), direct considerable pathway ﬂux to the
H-cyclodeca[3,4]benz[1,2-b]oxet-9-yl ester.                    production of taxoids other than Taxol, and that


[PDF physical page 3]
                                                                                         77





Figure 1. Structures of Taxol, the related semi-synthetic drug Taxotere, and their respective precursors. Ac and Bz denote acetyl
and benzoyl groups, respectively. The taxane A ring in this ﬁgure is illustrated as found in much of the earlier literature. Sub-
sequent renderings illustrate the A ring as suggested by Kingston et al. (1993) to more accurately depict the 16b- and 17a-methyl
groups.



any approach to improving the production yields      reactions almost certainly intervene en route to the
of Taxol and its immediate precursors must take     hypothetical heptaol intermediate (Figure 2), and
into  account  these numerous and  apparently     the order of oxygenation deduced may be some-
diversionary taxoid biosynthetic side-routes and     what biased by inclusion in the survey of taxoid
dead-ends.                                            metabolites most unlikely to reside on the path-
   The biogenesis of Taxol (Figure 2) can be con-     way(s) to Taxol (e.g., 14b-hydroxy taxoids and 13-
ceptually divided into several discrete processes,      acetyl derivatives).
the ﬁrst being the construction of the taxane skel-         Several more auxiliary reactions are required to
eton that is followed by the addition of eight oxy-     reach baccatin III, including an oxidation at C9 to
gen functional groups to the core. Not surprisingly,     the ketone function and the formation of the
these added functions have been shown to arise via     oxetane (D  ring), both processes of which are
atmospheric O2 (Eisenreich et al., 1998) indicating     thought to occur late in the pathway (Figure 2).
that the reactions involved are indeed oxygenations     Several proposals based on sound chemical rea-
and not double bond hydrations. Two acetylations     soning have been put forward for construction of
and a benzoylation (at C2) decorate the oxygena-     the oxetane (reviewed in Floss and Mocek, 1995;
ted intermediate. Based on a survey of the posi-      see also Giner and Faraldos, 2003), all involving
tional frequency of oxygen functional groups in the     the progression from the 4,20-ene-5a-oxy func-
extant taxoids, Floss and Mocek (1995) have pro-      tional grouping to the 4b,20-epoxide-5a-oxy group
posed the order of oxygenation of the taxane core     to the oxetane (i.e., ring expansion of the C4,C20-
to be C5 and C10, followed by C2 and C9, then C13     epoxide to the C4,C20-O-C5 oxetane).
followed by C7, and ﬁnally C1 hydroxylation       The ﬁnal steps of the pathway likely involve the
which occurs very late in the pathway. Acylation     assembly  of  the  C13-side  chain appended  to


[PDF physical page 4]
78





Figure 2. Overview of the Taxol biosynthetic pathway. The boxed MEP Pathway is the plastidial route from pyruvate and glycer-
aldehyde 3-phosphate (via methylerythritol phosphate) for C5 (IPP and DMAPP) precursor supply. The abbreviations are: IPP,
isopentenyl diphosphate; DMAPP, dimethylallyl diphosphate; IPPI, isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase; GGPPS, geranylgeranyl
diphosphate synthase; TS, taxadiene synthase; and PAM, phenylalanine aminomutase. OPP denotes the diphosphate moiety; Ac
and Bz denote acetyl and benzoyl groups, respectively. Because the relative order of C1 hydroxylation and oxetane formation is
uncertain, the hypothetical intermediate illustrated could be at the level of an acylated hexaol rather than a heptaol bearing the C1
hydroxyl.


baccatin III. Little by way of chemical inference     or taxol C (N-hexanoyl). The N-benzoyl phenyl-
can be said about this process, except that the last      isoserine C13-side chain, the acetate at C4, the
step may be the N-benzoylation to Taxol; related     benzoate group at C2, the oxetane ring, and the
reactions would aﬀord cephalomannine (N-tigloyl)     cup-shaped taxane core  itself are  all important


[PDF physical page 5]
                                                                                         79

structural  elements  contributing  to  the  Taxol     and that is free of the environmental and political
pharmacophore for tubulin binding (Georg et al.,      issues which may attend tissue collection (Cragg
1995; Kingston,  1995;  Jime´nez-Barbero  et  al.,      et al., 1993; Rikhari et al., 1998; Goodman and
2002; Wang et al., 2003); the bioactive conforma-     Walsh, 2001), and that also has the potential for
tion of Taxol bound to b-tubulin has recently been     molecular genetic manipulation of taxoid compo-
described (Ganesh et al., 2004).                          sition and yield with relatively short development
   In this paper, we employ this descriptive out-      times.
line of Taxol biosynthesis (Figure 2) to review,         All Taxus  species produce Taxol (Itokawa,
in approximate sequence and with some personal     2003) and, although the mixture of taxoids accu-
accounting, the deﬁned pathway steps, enzymes     mulated can vary widely between species (and
and structural genes of Taxol formation, with     between tissues of the same species), the basic taxoid
attention, where  possible,  to  related  organiza-      biosynthetic pathways are thought to be universal
tional, regulatory, and evolutionary features of the      in the genus. It was once considered that all Taxus
pathway, and with equal emphasis on those as-      species may be  subspecies  of T. baccata  (the
pects of Taxol metabolism that are still unknown.     European yew) (see, for example, the discussion in
Progress in this research area was last brieﬂy re-      Hartzell (1991) based on the early work of Pilger
viewed in 2001 (Jennewein and Croteau, 2001;      (1903)); however, more  recent molecular  taxa-
Walker and Croteau, 2001).                       nomic evidence (Collins et al., 2003) has demon-
                                                         strated the existence of at least several distinct, but
                                                     very closely related, species. Limited biochemical
                                                     evidence indicates that the pathways and enzymes
Experimental systems                                  of Taxol biosynthesis are indistinguishable be-
                                                tween Taxus species but, more tellingly, perusal of
Signiﬁcant early work, including feeding experi-    GenBank for acquisitions, for example, of tax-
ments and time-course studies, cell-free enzymol-     adiene synthase (TS), taxoid 10b-hydroxylase, or
ogy, cDNA library construction and pathway gene     taxadien-5a-ol-O-acetyl transferase from diﬀerent
cloning (Hezari et al., 1995; Koepp et al., 1995;     Taxus species (for the signiﬁcance of these en-
Hefner et al., 1996; Wildung and Croteau, 1996),     zymes, see below) indicates that these genes are
was conducted using mature Taxus plants as a     nearly identical (>95%I). This essential identity at
tissue source. The forests of northern Idaho oﬀer     the molecular level has permitted switching be-
nearly limitless biomass of T. brevifolia and a very     tween the various available Taxus species (both
scenic environment; however, the logistics of such      intact tissue and cell cultures) in pursuit of the
research in the forest setting coupled to seasonal     enzymology and molecular genetics underlying the
variation in co-worker enthusiasm (particularly     pathway and  its induction, as well as composi-
during the winter) rapidly brought this approach      tional and developmental  variations,  with  the
to a halt. Taxus saplings raised in the greenhouse     expectation that broad, generally applicable con-
oﬀer an alternative source material but imma-      clusions about taxoid metabolism in the genus can
ture plants,  like their mature counterparts, are     be drawn.
slow-growing, phenolic-laden, woody (stems) or
oleaginous (needles), and thus hardly ideal for
biochemical or molecular biological study. With     Precursor supply and early pathway steps
the development of Taxol-producing Taxus  cell
cultures (Gibson et al., 1995), an immediate switch    The diterpenoid taxane core  is derived via the
was made to this experimental system. Taxus cell      plastidial 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol phosphate (MEP)
suspension  cultures,  especially  those  that  are     pathway which supplies the C5 isoprenoid precursors
inducible with methyl jasmonate  for increased     isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP, three units are re-
taxoid production (Ketchum  et  al., 1999), are     quired) and dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP,
highly amenable to biochemical and molecular     one starter unit is required) (Eisenreich et al., 1996).
study. The approach also oﬀers a viable commer-      Partial  sequencing  of  nearly 8500 anonymous
cial production platform for the pharmaceutical   cDNA clones from a methyl jasmonate-induced
industry that is more controllable (Tabata, 2004)     T. cuspidata cell library (Schoendorf et al., 2001)


[PDF physical page 6]
80

revealed (Jennewein et al., 2004b) at least one EST      surprisingly  given  the  phylogenetic  distance
encoding each of the seven enzymes of the plastidial     between this ancient gymnosperm and the angio-
MEP pathway for production of IPP and DMAPP     sperms, it is clearly distinguishable from them; the
from pyruvate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate     recombinant enzyme has become the prototype of
(for reviews of this pathway, see Rohmer, 1999;     the class from gymnosperms that has proved useful
Eisenreich et al., 2001; Kuzuyama and Seto, 2003);      for a range of studies (Burke and Croteau, 2002).
see also Rodrı´guez-Concepcio´n elsewhere in this    The time-course of transcript abundance in devel-
issue. Given that taxoid biosynthesis is substan-     oping T. canadensis cells compared to that for the
tially induced in the source Taxus cells (Ketchum     immediate cyclization step also supports the notion
et al., 1999), the up-regulation of this pathway for      that GGPP synthase is probably not rate limiting in
precursor  supply  might  be  anticipated. ESTs      either constitutive or induced biosynthesis of tax-
encoding 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate (DXP)     oids in this system (Hefner et al., 1998); this earlier
reductoisomerase were substantially more abun-    work on Taxus GGPP synthase appears to have
dant than acquisitions encoding other MEP path-     been overlooked by Laskaris et al. (1999, 2000).
way enzymes, although transcripts encoding  all    ESTs encoding GGPP synthase were quite abun-
but MEP cytidyltransferase and hydroxymethyl-     dant  in the induced Taxus  cell cDNA  library
butenyl diphosphate reductase were well repre-     (1.7&), but only one acquisition for IPP isomerase
sented   (Jennewein   et    al.,   2004b).  DXP     was noted (Jennewein et al., 2004b). Because the
reductoisomerase and DXP synthase have both   MEP pathway seemingly yields IPP and DMAPP in
been implicated as catalyzing slow steps in the     a 5:1 ratio (Rohdich et al., 2002), conversion of IPP
biosynthesis of plastid-derived terpenoids (Estevez     to DMAPP by plastidial IPP isomerase (Figure 2)
et al., 2001; Mahmoud and Croteau, 2001).            could establish a more appropriate 3:1 ratio for
   The parental taxane clearly arises in plastids (see   GGPP synthesis since isomerization to DMAPP is
below), as almost certainly do all plant diterpenes,     favored (Ramos-Valdivia et al., 1997). IPP isom-
from the universal, acyclic (C20) precursor gera-      erase could be a useful gene for overexpression
nylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP) (Figure 2). GGPP      in Taxus, as would be the homologous GGPP
synthase from cell cultures of both T. canadensis      synthase,  for  the sake  of  compatibility, when
(Hefner et al., 1998) and T. baccata (Laskaris et al.,     attempting to reconstruct Taxol biosynthesis in a
2000) has been isolated and partially characterized,     heterologous host (DeJong et al., 2005).
and  it appears  typical  of  this  class  of  pren-       The formation of the taxane skeleton was ini-
yltransferases in properties. Consideration of the       tially, and presciently, suggested by Lythgoe and
GGPP synthase activity proﬁle measured in vitro      his colleagues (Harrison et  al., 1966) to involve
and taxoid accumulation in T. baccata cells led      cyclization of the geranylgeranyl skeleton to taxa-
Laskaris et al. (1999) to suggest that GGPP syn-      4(20),11(12)-diene by an electrophilic mechanism
thase may play a regulatory role in taxoid produc-    now known to be characteristic of this enzymatic
tion; however,  in T. canadensis  cells  (the two      reaction type. The 4(20),11(12)-isomer of taxadi-
experimental systems diﬀer substantially in detail),     ene was the proposed product based on the obser-
consideration of in vitro determined rates of GGPP     vation that many taxoids bear double bonds in
synthase versus the immediate downstream step      these positions. Work on the responsible cycliza-
(the committed cyclization) during the time course      tion enzyme was ﬁrst carried out with cell-free
of taxoid production indicated that GGPP synthase      extracts prepared from T. brevifolia stem tissue,
is very unlikely to have much regulatory inﬂuence     with which it was shown that the product of the
on the pathway (Hefner et al., 1998).                   reaction was in fact the isomeric taxa-4(5),11(12)-
  A cDNA  encoding GGPP  synthase  from     diene that was conﬁrmed as the precursor of Taxol
T. canadensis cells has been isolated and conﬁrmed     by feeding studies (Koepp et al., 1995); migration
by heterologous functional expression (Hefner et     of the double bond from the 4(5)- to the 4(20)-
al., 1998). The sequence encodes an apparent plas-      position occurs during the subsequent hydroxyl-
tidial transit peptide, as expected, and translates a     ation step (see below). Taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene was
mature protein of ~32 kDa that functions as a ho-      isolated  as a  natural  product  (in  very  small
modimer of ~60 kDa. The sequence also resembles     amounts) from T. brevifolia bark (Koepp et al.,
those of angiosperm GGPP synthases but, not     1995) and both positional isomers of taxadiene


[PDF physical page 7]
                                                                                         81

were subsequently prepared by  total  synthesis     carbocation, followed by a unique intramolecular
(Rubenstein and Williams, 1995). The operation-     proton migration from C11 to the re-face of C7 to
ally soluble TS clearly catalyzes the committed     complete the A-ring and promote closure of the B/
step of taxoid biosynthesis by constructing the     C-ring juncture, with a terminating deprotonation
taxane nucleus from the branch-point intermediate     from the C5b-face of the tricyclic taxenyl carbo-
geranylgeranyl diphosphate. The enzyme is similar     cation to yield taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene as the prin-
in properties to other diterpenoid cyclases from      cipal  product (94%). Minor  products  of  this
angiosperms and gymnosperms (relatively low sub-      electrophilic cyclization cascade include taxa-4(20),
strate Km, requirement for divalent metal ion, size     11(12)-diene (5%) and verticillene (1%); interest-
of roughly 80 kDa, but with an alkaline pH opti-      ing, the kinetic isotope eﬀect resulting from the
mum (Hezari et al., 1995)).                           forced elimination of deuterium at C5b (from the
   Based on the assumption that TS would also    4R)2H of GGPP) even allows formation (by iso-
resemble other terpene synthases in structure, a      topically  sensitive  branching)  of  the  unusual
homology-based cloning strategy was employed      3(4),11(12)-isomer of taxadiene in small amounts
to acquire the corresponding cDNA from a     (Williams et al., 2000b).
T. brevifolia stem library (Wildung and Croteau,       The time-course of TS activity versus Taxol
1996). The sequence encodes a 98 kDa preprotein     production in T. canadensis cell cultures suggests
that bears a plastidial targeting peptide and con-      that the committed cyclization is a slow step of the
tains all of the other structural elements typical of     pathway; that neither taxadiene nor other early
this enzyme class (Davis and Croteau, 2000). The     pathway intermediates accumulate to any appre-
mature enzyme of nearly 85 kDa functions as a      ciable level in Taxus tissues or cell cultures further
monomer (Williams et al., 2000b), and TSs from      indicates rapid conversion of these metabolites by
other Taxus species appear to be essentially iden-     downstream reactions (Koepp et al., 1995; Hefner
tical (Hezari et  al., 1997). The mechanistic and      et al., 1996; Hezari et al., 1997). Nevertheless, TS
stereochemical details of this complex cyclization       is apparently not rate limiting, and slower steps
(Figure 3) have been explored (Lin et al., 1996;      reside  further downstream on the pathway to
Williams et al., 2000a, b; Jin et al., 2005a, b), and     Taxol (Hezari et al., 1997). ESTs corresponding to
the reaction, in which three rings and three chiral     two catalytically comparable, minor variants of TS
centers are generated, shown to involve inversion     (Jennewein  et  al., 2004a) were very abundant
of conﬁguration at C1 of the geranylgeranyl pre-       ( 5&) in the induced T. cuspidata  cell library
cursor in the initial bicyclization to the verticillenyl     (Jennewein et  al., 2004b). Despite the relatively





Figure 3. Cyclization of geranylgeranyl diphosphate by taxadiene synthase involving ionization of the diphosphate with closure of
the ﬁrst ring, intramolecular transfer of a proton in the resulting verticillenyl cation to promote the second closure, and deprotona-
tion of the resulting taxenyl cation to yield taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene (major product) and taxa-4(20),11(12)-diene (minor product).


[PDF physical page 8]
82

high level of expression of this gene, the cyclization     employing cell-free systems for initial demonstra-
is a slow step of the pathway, perhaps reﬂecting      tion of activity with deﬁned substrates, or with
the low turnover rate of this enzyme (0.01 s)1)     surrogate substrates when the predicted substrate is
(Williams et al., 2000b).                            not readily available, coupled to feeding studies to
                                                  demonstrate pathway relevance, synthesis of the
                                                      authentic reaction product, and isolation of the
Cytochrome P450 taxoid oxygenases                  corresponding metabolite from Taxus has guided
                                                                     all subsequent biochemical and molecular explo-
The survey of functionalized taxoids by Floss and      ration of the pathway from simpler precursors to
Mocek (1995) has suggested the approximate order    more complex taxoids.
of hydroxylation steps on the taxane core. How-         Several cloning strategies have been employed
ever, the dearth of lightly functionalized taxoids     to  acquire cDNAs  encoding  the  cytochrome
described in the literature (the ﬁrst to appreciably     P450 taxoid oxygenases. Initially, a diﬀerential dis-
accumulate in any Taxus tissue is at the level of a     play of mRNA-reverse transcription-polymerase
5,9,10,13-tetraol) (Baloglu and Kingston, 1999;     chain reaction (DD-RT-PCR) method was em-
Itokawa, 2003) gave  little guidance to the exact     ployed (Schoendorf  et  al., 2001) using methyl
sequence of the initial reactions which obviously     jasmonate induced T. cuspidata cells versus unin-
must proceed from taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene (Hezari     duced cells as source material (Ketchum et  al.,
and Croteau, 1997). The observations that no      1999). This approach was subsequently supple-
oxygenated taxoids bearing the 4(5)-double bond     mented with a classical homology-based search
had yet been reported, whereas taxoids with the     (Jennewein et al., 2004a) and, ultimately, random
exo-methylene at the 4(20)-position and that also     sequencing of the same induced-cell library (Jen-
bore on oxygen function at C5 were exceedingly     newein et al., 2004b) to yield a family of nearly 20
common (Kingston et  al., 1993), suggested that     cytochrome P450 clones that display high similarity
hydroxylation at C5 of taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene, with    (>70%) within the group but appear to be only
migration of the double bond, must occur as an      distantly related to other cytochrome P450s of plant
early,  if not the  ﬁrst, oxygenation step of the      origin (<35% similarity). The selection of new
pathway.                                            candidate clones as potential taxoid oxygenases
  To explore this possibility, cell-free preparations     could thus be made by sequence relatedness. For
from T. brevifolia stems and T. cuspidata cell cul-      functional  assessment  of  activity,  clones were
tures were examined for their ability to transform       initially expressed in the WATII Saccharomyces
biosynthetically prepared  [2-3H]taxa-4(5),11(12)-      cerevisiae cell line that coexpresses an Arabidopsis
diene to more polar products under a range of    NADPH:cytochrome P450 reductase for improved
oxygenation conditions. Microsomal preparations     redox coupling (Pompon et al., 1996), and then
were shown to convert taxadiene to a monool under     screened by a method involving feeding of the in-
cytochrome P450 reaction conditions (i.e., O2 and      tact transformed yeast with the appropriate radio-
NADPH-dependence, CO-inhibition and blue light      labeled taxoid precursors (Schoendorf et al., 2001).
reversal); the product was identiﬁed as taxa-4(20),     This approach avoided the uncertainties of micro-
11(12)-dien-5a-ol (by synthesis of the authentic    some preparation prior to clone identiﬁcation and
standard), shown to be an intermediate of Taxol    more detailed cell-free studies to characterize the
biosynthesis by feeding studies, and identiﬁed as a     recombinant cytochrome. For clones that did not
naturally occurring metabolite by isolation (albeit     express well in yeast, or were unstable in this host
in very small amounts) from Taxus (Hefner et al.,      (as determined by C-terminal epitope tagging and/
1996). Subsequent studies (Lovy Wheeler et  al.,     or CO-diﬀerence spectrometry), the more tedious
2001) demonstrated that Taxus microsomes were     but highly reliable baculovirus-Spodoptera expres-
capable of converting taxadiene, taxadienol and     sion system (Kutchan et al., 1994) was employed.
related simple taxoids to the level of a hexaol under       The ﬁrst oxygenase of the Taxol pathway (cyto-
identical conditions, suggesting that most, if not all,     chrome P450  taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene 5a-hydroxy-
of the relevant pathway oxygenation steps were      lase) was acquired by homology-based screening
cytochrome P450-mediated and localized to the     (Jennewein et al., 2004a), this clone having been
endoplasmic reticulum. This general approach of     missed in the initial DD-RT-PCR-based approach


[PDF physical page 9]
                                                                                         83

because the gene is not highly induced by methyl     enzyme  also  utilizes  taxa-4(20),11(12)-diene  as
jasmonate in T. cuspidata cells (Lovy Wheeler et al.,      substrate to produce the same product with com-
2001). The cDNA encodes a protein of about     parable kinetics (to the 4(5),11(12)-diene isomer
56 kDa, an N-terminal membrane (endoplasmic     which is the major product of the TS reaction). This
reticulum) insertion sequence, and all of the other     observation is consistent with a reaction mechanism
conserved structural elements (for heme, oxygen     involving promiscuous hydrogen radical abstrac-
and  reductase  binding  (von  Wachenfeldt and      tion from the C20 position, or the C5 position of the
Johnson, 1995)) typical of a cytochrome P450 and      4(20),11(12)-isomer, to aﬀord from either oleﬁn the
that are found in all of the other taxoid oxygenases    same delocalized radical, to which oxygen is ulti-
deﬁned thus far. The recombinant microsomal en-     mately delivered to the C5a-face to yield taxa-4(20),
zyme, functionally expressed in both yeast and      11(12)-dien-5a-ol. The gene  is induced roughly
Spodoptera, is also typical in properties, like the     twofold by methyl jasmonate, and the abundance
native enzyme, but the turnover number is seem-      in the EST library is modest (0.8&). This, coupled
ingly low (Jennewein et al., 2004a) and the reaction     to the apparently low turnover number of the en-
is unusual, but not unprecedented (Groves and     zyme, perhaps as a consequence of the unusual
Subramanian, 1984; Groves, 2005), in involving an      reaction catalyzed, suggests that the 5a-hydroxyl-
allylic transposition (Figure 4). Interestingly, the     ation  is a slow step of the pathway. Taxus cell





Figure 4. Proposed mechanism for cytochrome P450 taxadiene 5a-hydroxylase involving two modes of hydrogen abstraction to a
common allylic radical followed by stereoselective oxygen insertion at the a-face of the common intermediate. Isomerization of the
taxadiene isomers is not observed.


[PDF physical page 10]
84

cultures accumulate but exceedingly low levels of       cells with these various early precursors indicate
taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene (4.8  g/g dry wt.) and taxa-      that  5a-acetoxytaxadien-10b-ol  yields a  higher
4(20),11(12)-diene (0.33  g/g dry wt.), and taxa-     proportion of diversionary products (of the taxoid
4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-ol is rarely detectable (1.5  g/     14b-hydroxy type, see below) than Taxol and its
g dry wt.), implying that the 5a-ol intermediate     congeners compared  to, for example, taxadien-
produced  is  rapidly consumed by downstream     5a-ol  itself (Ketchum and Croteau, in prepara-
hydroxylation/acylation reactions (Ketchum and      tion). While the full implications of these ﬁndings
Croteau, 2005).                                       are not  yet known,  they do  suggest  multiple
   The taxoid 13a-hydroxylase was acquired by     anastomosing routes to Taxol that diverge early in
the DD-RT-PCR screen via functional expression     the pathway and compete at some level with sev-
in Spodoptera fugiperda cells using labeled taxa-      eral side routes to other, very numerous taxoid
4(20),11(12)-5a-ol as substrate (Jennewein et al.,      derivatives.
2001), and the taxoid 10b-hydroxylase was simi-        In addition to these demonstrated hydroxyl-
larly acquired but with functional conﬁrmation     ation (and acylation) steps, oxygenation at C9 is
in yeast using labeled taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-yl      also presumed to occur fairly early in the pathway
acetate  as  substrate (Schoendorf  et  al., 2001)      (Floss and Mocek, 1995). A clone for the cyto-
(Figure 5). Both are typical cytochrome P450s in     chrome P450 taxoid 9a-hydroxylase has been ten-
structure and properties, and both exhibit some      tatively identiﬁed in the initial family of sequence
plasticity in substrate utilization (i.e., with lower      acquisitions by functional expression in yeast and
eﬃciency, the 10b-hydroxylase can utilize the 5a-      testing the 5a,13a-diol and the 5a,10b-diol (and
alcohol and the 13a-hydroxylase can utilize the     the corresponding 5a-acetates) as substrates; how-
5a-acetate). These results, coupled to precursor      ever, suﬃcient biosynthetic products have not yet
evaluation with microsomal  preparations from     been prepared to permit NMR-based conﬁrmation
Taxus cells (Lovy Wheeler et al., 2001), suggest     of structures. Should the taxoid-9a-hydroxylase be
bifurcation of the taxoid biosynthetic pathway at a      veriﬁed, the above four cytochrome P450 clones
very early stage, leading from the 5a-ol via the     would suﬃce to convert taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene to
5a,13a-diol or via acetylation at C5 (see below)     the  level  of a  taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a,9a,10b,
and 10b-hydroxylation. Feeding studies of Taxus      13a-tetraol.





Figure 5. Reactions catalyzed by the taxoid 10b-hydroxylase, taxoid 13a-hydroxylase and taxoid 14b-hydroxylase. All of these
hydroxylases can employ the 5a-alcohol or the corresponding acetate ester as alternate substrates but only the kinetically most favor-
able routes are illustrated.


[PDF physical page 11]
                                                                                         85

   Intermediate oxygenation steps of the pathway      additional oxygen functional groups at C1, C2 or
(i.e., from the level of a taxadien tetraol onward)    C7 (Baloglu and Kingston, 1999) encouraged the
have been more diﬃcult to approach. This mid-     use of this material as an alternate substrate for
section of the pathway is not well deﬁned in reac-      testing microsomal oxygenase activities and for
tion order, and the intermediates are not known or,     screening cytochrome P450 clones in yeast. This
if predicted, are not so readily available for testing.     approach led to the acquisition and character-
This diﬃculty necessitates the use of accessible      ization  of  the  seemingly  regioselective  taxoid-
‘‘surrogate’’ substrates to explore these ‘‘central’’     2a-hydroxylase (Chau and Croteau, 2004) and
hydroxylations. For this purpose, taxusin (the tet-     taxoid-7b-hydroxylase (Chau et al., 2004a).
raacetate of taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a,9a,10b,13a-       Both hydroxylases exhibit excellent kinetics for
tetraol) was employed as a surrogate substrate to     the surrogate substrate in the production of the
test microsomal preparations and to functionally      respective 2a- and 7b-hydroxytaxusins (Figure 6)
evaluate the extant cytochrome P450 clones for     and are otherwise typical in structure and prop-
taxoid C1, C2 and C7 hydroxylase activities, and      erties compared to the other taxoid hydroxylases.
for the presumed C4,C20-epoxidase. (+)-Taxusin      Selectivity studies indicated preference for poly-
(Figure 6)  is  a  prominent  metabolite  of yew     oxygenated and acylated taxoid substrates, con-
heartwood (Miyazaki et al., 1968; Della Casa de      sistent with the operation of these enzymes in the
Marcano and Halsall, 1969) in which it is consid-      central portion of the Taxol biosynthetic pathway.
ered a dead-end metabolite, not a possible interme-    The transformation of taxusin in Taxus micro-
diate in Taxol formation (Floss and Mocek, 1995).     somes, and the reciprocal conversion in yeast of
Nevertheless, the natural occurrence in Taxus of a      their respective hydroxy tetraacetoxy products to
broad range of taxusin-like metabolites bearing     the common dihydroxy tetraacetoxy product (i.e.,





   Figure 6. Conversions of the surrogate substrate (+)-taxusin mediated by taxoid 2a-hydroxylase and taxoid 7b-hydroxylase.


[PDF physical page 12]
86

2a,7b-dihydroxy taxusin) (Figure 6) indicated that     taxoid metabolism. Although the regioselectivity
these  hydroxylases  are  capable  of  operating    and substrate speciﬁcity of the recombinant taxoid
sequentially in the possible order of 7b-hydroxyl-     hydroxylases have not been  fully assessed, the
ation followed by 2a-hydroxylation on the way     demonstration of redundancy in at least one case,
to the level of a taxadien-2a, 5a, 7b, 9a, 10b;     the above-noted multiple routes from taxadienol,
13a-hexaol at some level of acylation (Chau and     the observed plasticity in substrate utilization by
Croteau, 2004).                                some hydroxylases, and the fact that the same sur-
   In addition to the six taxoid hydroxylases (the     rogate substrate can be utilized by more than one
2a-, 5a-, 7b-, 9a-(tentative), 10b- and 13a-hydrox-     hydroxylase suggest that the Taxol biosynthetic
ylases) described above, a seventh hydroxylase was     pathway is not so linear as initially imagined but
discovered by in vivo screening the cytochrome      likely involves multiple routes perhaps converging
P450 clones in yeast using radiolabeled 5a-acet-      at a late stage intermediate.
oxytaxadien-10b-ol and taxadien-5a; 13a-diol as      Two oxygenation reactions remain to be de-
test substrates. This oxygenase clone, which resem-     ﬁned, and the corresponding genes are still missing;
bles the other family members in structure and      these are the taxoid C1b-hydroxylase and the C4b,
properties, eﬃciently converted 5a-acetoxytaxadi-     C20-epoxidase leading to oxetane formation (see
en-10b-ol (but not the taxadien diol) to 5a-acet-     Figure 2). Both reactions are presumed to be cyto-
oxytaxadien-10b; 14b-diol (Jennewein et al., 2003)     chrome P450-mediated (cytochrome P450 epoxid-
(Figure 5). Because Taxol is unsubstituted at C14,      ases have ample precedent (Ortiz de Montellano
this  cytochrome  P450  taxoid  14b-hydroxylase    and De Voss, 2005)), as are the other taxoid oxy-
cannot reside on the pathway to the target drug but      genases, and the corresponding genes are presumed
rather appears to be responsible for early diversion     to reside within the extant family awaiting extri-
of the pathway to 14b-hydroxy taxoids (e.g., of the     cation using the appropriate substrate to query
taxuyunnanine C type) that are prominent metab-      these remaining P450 clones for function. Little
olites of Taxus cell cultures (Menhard et al., 1998;     guidance is available to suggest the precise order of
Ketchum et al., 2003). That the 14b-hydroxylation    C1 hydroxylation, epoxidation and ring expansion
branch pathway appears to diverge early in taxoid      steps, and alternate reaction sequences may prevail
metabolism  is consistent with precursor feeding      in the main and side-routes for taxoid metabolism.
studies in cell culture, and suggests that transgenic       It  is certainly conceivable that oxirane/oxetane
down-regulation of this hydroxylase gene could     formation precedes installation of the C1 hydroxyl
permit signiﬁcant redirection of the pathway to    on route to Taxol, such that the hypothetical
increase ﬂux toward Taxol.                            intermediate  illustrated in Figure 2 may be an
  Most of the previously identiﬁed hydroxylases     acylated derivative of a taxadien hexaol, rather
of taxoid metabolism were well represented in the     than a heptaol functionalized at C1.
induced T. cuspidata cell EST library (Jennewein           It seemed reasonable to assume that the family
et al., 2004b), including the taxoid 14b-hydroxylase     of cytochrome P450 taxoid oxygenases derived
(1.5& abundance) involved in the production of a     from a common progenitor by gene duplication
family of side-route metabolites. Curiously, not a    and diﬀerentiation (Pichersky and Gang, 2000) to
single EST was identiﬁed that corresponded to     evolve alternative substrate selectivities and new
the original taxoid 10b-hydroxylase clone previ-      regio- and stereochemistries of oxygenation on the
ously isolated by the DD-RT-PCR approach and     core taxadiene structure. In the context of estab-
homology-based screen (Schoendorf et al., 2001;      lishing the reaction sequence, it also seemed pos-
Jennewein  et  al., 2004a). An alternative taxoid      sible that the pattern of descent from the parental
10b-hydroxylase was therefore sought among the     gene (as determined by sequence relatedness) might
new EST acquisitions, and such a gene was found      reﬂect the order of oxygenations in the Taxol bio-
(by functional expression in yeast) that was rather      synthetic pathway starting from the presumptive
similar (68% identity; 82% similarity) to the pre-       initial hydroxylation at C5a of the committed
viously isolated taxoid 10b-hydroxylase from the     taxadiene precursor. A cladogram of the taxoid
same cDNA library (Jennewein et al., 2004b). This     oxygenases was constructed with rooting at the
result indicated at least some redundancy in en-     C5a-hydroxylase (Jennewein et  al., 2004b), and
zymes mediating this presumptive early step of     the pattern was consistent with the preliminary


[PDF physical page 13]
                                                                                         87

hydroxylation steps leading from C5 hydroxylation      requisite activity was ﬁrst demonstrated in soluble
to C10 or C13 hydroxylation and with the early     protein extracts from T. canadensis suspension
emergence of C14 hydroxylation after C5 hydrox-       cells, and the 50 kDa, acetyl CoA-dependent en-
ylation as a major side route. Phylogenic consid-    zyme was partially puriﬁed and fully characterized
erations placed the taxoid C7 hydroxylase closer     with respect to pH optimum (~9.0), pI (~5.0),
to  the C5 hydroxylase than might have been      kinetics (low M Km values for both co-substrates)
anticipated based on the proposed sequence of    and selectivity (10-deacetylbaccatin III was not a
hydroxylations deduced from the relative abun-      substrate but simple terpenols were competently
dances of taxoid metabolites functionalized at the      acetylated) (Walker et al., 1999). Because the gene
various positions (Floss and Mocek, 1995) but in    had no homologs (i.e., no other terpenoid O-acetyl
agreement with recent experimental implications      transferases) in the databases to permit similarity-
for the relative placement of the 7b-hydroxylase     based cloning approaches, a protein-based cloning
(Chau and Croteau, 2004; Chau et al., 2004a). With      strategy was adopted. The enzyme was puriﬁed to
at least two pathway oxygenases still unaccounted     near homogeneity  (to permit microsequencing)
for, and many of the cytochrome P450 genes in the     from T. canadensis cells because these cells yielded
group of still uncertain function, this preliminary     the highest starting levels of activity. With primers
phylogeny of pathway steps can only be regarded     designed for PCR ampliﬁcation, a cDNA library as
as approximate.                                         target was constructed using T. cuspidata suspen-
   Although not strictly a component of the Taxol     sion cells because these cells aﬀorded the highest
pathway, the NADPH:cytochrome P450 reductase      levels of induced Taxol production (Walker et al.,
(required  for  electron  transfer)  is  nevertheless      2000). This approach yielded a number of probes
important, given that nearly half of the pathway     with which library screening ultimately provided
steps are cytochrome P450-mediated oxygenations.      eight full-length transferase-like sequences; the EST
A cDNA encoding the reductase was isolated from      project provided an additional seven acquisitions,
induced T. cuspidata cells and the recombinant     bringing the total of related cDNAs encoding this
enzyme characterized (Jennewein et al., 2005). The     enzyme type to 15 (Walker et al., 2000; Jennewein
gene is reasonably well represented (0.6&) in the      et  al., 2004b). Functional assessment  of  these
induced-cell library (Jennewein et al., 2004b), and     clones was conducted by heterologous expression in
has been co-expressed in yeast and Spodoptera cells      Escherichia coli and assay of the derived soluble,
(Jennewein et al., 2004a) as an improved aid for     recombinant enzyme preparations for the relevant
characterizing Taxus oxygenase clones, and as a      acyl and aroyl transferase activities. By this means,
preliminary to reconstructing taxoid biosynthesis in    cDNAs  encoding  the  taxadien-5a-ol-O-acetyl
the microbial host (DeJong et al., 2005; Jennewein      transferase, the taxoid-2a-O-benzoyl transferase,
et al., 2005).                                           the taxoid-10b-O-acetyl transferase, and the two
                                                         transferases involved in C13-side chain assembly
                                                 were obtained.
Acyl and aroyl transferases                         The cDNA  encoding  the  taxadien-5a-ol-O-
                                                          acetyl transferase (ex. T. cuspidata) corresponds to
Baccatin III (Figure 1) contains three ester func-     a deduced amino acid sequence of 439 residues that
tions (C2 benzoate, C4 acetate and C10 acetate),      exhibits high sequence identity to the proteolytic
and two  additional  transfers  are  required  for     fragments of the native enzyme (ex. T. canadensis),
C13-side chain assembly to reach Taxol (Figure 2).     which the recombinant acyl transferase resembles
The ﬁrst of the responsible biosynthetic enzymes to      closely in properties (Walker et al., 2000). Consis-
be approached was that for the 5-O-acetyl transfer      tent with the size of the operationally soluble native
to taxadienol, the route to taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-     enzyme, the DNA appears to encode a monomeric
5a-ol having been recently established as described     protein of molecular weight 49,079 that bears no
above, and the C5a-acetoxy function being con-     N-terminal organellar targeting information.
sidered  important  in  oxetane  ring  formation       The second transfer to the taxane core, pre-
involving the proposed intramolecular transfer of    sumed to occur roughly mid-pathway, involves
this function to the C4a-position (Figure 2). The     benzoylation at the C2a-position, and this gene


[PDF physical page 14]
88

was acquired by the identical functional screen of     apparently regiospeciﬁc toward the 10b-hydroxy
the family of clones using labeled 2-debenzoyl-7,     group of the taxoid core.
13-diacetylbaccatin  III as a surrogate substrate     A   10b-hydroxytaxane-O-acetyl   transferase
(Figure 7) because the actual substrate was uncer-      activity was ﬁrst reported in extracts of T. baccata
tain, and  the  surrogate was  accessible  semi-     and T. cuspidata (Zocher et al., 1996; Pennington et
synthetically (Walker and Croteau, 2000a). The       al., 1998), and an enzyme of this type was puriﬁed
cDNA, like that for the 5a-O-acetyl transferase,     to apparent homogeneity from the soluble protein
codes for a protein of ~50 kDa that lacks apparent      fraction of T. chinensis cell cultures and charac-
targeting information, resembles other members      terized in some detail (Menhard and Zenk, 1999).
of the transferase family (with about 65%I), and    The C10-O-acetyl transferase from T. chinensis
bears conserved sequence elements thought to be     diﬀers somewhat in properties from the corres-
involved in acyl (aroyl) group transfer from the     ponding native and recombinant acetyl transferase
CoA-ester to the substrate alcohol. The monomeric     from T. cuspidata (Walker and Croteau, 2000b),
recombinant enzyme has a pH optimum of 8.0, sub-     most notably in the size of the former which was
mM Km values for the taxoid substrate and benzoyl     found to be a monomer of 71 kDa. All 15 acyl
CoA (acetyl CoA is a very ineﬃcient donor), and      (aroyl) transferase cDNA clones from T. cuspidata
is apparently regiospeciﬁc for benzoylation of the     code for proteins of about 50 kDa, and  all of
2a-hydroxyl group of the functionalized taxane     the  native and recombinant T.  cuspidata and
nucleus (Walker and Croteau, 2000a).                 T. canadensis transferases thus far examined are
   The  taxoid  10b-O-acetyl  transferase   (i.e.,      functional monomers of this size. It is worth noting
10-deacetyl baccatin III-10-O-acetyl transferase),      that all of the transferases are apparently translated
thought to catalyze formation of the last diterpe-     without N-terminal targeting information, and so
noid intermediate in the Taxol biosynthetic path-       all are presumed to be cytosolic enzymes consistent
way (just prior to C13-side chain addition), was     with their operationally soluble nature. Thus, the
acquired by the same cloning strategy, with func-     Taxol pathway originates in plastids and involves
tional evaluation by expression in E. coli as before     hydroxylation at the endoplasmic reticulum and
(Walker and  Croteau,  2000b). The  full-length      acylation in the cytosol. Whether interorganellar
cDNA encodes a deduced protein of 440 residues     traﬃcking of these relatively hydrophobic metab-
with a calculated molecular weight of 49,052, con-      olites relies on diﬀusional control, or is transport
sistent with the size of the operationally soluble,     protein-mediated, is presently unknown.
monomeric native acetyl transferase. The recom-       The ﬁve deﬁned acyl (aroyl) transferases of the
binant enzyme has a pH optimum of 7.5, Km values      19-step Taxol biosynthetic pathway from GGPP
of about 10 M for both cosubstrates, and  is      (three for modifying the core and two for C13-side





  Figure 7. Benzoylation of the surrogate substrate 2-debenzoyl-7,13-diacetylbaccatin III by the taxoid 2a-O-benzoyl transferase.


[PDF physical page 15]
                                                                                         89

chain assembly) are remarkably well represented in      lation step and that regioselectivity of acylation
the induced Taxus  cell cDNA library (59 total     depends in part on the substitution pattern of
acquisitions of 8424 sequences). The 10 other dis-     the taxoid substrate. Although the sequence of the
tinct transferases observed comprise a total of 60    C2 benzoylation and C10 acetylation steps on route
ESTs. A very large number of taxoid side chain     to Taxol seems reasonably secure, the precise tim-
variants are known that diﬀer in position on the     ing of C5 acetylation on the Taxol pathway is now
hydroxylated taxane core and in the type of acyl/       less certain for two reasons: assessment of the
aroyl  substitution, including  tiglate, butanoate,      transacylases indicates that acetylation at C5 can
hexanoate, cinnamate, and other aromatic and     occur at kinetically very competent rates at the level
aminoacyl esters in addition to the more common     of a taxadien polyol; and feeding studies suggest
acetates and benzoates (Baloglu and Kingston,      that acetylation of taxadien-5a-ol as a very early
1999). Taxoid acetate esters are particularly com-      step (as originally proposed (Walker et al., 1999))
mon. Thus, Taxol bears an acetate at C10 and an-    more favorably promotes side route diversion, via
other at C4 thought to originate by intramolecular     10b- and 14b-hydroxylation, than direct progres-
migration of a C5 acetate function in the process of     sion to Taxol. This question of precise timing (C5
oxetane ring formation (Figure 2), but many other      acetylation is  still likely the ﬁrst acylation) may
naturally occurring taxoids bear acetate groups at     be resolved by further feeding studies with more
the C1, C2, C7, C9 (of 9a-dihydro derivatives) and     advanced precursors, and more detailed charac-
C13 positions that would appear to block pathway      terization of the selectivity and kinetic competence
progression  to  Taxol. These  ‘‘inappropriately’’     of the extant acyl transferases.
acetylated metabolites can accumulate to signiﬁ-       As with the cytochrome P450 taxoid oxygenases,
cant levels in cell culture (over 30% of total taxoids)        it seemed reasonable to assume that this family
and thus represent considerable diversion of path-     of taxoid acyl and aroyl transferases (showing
way ﬂux (Ketchum and Croteau, 2005). It is also   >65% similarity within the 15-member group) also
possible that some of these acylated metabolites are     derived from a common ancestral gene by duplica-
true intermediates, since it is conceivable that the      tion and diﬀerentiation to evolve alternative acyl/
Taxol pathway involves transient acylation/deac-     aroyl CoA substrate selectivities and new regio-
ylation for the purposes of traﬃcking and orga-      chemistries  for  ester  synthesis  at  the  various
nellar targeting, or ﬂux regulation. Such processes     hydroxylated positions on the taxane core, and for
could greatly increase the number of biosynthetic     amidation of the C13-phenylisoserinoyl side chain.
steps and pathway complexity. It is assumed that     Here also, it might be expected that the pattern of
the remaining 10 transferase genes that have been     descent as gauged by sequence relatedness could
isolated are responsible for the production of these      reﬂect the order of acylation in the Taxol biosyn-
numerous taxoid side chain structural and regio-      thesis pathway, which the current data suggest is
chemical variants.                                      acetylation at C5 of the taxane core (i.e., taxadienol
  To explore this issue, in particular the origins of     or a derived polyol), benzoylation at C2, acetylation
the large number of variously acetylated taxoids,      at C10 (ultimately leading to baccatin III), addition
the group of recombinant Taxus acyl transferases     of the side chain at C13, and N-benzoylation of the
was investigated with a range of polyhydroxylated     C13-side chain. To evaluate the possibility of such a
taxoids as substrates (Chau et al., 2004b). From this      relationship, a cladogram  of  the deﬁned  acyl
survey, a new acetyl transferase clone was identiﬁed      transferases was constructed with rooting at the
that was capable of acetylating taxadien-5a-ol with     5a-O-acetyl transferase as the ﬁrst probable acyla-
activity comparable to that of the previously iden-      tion (Jennewein et al., 2004b). The relative phylo-
tiﬁed 5a-O-acetyl transferase. However, when these     genic placement of these transferases is generally
two recombinant enzymes were presented with      consistent with the predicted order of acylation in
taxadien triol and tetraol substrates, they exhibited     Taxol biosynthesis, but the placement of the re-
diﬀerent regiospeciﬁcities for acetylation of the      cently acquired 5-O-acetyl transferase is apparently
‘‘northern’’ hemisphere hydroxyls at C9 and C10     anomalous. As with the cytochrome P450 oxygen-
and the ‘‘east-west’’ pole positions at C5 and C13      ases, there are still too many genes of uncertain
(Chau et al., 2004b). These results clearly indicate     function in the transferase group to regard the
some redundancy in transferases for the C5 acety-     suggested phylogeny as anything but approximate.


[PDF physical page 16]
90

Additional steps to baccatin III                        involved in C9-oxidation must precede a cloning
                                                        eﬀort.
As indicated above, two presumptive cytochrome         Several groups have proposed chemically fea-
P450 oxygenases on the route to baccatin  III      sible mechanisms for construction of the oxetane
remain to be acquired; these are the C1b-hydrox-     (D-ring) of Taxol and related compounds, all of
ylase and the C4b,C20-epoxidase which modify the     which implicate the progression from the 4,20-ene-
taxane  core  prior  to  C13-side  chain  transfer.     5a-oxytaxoid functional grouping through the 4b,
Uncertainties about the exact timing of these steps     20-epoxide-5a-oxy derivative to the 4a-oxy-4b,20-
within the pathway provide little guidance as to the     O-5-oxetane (see Floss and Mocek, 1995; Walker
true substrates of these reactions. Such uncertain-     and Croteau, 1999 for review of these proposals)
ties have limited synthetic eﬀorts directed to the     but none of which have been experimentally tes-
preparation of potential ‘‘surrogate’’ substrates for      ted. A simple and quite plausible proposal has
test of function of candidate genes by expression     been put forward by Potier and colleagues (Gue´-
and in vivo feeding studies; the general approach of      ritte-Voegelein et  al., 1987) in which the 4b,20-
employing accessible surrogates has proved suc-     epoxide-5a-acetoxy  grouping  undergoes  rear-
cessful recently in the acquisition of the C2-O-     rangement, by protonation and opening of the
benzoyl transferase and the C2a- and C7b-hy-     epoxide, with the acetoxy group migrating from
droxylases. Similar eﬀorts based on surrogates of    C5 to C4 in the ring expansion process (i.e., along
the  taxadien  pentaol  and  hexaol  type  (e.g.,     the lines shown in Figure 2 via the intermediate
the2a; 5a; 7b; 9a; 10b; 13a-hexaol) hold promise for     dioxonium ion (Giner and Faraldos, 2003)). At the
acquiring the taxoid epoxidase, whereas surrogates     other extreme, this reaction could also be easily
of the baccatin I type (devoid of the 1b-hydroxyl     rendered as an intramolecular migration catalyzed
but with  the  4,20-epoxide) and 1b-dehydroxy-     by a transferase-type mechanism involving initial
baccatin VI type (devoid of the 1b-hydroxyl but      nucleophilic  displacement  of  the  4b-epoxide
with the oxetane function) would seem most suit-     (Figure 8), which similarly accounts for the correct
able  for approaching the 1b-hydroxylation  for     stereochemistry and the observation that the only
which the timing (before or after oxetane forma-    known esters at C4 are acetates. From the Taxus
tion) is uncertain based on the metabolite survey of       cell EST project, the number of candidate ‘‘oxomu-
Floss and Mocek (1995).                                    tases’’ for this process is quite large, given that
   The remaining two steps to yield baccatin III,    many of the potential suspects could be disguised
the oxidation at C9 and oxetane (D-ring) con-     as  proteases,  esterases  or  other  hydrolases;
struction, also occur relatively late in the pathway      potentially, this enzyme could be of a new type.
where  uncertainties  about  the  preceding  steps    The biochemistry of the  reaction, a necessary
(epoxidation and oxetane formation likely precede     foundation to narrow the number of candidate
oxidation  at C9;  see Floss and Mocek  (1995))     enzyme/gene types, can most likely be approached
similarly  constrain  substrate  design  for  test  of     with baccatin I and 1b-hydroxybaccatin I as sur-
function. The oxidation of the taxane C9a-hydro-     rogate substrates (i.e., highly functionalized taxoid
xyl function to the corresponding ketone (Figure 1)      4b,20-epoxides).
could, like the initial hydroxylation at this position,
be mediated by a cytochrome P450 hydroxylase
(via the ketone hydrate), and there is precedent for     C13-side chain assembly
this reaction type in the biosynthesis of other dit-
erpenoids (resin acids and gibberellins) (MacMillan    The origin of the b-phenylalanoyl-type side chains
and Beale, 1999). This oxidation step may also be     of the taxoids has been of interest for some time;
catalyzed by a more typical pyridine nucleotide-     feeding studies by Leete and Bodem (1966) estab-
dependent  dehydrogenase. The EST  acquisi-      lished a-phenylalanine as the precursor, and sub-
tions from T.  cuspidata  cells  revealed many     sequent work by Haslam and coworkers (Platt
undeﬁned  candidate  dehydrogenases  for  this      et  al., 1984) showed that b-phenylalanine arose
step, and  it  is clear that biochemical studies,     from a-phenylalanine by an aminomutase-type
with  9a-dihydrobaccatin  III  type  derivatives      reaction. Floss and associates have conducted a
as  surrogates,  to  deﬁne  the  type  of enzyme    more recent series of illuminating feeding studies


[PDF physical page 17]
                                                                                         91





Figure 8. A proposal for the oxomutase reaction involving intramolecular exchange of the C5a-acetoxy group and the C4b-oxide
function of an advanced taxoid catalyzed by a transferase-type mechanism.



with Taxus (Fleming et al., 1993, 1994) directed to      in E. coli, and conﬁrmed as the target aminomutase
the sequence of reactions for constructing the 13-O-     (Walker et al., 2004). The recombinant enzyme and
(N-benzoyl-3-phenylisoserinoyl)  side  chain;  this     clone are virtually identical to those acquired from
work is reviewed in Floss and Mocek (1995). These     T. chinensis cells by a reverse genetics approach
results clearly conﬁrmed that the phenylisoserine      (Steele et al., 2003). The cDNA encodes a 698 resi-
side chain  is formed from a-phenylalanine via     due enzyme (76.5 kDa) with Km of 70 M, kcat of
b-phenylalanine. A  phenylalanine  aminomutase     30 s)1 and pH optimum at 8.5. The aminomutase
activity,  as  the committed  step  of  side  chain      requires no cofactors to conduct the reaction but
assembly, was subsequently demonstrated in Taxus       relies for this purpose solely on the electronegativity
stem extracts (Walker and Floss, 1998). Interest-     of an autocatalytically formed methylideneimida-
ingly, the N-benzoate moiety of the side chain was     zol-5-one prosthetic group within the active site
also shown to be derived from b-phenylalanine      that is derived from a signature Ala-Ser-Gly motif
rather than via cinnamic acid as might have been      characteristic of this enzyme type (Walker et al.,
expected. Feeding studies with baccatin III and      2004).  The  mechanism  of  this  aminomutase
various  side  chain  precursors  indicated  that      involves removal and interchange of the pro-3S-
b-phenylalanine was  roughly  three-times more     hydrogen and the amino group of 2S-a-phenylala-
eﬃciently incorporated into Taxol than was phe-     nine to yield 3R-b-phenylalanine.
nylisoserine, and that N-benzoyl phenylisoserine       As indicated previously, the two aroyl CoA
was only poorly incorporated and mostly after      transferase  clones  required  for C13-side chain
hydrolysis of the benzoate group. The combination     assembly were acquired by functional screening of
of these results suggested that side chain transfer to     the original set of T. cuspidata transferases ex-
the  diterpenoid moiety occurs  at  the  level  of     pressed in E. coli. The ﬁnal step of Taxol biosyn-
baccatin III (i.e., very late in the pathway) by way of      thesis  is catalyzed by the side chain N-benzoyl
b-phenylalanine and/or phenylisoserine, and that      transferase (Figure 2), and a cDNA encoding this
N-benzoylation of the C13-side chain is the termi-      stereoselective and regiospeciﬁc enzyme was lo-
nal step of Taxol biosynthesis (Figure 2). These     cated using the surrogate substrate N-debenzoyl-
feeding studies could not address the issues of the     (3¢-RS)-2¢-deoxytaxol and benzoyl-CoA as cosub-
timing or the speciﬁc precursor of the side chain      strate to yield the product 2¢-deoxytaxol (Walker
2¢-hydroxylation step.                                      et al., 2002a). The actual substrate for this reaction
   All indications are that, as a prelude to side chain      in planta is considered to be N-debenzoyltaxol, the
assembly, a-phenylalanine is separately converted     penultimate product of the pathway that also gives
to b-phenylalanine by an aminomutase. A gene       rise to cephalomannine (by N-tigloyl transfer) and
cloning approach to this target was based on the     Taxol C (by N-hexanoyl transfer). Whether the
assumption   that  phenylalanine  aminomutase    same or diﬀerent transferases catalyze these alter-
would resemble the  well known plant enzyme     nate amidation reactions is not presently known.
phenylalanine ammonia lyase, and a phenylalanine    The full-length cDNA coding for the N-benzoyl
ammonia lyase-like sequence was acquired from the      transferase translates a 441-residue protein (~49 kDa)
T. cuspidata cDNA library, functionally expressed     without apparent targeting information. The recom-


[PDF physical page 18]
92

binant enzyme has a pH optimum at  8.0, Km     the surrogate internal acid/base, and, in the second
values for the N-deacylated taxoid and benzoyl-      case, with the separate N-benzoyl transfer as the
CoA of about 0.4 mM, and operates with kcat of      last operation of the pathway (i.e., the complete
about 1.5 s)1 with the surrogate substrate. Pre-     N-benzoyl phenylisoserine side chain is not trans-
liminary studies indicate that this enzyme can be      ferred as a unit).
exploited to attach modiﬁed aroyl groups to taxoid       The productive, but less eﬃcient, transfer of
precursors  for the purpose of improving drug      phenylisoserine to baccatin III, compared to the
eﬃcacy.                                                  transfer of b-phenylalanine, is of particular note in
   The C13-phenylpropanoyl-CoA transferase that     suggesting that 2¢-hydroxylation in the side chain
initiates  side  chain  assembly on  baccatin  III     could occur before transfer (i.e., hydroxylation at
(Figure 2) is a catalyst of considerable interest. The     the level of b-phenylalanine to yield on transfer
cDNA  clone was  obtained from  the  original      phenylisoserinoyl-baccatin III=N-debenzoyltaxol)
transferase set by functional screening in E. coli,      rather than after transfer of b-phenylalanine (to
as before, using b-phenylalanoyl CoA as the acyl     b-phenylalanoyl-baccatin    III=N-debenzoyl-2¢-
donor  for  transfer  to  baccatin  III  to  form     deoxytaxol) with subsequent 2¢-hydroxylation and
N-debenzoyl-2¢-deoxytaxol (Walker et al., 2002b).     terminal N-benzoylation. This issue of timing of
The full-length cDNA encodes a 445-amino acid     the  side  chain  2¢-hydroxylation  step  remains
protein (50.5 kDa) without targeting information,     untested by feeding studies with doubly labeled
and the soluble recombinant enzyme has a pH     b-phenylalanoyl-baccatin III (labeling in both side
optimum at 6.8 with Km values of 2.4 and 4.9 M     chain and baccatin core is required to monitor for
for  baccatin   III  and  b-phenylalanoyl-CoA,     disassembly and resynthesis of Taxol from the
respectively. The side chain transferase resembles     modiﬁed side chain precursor and baccatin III)
the four other acyl/aroyl transferases involved di-     but preliminary evidence has been obtained for 2¢-
rectly in Taxol biosynthesis (i.e., between 71 and     hydroxylation of b-phenylalanoyl-baccatin III to
74% similarity at the amino acid level compared to      phenylisoserinoyl-baccatin  III by Taxus micro-
the others), but is the only one of the ﬁve that     somes under cytochrome P450 reaction conditions
contains a G163XXXDA168 motif instead of the     (Long and Croteau, 2005). Such an enzyme might
typical acyl transferase HXXXDG(A) element of     resemble a typical ‘‘taxoid hydroxylase’’ and could
which the His and Asp side chains along with a     be presumed to reside within the family of cyto-
conserved upstream cysteine residue (Cys-95 in the     chrome P450 cDNA clones already on hand. No
present case) form a catalytic triad thought to be     evidence has thus far been obtained for the direct
involved in acyl group transfer (St-Pierre and De     hydroxylation of b-phenylalanine in cell-free en-
Luca, 2000). The Gly-163 for His-163 substitution    zyme systems under reaction conditions described
in the side chain transferase would almost cer-      for other amino acid hydroxylases (Silverman,
tainly disrupt the proposed triad function (Brown      2000). b-Phenylalanoyl-CoA has not  yet been
et al., 1994); however, the free b-amino group of     evaluated as a substrate for 2¢-hydroxylation; yet,
the CoA ester cosubstrate in this instance could,     consideration of the possible use of the CoA-ester
through hydrogen bonding, function as a surro-      in the 2¢-hydroxylation reaction raises the larger
gate intramolecular general acid/base in place of      issue of the role of the enabling aroyl CoA ligase in
the normal histidine at this position of the enzyme.     the side chain assembly process.
   This transferase appears to be highly selective        Database searching of the induced Taxus cell
for esteriﬁcation at the 13-O-position but lacks      library revealed 22  total ESTs encoding seven
absolute speciﬁcity for the aroyl CoA donor, in      distinct CoA ligases of unknown function (ranging
that, while preferring b-phenylalanoyl-CoA (Vrel=     from 0.1 to 0.7& abundance), in addition to the
100), the enzyme can also transfer from 3-phe-      well known coumaroyl CoA ligase (14 ESTs, 1.7&
nylisoserinoyl-CoA at lower eﬃciency (Vrel=40).     abundance). Given the variety of acyl and aroyl
Neither  a-phenylalanoyl-CoA  nor  N-benzoyl      substitutions found  in  the  naturally  occurring
phenylisoserinoyl-CoA are productive acyl donors     taxoids (Baloglu and Kingston, 1999),  it  is not
(Vrel <1), consistent, in the ﬁrst case, with the      surprising that a number of CoA ligases are ex-
requirement for a 3-amino group (not 2-amino     pressed in this system for the purpose of activating
group) of the 3-phenylpropanoyl donor to serve as     the various acyl and aroyl groups before transfer


[PDF physical page 19]
                                                                                         93

to the taxane core or C13-side chain. Evaluation of     deﬁned in the not too distant future. However, as
the full-length expressed forms with all conceivable      indicated throughout this chapter, the complexity
side chain precursors (b-phenylalanine, phenyl-     of taxoid metabolism, the limitations of feeding
isoserine, and N-benzoyl phenylisoserine) should      studies (in availability of relevant labeled precur-
allow determination of relevant types and their      sors, and in precursor uptake and in the sometimes
speciﬁcity; note here that Floss and associates have     non-physiological disposition of exogenous pre-
demonstrated incorporation of both b-phenylala-      cursors), and the shortcomings of inference from
nine and phenylisoserine (less eﬃciently), but not     the in vitro properties of native and recombinant
the N-benzoate,  into Taxol by Taxus  feeding     enzymes, may defy our best eﬀorts to extricate the
studies (see Floss and Mocek, 1995), suggesting      kinetically most eﬃcient pathway to Taxol from
that both of  these 3-amino-3-phenyl-propanoic     multiple competing routes to the target, and from
acids can be activated to the CoA-ester before     numerous side reactions and metabolic dead-ends;
transfer. It is anticipated that a combined assess-      additional approaches will be necessary.
ment of selectivity of both the aroyl CoA ligase        Expression proﬁling of pathway genes in in-
and C13-side chain aroyl CoA transferase, along     duced Taxus  cells  relative to  their constitutive
with additional feeding studies with the relevant     counterparts will certainly provide important bio-
precursors and direct evaluation of b-phenylala-     chemical context and can assist in revealing ﬂux-
noyl CoA as a possible 2¢-hydroxylase substrate,      restricting metabolic steps. However, transgenic
will reveal the timing of the 2¢-hydroxylation step     manipulation of the pathway  in cultured  cells
and give further guidance to the 2¢-hydroxylase     would appear to provide the most productive
cloning eﬀort.                                 means of delineating precursor–product relation-
                                                        ships (and the true substrates for reactions thus far
Conclusions                                      probed only with surrogates), sequencing reaction
                                                             steps, and deﬁning ﬂux controls. The transgenic up-
Intense activity in developing new uses of Taxol in      regulation and knock-out of each gene of the
cancer chemotherapy, and  in the treatment of     pathway should result, respectively, in a decreased
other human maladies ranging from polycystic      level of upstream metabolites and increased level of
kidney disease (Woo et  al., 1994), to coronary     immediate precursor(s) relative to the metabolite
restenosis (Park et al., 2003), to Alzheimer’s dis-     proﬁle of controls to reveal placement and relative
ease (Zhang et  al., 2005), will ensure continued     contribution to pathway (and oﬀ-pathway) ﬂux. A
interest in the supply and cost of this valuable     systematic approach of this type, in addition to
natural product, and in  its biosynthesis in yew      revealing the role of each gene product, is central to
species as the only viable source. A range of     deﬁning the most direct route to Taxol and has
studies described here have revealed several of the    many practical consequences for improving pro-
early and  late  steps of the Taxol biosynthetic     duction yield. Thus, increasing precursor supply by
pathway, and over half of the genes (14 out of 20)     manipulation  of  the  plastidial MEP pathway,
required for the biosynthesis of Taxol from pri-      increasing ﬂux through the early slow steps of the
mary metabolites have now been cloned. Although      reaction sequence (e.g., TS, taxadiene 5a-hydrox-
the sequence of reactions, especially those com-      ylase) and eliminating limitations to side chain
prising the mid-section of the pathway,  is  still     assembly on baccatin III can all be expected to in-
uncertain, and several steps for modiﬁcation of the      crease Taxol production. An alternative approach
core and for side chain assembly are still unknown      directed to knock-out of major diversionary routes
at the enzyme and gene level, the broad outlines of       (e.g., to 14b-hydroxy taxoids, and C9- and C13-
taxoid metabolism have emerged, as have some      acetate derivatives) should similarly increase Taxol
details of the organization, regulation and evolu-      yield. Redirection of the pathway by transgenic
tionary origins of the pathway that may serve as a    means may also oﬀer a complementary approach
model for the formation of other complex natural     to the diﬃcult semi-synthesis of new, second gen-
products.                                              eration  drugs, such  as C9-dihydrotaxoids and
   With the biochemical and molecular tools cur-     C13,C14-dihydroxytaxoids, that hold promise for
rently in hand, it is anticipated that the remaining     improved eﬃcacy (Alder et  al., 1996; Distefano
enzymes and genes of Taxol biosynthesis will be      et al., 1997; Polizzi et al., 1999).


[PDF physical page 20]
94

   The coming years are  certain to witness a     Brown DT (2003) Preclinical and clinical studies of the taxanes
continuation of feeding studies and other classical           In: Itokawa H & Lee K-H (eds) Taxus – The Genus Taxus.
                                                                         (pp. 387–435). Taylor & Francis, London, UK.
biochemical approaches to understanding the ori-     Brown NF, Anderson RC, Caplan SL, Foster DW & McGarry
gins of Taxol. Interesting new enzymology will       JD (1994) Catalytically important domains of rat carnitine
likely be revealed, and understanding substrate          palmitoyltransferase II as determined by site-directed muta-
                                                                          genesis and chemical modiﬁcation. Evidence for a critical
selectivity and the regio and stereochemistry of the
                                                                              histidine residue. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 19157–19162.
target enzymatic reactions (and their placement on      Burke C & Croteau R (2002) Interaction with the small
the pathway) will assist in ﬁnding an eﬃcient road         subunit of geranyl diphosphate synthase modiﬁes the chain
to Taxol that must exist among the many diver-          length speciﬁcity of geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase
                                                                       to produce geranyl diphosphate. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 3141–
sions and dead-ends along the way. Cloning the                                                                     3149.
missing biosynthetic genes will also remain a high     Chau M & Croteau R (2004) Molecular cloning and charac-
priority, but the major thrust in the future will be          terization  of a cytochrome P450 taxoid 2a-hydroxylase
transgenic manipulation of Taxus  cells to fully         involved in taxol biosynthesis. Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
                                                                       427: 48–57.
deﬁne the pathway and its controls, and to exploit                                                    Chau M, Jennewein S, Walker K & Croteau R (2004a) Taxol
the tools and information gained to increase Taxol          biosynthesis: molecular cloning and characterization of a
yields.                                                        cytochrome P450 taxoid 7b-hydroxylase. Chem. Biol. 11:
                                                                  663–672.
                                                     Chau M, Walker K, Long R & Croteau R (2004b) Regioselec-
                                                                                        tivity of taxoid-O-acetyltransferases: heterologous expression
Acknowledgements                                        and characterization of a new taxadien-5a-O-acetyltransferase.
                                                                  Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 430: 237–246.
                                                                      Collins D, Mill RR & Mo¨ller M (2003) Species separation of
Studies on the origin of Taxol in our laboratory        Taxus baccata, T. canadensis and T. cuspidata (Taxaceae)
were supported by a grant from the National        and origins of their reputed hybrids inferred from RAPD
Institutes of Health (National Cancer Institute;        and cpDNA data. Am. J. Bot. 90: 175–182.
CA-55254), a research agreement with Cytoclo-      Cragg GM, Schepartz SA, Suﬀness M & Grever MR (1993)
                                                         The Taxol supply crisis. New NCI policies for handling the
nal Pharmaceutics (eXegenics Inc.)/Bristol-Myers          large-scale production of novel natural product anticancer
Squibb, and McIntire-Stennis Project 0967 from        and anti-HIV agents. J. Nat. Prod. 56: 1657–1668.
the  Agricultural Research  Center, Washington     Croom EM Jr (1995) Taxus for taxol and taxoids In: Suﬀness
                                                  M. (ed) Taxol – Science and Applications. (pp. 37–70). CRC
State University. We are indebted to a group of
                                                                            Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA.
dedicated coworkers for  their many eﬀorts, as      Daniewski WM, Gumulka M, Anczewski W, Masnyk M,
indicated in the appropriate references, and to         Bioszyk E & Gupta KK (1998) Why the yew tree (Taxus
our  expert  collaborators Robert M.  Williams          baccata) is not attacked by insects. Phytochemistry 49: 1279–
                                                                     1282.
(Colorado State University), Robert M. Coates                                                             Davis EM & Croteau R (2000) Cyclization enzymes in the
(University  of  Illinois)  and  Heinz  G.  Floss          biosynthesis of monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes, and diterp-
(University of Washington).                                       enes. Top. Curr. Chem. 209: 53–95.
                                                       DeJong JM, Liu Y, Bollon AP, Long RM, Jennewein S,
                                                                  Williams D & Croteau RB (2005) Genetic engineering of
                                                                        taxol biosynthetic genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Bio-
                                                                         technol. Bioeng. (in press).
References                                                     Della Casa de Marcano DP & Halsall TG (1969) The isolation
                                                                       of seven new taxane derivatives from the heartwood of yew
Adams JD, Flora KP, Goldspiel BR, Wilson JW, Arbuck SG &         (Taxus baccata L.). Chem. Commun. 1969: 1282–1283.
   Finley R (1993) Taxol: a history of pharmaceutical devel-      Distefano M, Scambia G, Ferlini C, Gaaini C, De Vincenzo R,
  opment and current pharmaceutical concerns. Monograph        Riva A, Bombardelli E, Ojima I, Fattorossi A, Panici PB &
   Natl. Cancer Inst. 15: 141–147.                             Mancuso S (1997) Anti-proliferative activity of a new class
Alder JD, Jarvis KP, Marsh KC, Klein LL & Clement JJ (1996)          of taxanes (14b-hydroxy-10-deacetylbaccatin III derivatives)
   Preclinical in vivo eﬃcacy of two 9-dihydrotaxane analogues        on multidrug-resistance-positive human cancer cells. Int. J.
   against human and murine tumours. Brit. J. Cancer 73: 560–        Cancer 72: 844–850.
   564.                                                             Eisenreich W, Menhard B, Hylands PJ, Zenk MH & Bacher A
Arbuck SG & Blaylock BA (1995)  Taxol: clinical results and          (1996) Studies on the biosynthesis of  taxol: the taxane
   current issues in development  In: Suﬀness M (ed) Taxol –         carbon skeleton  is not of mevalonoid origin. Proc. Natl.
   Science and Applications. (pp. 379–415). CRC Press, Boca        Acad. Sci. USA 93: 6431–6436.
  Raton, FL, USA.                                                Eisenreich W, Menhard B, Lee MS, Zenk MH & Bacher A
Baloglu E & Kingston DGI (1999) The taxane diterpenoids.          (1998) Multiple oxygenase reactions in the biosynthesis of
   J. Nat. Prod. 62: 1448–1472.                                          taxoids. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 120: 9694–9695.


[PDF physical page 21]
                                                                                         95

Eisenreich W, Rohdich F & Bacher A (2001) Deoxyxylulose          of the role of this prenyltransferase in cells induced for taxol
   phosphate pathway to terpenoids. Trends Plant Sci. 6: 78–         production. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 360: 62–74.
   84.                                                          Hezari M, Lewis NG & Croteau R (1995) Puriﬁcation and
Elmer WH, Mattina MJI & MacEachern GI (1994) Sensitivity          characterization  of  taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene  synthase from
   of plant pathogenic fungi to taxane extracts from orna-         Paciﬁc yew  (Taxus  brevifolia)  that  catalyzes  the  ﬁrst
   mental yews. Phytopathology 84: 1179–1185.                     committed  step  of  taxol  biosynthesis.  Arch.  Biochem.
Estevez JM, Cantero A, Reindl A, Reichler S & Leon P (2001)         Biophys. 322: 437–444.
   1-Deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate synthase, a limiting enzyme      Hezari M & Croteau R (1997) Taxol biosynthesis: an update.
   for plastidic isoprenoid biosynthesis in plants. J. Biol. Chem.         Planta Med. 63: 291–295.
   276: 22901–22909.                                            Hezari M, Ketchum REB, Gibson DM & Croteau R (1997)
Fleming PE, Mocek U & Floss HG (1993) Biosynthesis of        Taxol production and taxadiene synthase activity in Taxus
   taxoids. Mode of formation of the Taxol side chain. J. Am.          canadensis cell suspension cultures. Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
  Chem. Soc. 115: 805–807.                                           337: 185–190.
Fleming PE, Knaggs AR, He X-G, Mocek U & Floss HG      Itokawa H (2003)  Taxoids occuring in the genus Taxus  In:
   (1994) Biosynthesis of taxoids. Mode of attachment of the        Itokawa H & Lee K-H (eds) Taxus – The Genus Taxus. (pp.
   taxol side chain. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 116: 4137–4138.                35–78). Taylor & Francis,, London, UK.
Floss HG & Mocek U (1995) Biosynthesis of taxol In: Suﬀness      Jennewein S & Croteau R (2001) Taxol: biosynthesis, molecular
 M (ed) Taxol – Science and Applications. (pp. 191–208).          genetics and biotechnological applications. Appl. Microbiol.
  CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA.                                 Biotechnol. 57: 13–19.
Ganesh T, Guza RC, Bane  S, Ravindra R, Shanker N,      Jennewein S, Rithner CD, Williams RM & Croteau R (2001)
  Lakdawala AS, Snyder JP & Kingston DGI (2004) The        Taxol biosynthesis: taxane 13a-hydroxylase is a cytochrome
   bioactive taxol conformation on beta-tubulin: experimental         P450-dependent monooxygenase. Proc.  Natl. Acad.  Sci.
   evidence from highly active constrained analogs. Proc. Natl.      USA 98: 13595–13600.
  Acad. Sci. USA 101: 10006–10011.                            Jennewein S, Rithner CD, Williams RM & Croteau R (2003)
Georg GI, Boge TC, Cheruvallath ZS, Clowers JS, Harriman        Taxoid metabolism: taxoid 14b-hydroxylase is a cytochrome
  GCB, Hepperle M & Park H (1995) The medicinal chemistry         P450-dependent monooxygenase. Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
   of Taxol    In: Suﬀness M  (ed) Taxol –  Science and          413: 262–270.
   Applications. (pp. 317–375). CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,      Jennewein S, Long RM, Williams RM & Croteau R (2004a)
  USA.                                                    Cytochrome P450 taxadiene 5a-hydroxylase, a mechanisti-
Gibson DM, Ketchum REB, Hirasuna TJ & Shuler ML (1995)           cally unusual monooxygenase catalyzing the ﬁrst oxygena-
   Potential of plant cell culture for taxane production  In:          tion step of taxol biosynthesis. Chem. Biol. 11: 379–387.
  Suﬀness M. (ed) Taxol – Science and Applications. (pp. 71–      Jennewein S, Wildung MR, Chau M, Walker K & Croteau R
   95). CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA.                           (2004b) Random sequencing  of an induced Taxus  cell
Giner J-L & Faraldos JA (2003) Facile orthoester formation in      cDNA library for identiﬁcation of clones involved in taxol
  a model compound of the taxol oxetane: are biologically          biosynthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101: 9149–9154.
   active epoxy esters, orthoesters and oxetanyl esters latent      Jennewein S, Park H, DeJong JM, Long RM, Bollon AP &
   electrophiles?. Helv. Chem. Acta 86: 3613–3622.                   Croteau RB (2005) Coexpression in yeast of Taxus cyto-
Goldspiel BR (1997) Clinical overview of the taxanes Pharma-        chrome P450 reductase with cytochrome P450 oxygenases
   cotherapy 17: 110S–125S.                                          involved in taxol biosynthesis. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 89: 588–
Goodman J & Walsh V (2001) The Story of Taxol. Cambridge          598.
   University Press, Cambridge, UK 282 p.                            Jime´nez-Barbero J, Amat-Guerri F & Snyder JP (2002) The
Groves JT & Subramanian DV  (1984) Hydroxylation by          solid state, solution and tubulin-bound conformations of
  cytochrome P-450 and metalloporphyrin models. Evidence         agents that promote microtubule stabilization. Curr. Med.
   for allylic rearrangement. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 106: 2177–        Chem. Anti-Cancer Agents 2: 91–122.
   2181.                                                               Jin Q, Williams DC, Hezari M, Croteau R & Coates RM
Groves JT (2005) Models and mechanisms of cytochrome         (2005a) Stereochemistry of the macrocyclizaton and elimi-
  P450 action. In: Ortiz de Montellano PR (ed) Cytochrome         nation steps in taxadiene biosynthesis through deuterium
   P450: Structure, Mechanism, and Biochemistry, 3rd edition          labeling. J. Org. Chem. 70: 4667–4675.
   (pp. 1–43). Kluwer Academic/Plenum Press, New York,       Jin Y, Williams DC, Croteau R & Coates RM (2005b)
  NY, USA.                                                    Taxadiene synthase-catalyzed cyclization of 6-ﬂuorogeranyl-
Gue´ritte-Voegelein F, Gue´nard D & Potier P (1987) Taxol and         geranyl diphosphate to 7-ﬂuoroverticillenes. J. Am. Chem.
   derivatives: a biogenetic hypothesis. J. Nat. Prod. 50: 9–18.          Soc. 127: 7834–7842.
Harrison JW,  Scrowston RM & Lythgoe B  (1966) The     Ketchum REB, Gibson DM, Croteau R & Shuler ML (1999)
   constitution of taxine-I. J. Chem. Soc. (C) 1996: 1933–1945.        The  kinetics of taxoid accumulation  in  cell suspension
Hartzell H Jr (1991) The Yew Tree (319 pp). Hulogosi Press,          cultures of Taxus following elicitation with methyl jasmo-
   Eugene, OR, USA.                                                    nate. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 62: 97–105.
Hefner  J,  Rubenstein SM, Ketchum REB, Gibson DM,     Ketchum REB, Rithner CD, Qiu D, Kim YS, Williams RM &
   Williams RM & Croteau R  (1996) Cytochrome P450-        Croteau RB (2003) Taxus metabolomics: methyl jasmonate
   catalyzed hydroxylation of taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene to taxa-          preferentially induces production of taxoids oxygenated at
   4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-ol: the ﬁrst oxygenation step in taxol        C-13 in Taxus  media cell cultures. Phytochemistry 62: 901–
   biosynthesis. Chem. Biol. 3: 479–489.                               909.
Hefner J, Ketchum REB & Croteau R (1998) Cloning and     Ketchum REB & Croteau R (2005) The taxoid metabolome
   functional expression of a cDNA encoding geranylgeranyl        and the elucidation of the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway in
   diphosphate synthase from Taxus canadensis and assessment            cell suspension cultures of Taxus  In: Saito K, Dixon R &


[PDF physical page 22]
96

   Willmetzer L (eds) Biotechnology in Agriculture and For-          sion cultures of Taxus chinensis. Phytochemistry 50: 763–
   estry.. Springer Heidelbergin press.                                  774.
Kikuchi Y & Yatagai M (2003) The commercial cultivation of      Miyazaki M, Shimizu K, Mishima H & Kurabayashi M (1968)
  Taxus species and production of taxoids  In: Itokawa H &        The constituents of the heartwood of Taxus cuspidata Sieb.
  Lee K-H (eds) Taxus – The Genus Taxus. (pp. 151–178).           et Zucc. Chem. Pharm. Bull. (Tokyo) 16: 546–548.
   Taylor & Francis, London, UK.                          Odgen L (1988) Taxus (yews) – a highly toxic plant Vet. Hum.
Kingston DGI, Molinero AA & Rimoldi JM (1993) The taxane          Toxicol. 30: 563–564.
   diterpenoids. Prog. Chem. Org. Nat. Prod. 61: 1–206.             Ortiz de Montellano PR & De Voss JJ (2005)   Substrate
Kingston DGI (1995) Recent advances in the chemistry and         oxidation by  cytochrome P450 enzymes   In:  Ortiz  de
   structure–activity relationships of paclitaxel Am. Chem. Soc.        Montellano PR (ed) Cytochrome P450: Structure Mecha-
  Symp. Ser. 583: 203–216.                                          nism, and Biochemistry. 3rd edition, (pp. 183–245). Kluwer
Kingston DGI, Jagtop PG, Yuan H & Samala L (2002) The        Academic/Plenum Press, New York, NY, USA.
   chemistry of Taxol and related taxoids. Prog. Chem. Org.      Park S-J, Shim WH, Ho DS, Raizner AE, Park S-W, Hong M-
   Nat. Prod. 84: 53–225.                                     K, Lee CW, Choi D, Jang Y, Lam R, Weissman NJ & Mintz
Koepp AE, Hezari M, Zajicek J, Stofer Vogel B, LaFever RE,      GS (2003) A paclitaxel-eluting stent for the prevention of
  Lewis NG & Croteau R (1995) Cyclization of geranylgeranyl         coronary restenosis. N. Engl. J. Med. 348: 1537–1545.
   diphosphate to taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene is the committed step      Pennington JJ, Fett-Neto AG, Nicholson SA, Kingston DG
   of Taxol biosynthesis in Paciﬁc yew. J. Biol. Chem. 270:     & Dicosmo F (1998) Acetyl CoA-10-deacetylbaccatin-III-
   8686–8690.                                                         O-acetyltransferase  activity  in  leaves and  cell  suspen-
Kutchan TM, Bock A & Dittrich H (1994) Heterologous         sion  cultures  of  Taxus  cuspidata.  Phytochemistry  49:
   expression of the plant proteins strictosidine synthase and         2261–2266.
   berberine bridge enzyme in insect cell culture. Phytochem-       Pichersky E & Gang DR (2000) Genetics and biochemistry of
   istry 35: 353–360.                                               secondary metabolism in plants: an evolutionary perspective.
Kuzuyama T & Seto H (2003) Diversity of the biosynthesis of         Trends Plant Sci. 5: 439–445.
   the isoprene units. Nat. Prod. Rep. 20: 171–183.                   Pilger R (1903) Taxaceae  In: Engler A & Prantl K (eds) Das
Laskaris G, DeJong CF,  Jaziri M, van  der  Heijden R,         Pﬂanzenreich, Vol. 18 (IV.5). (pp. 1–24). W. Engelmann,
   Theodoridis G &  Verpoorte R  (1999)  Geranylgeranyl          Leipzig, Germany.
   diphosphate synthase  activity and taxane production  in       Platt RV, Opie CT & Haslam E (1984) Plant proanthocyani-
  Taxus baccata cells. Phytochemistry 50: 939–946.                      dins. Part 8. Biosynthesis of ﬂavan-3-ols and other secondary
Laskaris G, van der Heiden R & Verpoorte R (2000) Puriﬁ-          plant products from (2S)-phenylalanine. Phytochemistry 23:
   cation and partial characterization of geranylgeranyl diphos-         2211–2217.
   phate synthase from Taxus baccata cell cultures. An enzyme       Polizzi D,  Pratesi G,  Tortoreta M, Supino R, Riva A,
   that regulates taxane biosynthesis. Plant Sci. 51: 97–105.            Bombardelli E & Zunino F (1999) A novel taxane with
Leete E & Bodem GB (1966) The biosynthesis of 3-dimethyla-        improved tolerability and therapeutic activity in a panel of
   mino-3-phenylpropanoic  acid  in yew. Tetrahedron  Lett.       human tumor xenografts. Cancer Res. 59: 1036–1040.
   1966: 3925–3927.                                   Pompon D, Louerat B, Bronnine A & Urban P (1996) Yeast
Lin X, Hezari M, Koepp AE, Floss HG & Croteau R (1996)         expression of animal and plant P450s in optimized redox
  Mechanism of taxadiene synthase, a diterpene cyclase that         environments. Methods Enzymol. 272: 51–64.
   catalyzes the ﬁrst step of taxol biosynthesis in Paciﬁc yew.      Ramos-Valdivia AC, van der Heijden R & Verpoorte R (1997)
   Biochemistry 35: 2968–2977.                                       Isopentenyl  diphosphate  isomerase:  a  core  enzyme  in
Long RM & Croteau R (2005) Preliminary assessment of the         isoprenoid biosynthesis A review of  its biochemistry and
   C13-side chain 2¢-hydroxylase involved in taxol biosynthesis.          function. Nat. Prod. Rep. 14: 591–603.
  Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. (in press).                    Rikhari HC, Palni LMS, Sharma S & Nandi SK (1998)
Lovy Wheeler A, Long RM, Ketchum REB, Rithner CD,        Himalayan yew: stand structure, canopy damage, regenera-
   Williams RM & Croteau R  (2001) Taxol  biosynthesis:          tion and conservation strategy. Environ. Conserv. 25: 334–
   diﬀerential transformation of taxadien-5a-ol and its acetate          341.
   ester by cytochrome P450 hydroxylases from Taxus suspen-      Rohdich F, Hecht S, Ga¨rtner K, Adam P, Krieger C, Amslinger
   sion cells. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 390: 265–278.                     S, Arigoni D, Bacher A & Eisenreich W (2002) Studies on
MacMillan J & Beale MH (1999)  Diterpene biosynthesis  In:          the nonmevalonate terpene biosynthetic pathway: metabolic
  Cane DE (ed) Comprehensive Natural Products Chemistry,          role of IspH (LytB) protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99:
   Vol. 2, Isoprenoids Including Carotenoids and Steroids. (pp.         1158–1163.
   217–243). Elsevier Science, Oxford UK.                    Rohmer M (1999) The discovery of a mevalonate-independent
Mahmoud SS & Croteau R (2001) Metabolic engineering of        pathway for isoprenoid biosynthesis in bacteria, algae and
   essential  oil  yield and composition  in mint by  altering         higher plants Nat. Prod. Rep. 16: 565–574.
   expression  of deoxyxylulose phosphate reductoisomerase      Rowinsky EK (1997) The development and clinical utility of the
  and menthofuran synthase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98:         taxane class of antimicrotubule chemotherapy agents Ann.
   8915–8920.                                                   Rev. Med. 48: 353–374.
McCoy M (2004) Lining up to make a cancer drug. Chem. Eng.      Rubenstein SM &  Williams RM  (1995)  Studies on  the
  News 82: 12–14.                                                     biosynthesis of Taxol: total synthesis of taxa-4(20),11(12)-
Menhard B, Eisenreich W, Hylands PJ, Bacher A & Zenk MH         diene and taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene. The ﬁrst committed bio-
   (1998)  Taxoids from  cell  cultures  of Taxus  chinensis.          synthetic intermediate. J. Org. Chem. 60: 7215–7223.
   Phytochemistry 49: 113–125.                            SchiﬀPB, Fant  J &  Horwitz SB  (1979) Promotion  of
Menhard B & Zenk MH (1999) Puriﬁcation of acetyl coenzyme         microtubule assembly in vitro by Taxol. Nature 277: 665–
   A:10-hydroxytaxane O-acetyltransferase from  cell suspen-          667.


[PDF physical page 23]
                                                                                         97

Schoendorf A, Rithner CD, Williams RM & Croteau R (2001)      Walker K, Fujisaki S, Long R & Croteau R (2002b) Molecular
   Molecular  cloning  of a cytochrome P450  taxane  10b-         cloning and heterologous expression of the C-13 phenyl-
   hydroxylase cDNA from Taxus and functional expression        propanoid side chain-CoA acyltransferase that functions in
   in yeast. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98: 1501–1506.                 taxol biosynthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99: 12715–
Silverman RB  (2000) Monooxygenation.  In: The Organic         12720.
   Chemistry of Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions (pp. 175–226).      Walker K, Klettke K, Akiyama T & Croteau R (2004) Cloning,
  Academic Press, San Diego, CA, USA.                            heterologous expression and characterization of a phenylal-
Steele CL, Chen Y, Dougherty BA, Hofstead S, Lam KS, Li W         anine aminomutase involved in taxol biosynthesis. J. Biol.
  & Xing Z (2003) Taxus phenylalanine aminomutase and        Chem. 279: 53947–53954.
  methods  to  improve  Taxol  production.  (Bristol-Myers      Wall ME & Wani MC (1995) Paclitaxel: from discovery to
  Squibb Co., USA) patent WO 03/066871 A2 (38 pp).                   clinic. Am. Chem. Soc. Symp. Ser. 583: 18–30.
St-Pierre B & De Luca V (2000) Evolution of acetyltransferase      Walsh V & Goodman J (2002) From taxol to Taxol: the
   genes: origin and diversiﬁcation of the BAHD superfamily of         changing identities and ownership of an anti-cancer drug.
   acetyltransferases involved in secondary metabolism. Recent        Med. Anthropol. 21: 307–336.
  Adv. Phytochem. 34: 285–315.                         Wang X, Itokawa H & Lee K-H (2003) Structure–activity
Straubinger RM (1995) Biopharmaceutics of paclitaxel (Taxol):          relationships of taxoids.  In: Itokawa H & Lee K-H (eds)
   formulation, activity, and pharmacokinetics. In: Suﬀness M        Taxus – The Genus Taxus. (pp. 298–386). Taylor & Francis,
   (ed) Taxol – Science and Applications. (pp. 237–258). CRC        London, UK.
   Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA.                           Wani MC, Taylor HC, Wall ME, Coggan P & McPhail AT
Suﬀness M & Wall ME (1995) Discovery and development of          (1971) The isolation and structure of taxol, a novel antileu-
  Taxol In: Suﬀness M (ed) Taxol – Science and Applications.        kemic and antitumor agent from Taxus brevifolia. J. Am.
   (pp. 3–25). CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA.                 Chem. Soc. 93: 2325–2327.
Tabata H (2004) Paclitaxel production by plant-cell-culture      Wildung MR &  Croteau R  (1996) A cDNA  clone  for
   technology. Adv. Biochem. Engin. Biotechnol. 7: 1–23.              taxadiene synthase, the diterpene cyclase that catalyzes the
Takeya K (2003) Plant tissue culture of taxoids In: Itokawa H        committed step of Taxol biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 271:
  & Lee K-H (eds) Taxus – The Genus Taxus. (pp. 134–150).         9201–9204.
   Taylor & Francis, London, UK.                               Williams DC, Carroll BJ, Jin Q, Rithner C, Lenger SR, Floss
vonWachenfeldt C & Johnson EF (1995) Structures of eukary-       HG, Coates RM, Williams RM & Croteau R (2000a)
   otic cytochrome P450 enzymes  In: Ortiz de Montellano PR         Intramolecular proton transfer in the cyclization of geranyl-
   (ed) Cytochrome P450: Structure, Mechanism, and Bio-         geranyl diphosphate to the taxadiene precursor of Taxol
   chemistry. 2nd edition, (pp. 183–223). Plenum Press, New          catalyzed by recombinant taxadiene synthase. Chem. Biol. 7:
  York, NY, USA.                                                969–977.
Walker K & Floss HG (1998) Detection of a phenylalanine      Williams DC, Wildung MR, Jin AQ, Dalal D, Oliver JS, Coates
  aminomutase in cell-free extracts of Taxus brevifolia and     RM & Croteau R (2000b) Heterologous expression and
   preliminary characterization of its reaction. J. Am. Chem.          characterization of a ‘‘pseudomature’’ form of taxadiene
   Soc. 120: 5333–5334.                                              synthase involved in paclitaxel (Taxol) biosynthesis, and
Walker K & Croteau R (1999) Taxol biosynthesis: a review of         evaluation of a potential intermediate and inhibitors of the
  some determinant steps. Recent Adv. Phytochem. 33: 31–50.          multistep diterpene  cyclization  reaction. Arch. Biochem.
Walker K, Ketchum REB, Hezari M, Gatﬁeld D, Goleniowski         Biophys. 379: 137–146.
  M, Barthol A & Croteau R (1999) Partial puriﬁcation and    Woo DDL, Miao SYP, Pelayo JC & Woolf AS (1994) Taxol
   characterization  of  acetyl coenzyme  A:taxa-4(20),11(12)-           inhibits progression of congenital polycystic kidney disease.
   dien-5a-ol-O-acetyl transferase that catalyzes the ﬁrst acyl-        Nature 368: 750–753.
   ation step of Taxol biosynthesis. Arch. Biochem. Biophys.     Wuts PGM (1998) Semisynthesis of Taxol Curr. Opin. Drug
   364: 273–279.                                                       Disc. Devel. 1: 329–337.
Walker K, Schoendorf A & Croteau R (2000) Molecular      Xiao Z, Itokawa H & Lee K-H (2003)  Total synthesis of
   cloning of a taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-ol-O-acetyl transfer-          taxoids. In: Itokawa H & Lee K-H (eds) Taxus – The Genus
   ase cDNA from Taxus and functional expression in Escher-         Taxus. (pp. 245–297). Taylor & Francis, London, UK.
   ichia coli. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 374: 371–380.             Young DH, Michelotti EL, Swindell CS & Krauss NE (1992)
Walker K & Croteau R (2000a) Taxol biosynthesis: molecular         Antifungal  properties  of Taxol and  various  analogues.
   cloning of a benzoyl CoA:taxane-2a-O-benzoyl transferase         Experientia 48: 882–885.
  cDNA from Taxus and functional expression in Escherichia     Zhang B, Maiti A, Shively S, Lakhani F, McDonald-Jones G,
    coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 13591–13596.                 Bruce J, Lee EB, Xie SX, Joyce S, Li C, Toleikis PM, Lee
Walker K & Croteau R (2000b) Molecular cloning of a      VM-Y & Trojanowski JQ (2005) Microtubule-binding drugs
   10-deacetylbaccatin III-10-O-acetyl transferase cDNA from         oﬀset tau  sequestration by  stablizing microtubules and
  Taxus and functional expression in Escherichia coli. Proc.          reversing fast axonal transport deﬁcits in a tauopathy model.
   Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 583–587.                                 Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 102: 227–231.
Walker K & Croteau R (2001) Taxol biosynthetic genes.      Zocher R, Weckwerth W, Hacker C, Kammer B, Hornbogen T
   Phytochemistry 58: 1–7.                          & Ewald D (1996) Biosynthesis of Taxol: enzymatic acety-
Walker K, Long R & Croteau R (2002a) The ﬁnal acylation          lation of 10 deacetylbaccatin III to baccatin III in crude
   step in taxol biosynthesis: cloning of the taxoid C13-side-          extracts from roots of it Taxus baccata. Biochem. Biophys.
   chain N-benzoyltransferase from Taxus. Proc. Nat. Acad.         Res. Commun. 229: 16–20.
   Sci. USA 99: 9166–9171.