with BamHI/SalI and inserted into the corresponding site    antibody. The secondary antibody was either sheep anti-
behind  the GAL1 promoter  in-frame with  the VSVG   mouse or antirabbit IgG, as appropriate, conjugated with
epitope in the proper orientation.                             horseradish peroxidase (Sigma). Membranes were washed
  Procedures used for the maintenance, transformation,    with Tris-buffered saline, incubated with SuperSignal West
and induction of S. cerevisiae were those described in the    Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate (Pierce) for 5 min, then
Invitrogen manual. S. cerevisiae YPH499 competent cells    exposed to X-ray film.
(Stratagene) were prepared using the EasyComp Trans-     NADPH:cytochrome P450 reductase activity was deter-
formation kit (Invitrogen) and were transformed/cotrans-    mined via the (nonphysiological) reduction of cytochrome
formed with 1 Ag of the relevant plasmid(s) according to     c, which was measured spectrophotometrically at 550 nm
the  manufacturer’s  protocol. Transformed  cells were    (Gupta and Porter, 2001; Lord, 1983) employing a molar
selected on SD-Trp dropout plates and one or more colonies    absorption coefficient of 21 cm  1 mM  1 (Van Gelder and
were used to inoculate SD-Trp dropout liquid medium for     Slater, 1962). The standard assay contained 6 Ag/ml mi-
overnight  culture. The  cells were then  harvested by    crosomal protein, 0.2 mM oxidized bovine cytochrome c
centrifugation, suspended in galactose-Trp dropout medium    (Sigma, USA) and 2.5 AM each of FMN and FAD in 10 mM
to give A600 f0.4, and the induced cultures grown at 37jC    potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.7) with 0.1 mM EDTA,
with vigorous shaking. At various times postinduction,    1 mM DTT, and 20% (v/v) glycerol. The reaction was
aliquots of the suspended cells were taken for immunoblot-     initiated by addition of freshly prepared NADPH (Sigma)
ting and enzyme assay.                                          to a final concentration of 50 AM; assays were run in
                                                                        triplicate and the standard errors (SE) were within F 11%
                                                              of the mean in all cases. Following the establishment of
Immunoblotting and Enzyme Assays
                                                                    linear  reaction  conditions  in  protein concentration and
For instances in which the subcellular distribution of the    time, the pH optimum for the reductase was determined
recombinant reductase was uncertain (i.e., the expression of     in 0.25 M Tris-Cl (pH 7.0–9.0) and 0.25 M potassium
N-terminally truncated forms), crude cell lysates (prepared    phosphate (pH 5.5–8.5) buffers over intervals of 0.5 pH
by disruption of the cell pellet by vortex mixing with glass     units. The Km value for NADPH was determined under
beads for 5   30 sec at 4jC and low-speed centrifugation)   optimum assay conditions at concentrations ranging from
were employed  for immunoblotting and  activity assay.    1–100 AM. The SPSS (Chicago, IL) Sigmaplot Enzyme
Otherwise, established protocols for microsome preparation    Kinetics  1.10  software package was used  with  the
from insect cells (Jennewein et al., 2001, 2004b) and yeast    Michaelis-Menten method (R2 = 0.98 for the line of best
(Pompon et al., 1996) were employed. Membrane content      fit), and the data reported are the means F SE of triplicate
of cytochrome P450 was determined by CO-difference    analyses.  Purified recombinant human NADPH:cyto-
spectrometry (Omura and Sato, 1964) as described in detail    chrome P450 reductase (PanVera, Invitrogen) was used as
elsewhere (Schenkman and Jansson, 1998). Protein content     positive control and to calibrate the assay.
was determined by the Bradford (1976) method or using the     The assays for cytochrome P450 taxoid 10h-hydroxylase
Coomassie Plus  kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL) with bovine    (with [20-3H]taxadien-5a-yl acetate as substrate) and for
serum albumin as  standard. Established protocols  for    cytochrome P450 taxoid 13a-hydroxylase (with [20-3H]
membrane  solubilization and  reconstitution  (i.e., with    taxadien-5a-ol as substrate) have been described in detail
various reductases and/or cytochrome b5) were employed    elsewhere (Jennewein and Croteau, 2001; Lovy Wheeler
(Haudenschild et al., 2000; Shimada and Yamazaki, 1998);     et al., 2001; Schoendorf et al., 2001). Following incubation
the  solubilization  efficiency using Emulgen 911 (Kao    of  these microsomal  preparations  in  the  presence  of
Chemical, Tokyo) as detergent was about 50%.          NADPH and O2 in the dark, the radiolabeled product and
  Procedures  for immunoblotting  of  fusion  proteins     residual substrate were extracted and separated by reversed
bearing an appended C-terminal tag have been described    phase radio-HPLC, with quantification based on the labeled
(Jennewein et al., 2003, 2004a). Primary antibodies were     substrate of defined specific activity; assays were run in
mouse anti-HA, mouse anti-FLAG, and mouse anti-VSVG     triplicate and the means F SE are reported.
(all from Sigma, St. Louis, MO), depending on the target.
Anti-peptide antibodies were generated in rabbits by the
contractor (Genemed, South San Francisco, CA) against   RESULTS
two regions of the T. cuspidata reductase, the TDR1A
sequence  corresponding  to SDTQKPAVRPTPLVKEED
                                                             Isolation of a T. cuspidata Cytochrome(aa 79–96 with an appended C) and the TDR2B sequence
                                          P450 Reductase
corresponding to SVYEETHALKQNGQAVYD (aa 296–
313 with an appended C). Following SDS-PAGE with size    Based on multiple sequence alignment of the dozen defined
markers and  transfer  in  Tris-glycine  buffer  to PVDF    plant NADPH:cytochrome P450 reductases in GenBank,
membranes  using  a Bio-Rad  (Hercules, CA)  transfer    two highly conserved regions were identified to which
apparatus, the membranes were incubated with SuperBlock    degenerate deoxyoligonucleotide primers were designed.
blocking  buffer  (Pierce) and  the  appropriate primary    Using these primers in an RT-PCR reaction, with source



           JENNEWEIN ET AL.: COEXPRESSION OF CYTOCHROME P450 REDUCTASE AND TAXOID OXYGENASES       591