expression; Fig. 5) and no significant difference was ob-    and Croteau, 1996), in the case of the taxoid 10h-hydroxylase
served in the presence of either form of the recombinant    the source of the reductase is of little consequence; there
reductase at apparent saturation (Table  II).  It seems un-    are other examples of this phenomenon (Cabello-Hurtado
likely that the recombinant reductase failed to produc-     et al., 1998; Mizutani and Ohta, 1998; Urban et al., 1997).
tively couple with the recombinant 13a-hydroxylase in    Nevertheless, in transgenic applications, for which a series
yeast because productive coupling of the two was pre-    of different cytochrome P450-mediated oxygenation steps
viously demonstrated  in  insect  cells (Jennewein  et  al.,     is to be employed, redox compatibility is best ensured by
2001). Nor does  it seem that the mixed redox environ-    the use of the homologous reductase.
ment, resulting from the presence of both the T. cuspidata     The influence of cytochrome b5 on cytochrome P450
and endogenous yeast reductases, was detrimental because     catalysis can be quite variable, depending on the specific
productive coupling of the closely related 10h-hydroxylase    system. In the present instance (taxoid 10h-hydroxylase), a
was demonstrated under these same conditions. However,   60% increase in activity was observed by reconstituting rat
the taxoid 13a-hydroxylase has proven to be somewhat    cytochrome b5 into insect cell microsomes harboring both
difficult to functionally express in yeast (compared to the    Taxus reductase and hydroxylase. To more fully assess the
expression in Spodoptera cells [Jennewein et al., 2001] and     in situ influence of cytochrome b5 will require coexpression
to the expression of the 10h-hydroxylase in both systems    of the Taxus cytochrome in yeast along with the Taxus
[Schoendorf et al., 2001]) and, of the recombinant taxoid    reductase and  several  representative cytochrome P450
hydroxylases thus far examined,  it is the least stable in    taxoid hydroxylases. Any potential gain in hydroxylase
isolated yeast microsomes (Jennewein et al., 2001). Thus, it    flux by this approach will need to be balanced against the
seems most likely that the endogenous yeast reductase    operational limitations to stacking this additional gene into
was sufficient to saturate the limited amount of functional    what will already be a substantial and complex set of genes
13a-hydroxylase present in this cell-free system, and that    needed to reach the Taxol precursor baccatin  III from
no further gain in activity was possible in the presence of    primary metabolism.
excess recombinant reductase. Feeding studies with the      Coexpression of the Taxus reductase with the homo-
taxadien-5a-ol substrate using the intact transformed yeast    logous  taxoid 10h-hydroxylase  in  the  microbial  host
might offer an  alternative, in vivo means of assessing    demonstrated  successful  coupling by  the  substantial
the coupling  of recombinant reductase and  the  taxoid    increase in hydroxylase activity compared to that supported
13a-hydroxylase, and another approach to comparing the    by the endogenous yeast reductase alone. Such functional
13a- and 10h-hydroxylase systems.                           transgenic redox coupling represents an important initial
                                                                step in reconstructing the biosynthesis of Taxol and  its
                                                              precursors in the yeast host because nearly half of the
DISCUSSION
                                                     pathway steps are comprised of cytochrome P450-mediated
The cDNA encoding the NADPH:cytochrome P450 reduc-    oxygenation reactions. Successful coupling of the Taxus
tase from  T. cuspidata resembles  in sequence  other    reductase with the homologous taxoid 13a-hydroxylase
reductases of plant origin, and is more similar to those    could not be demonstrated, likely because of the previously
from gymnosperms than to those from angiosperms, as    noted (Jennewein et al., 2001) instability of this hydrox-
might be anticipated from the lineage of the Taxaceae    ylase and its resulting low activity recovered in the yeast
(Florin, 1948; Page, 1990). The reductase, as a single-    microsomal system used to assess the hydroxylation reac-
sequence acquisition, was relatively abundant in the induced     tion; the endogenous yeast reductase appeared sufficient to
T. cuspidata cell EST library and was shown to be present     saturate the limiting amount of functional microsomal hy-
in the Taxus genome as a single-copy gene. This contrasts    droxylase that was present in this case. Although it should
with  studies on  several angiosperm  species  that have    be possible to evaluate coupling of the reductase and taxoid
demonstrated the presence of multiple cytochrome P450    13a-hydroxylase by in vivo feeding of the intact trans-
reductases, one of which appears to be stress-inducible    formed yeast with the labeled taxadien 5a-ol substrate, it
(Koopmann and Hahlbrock, 1997; Mizutani and Ohta, 1998;    would be most informative to first install the required path-
Ro et al., 2002).                                   way steps leading to this intermediate (i.e., taxadiene syn-
  The recombinant enzyme, expressed in insect cells and    thase and taxadien 5a-hydroxylase, as well as the taxadienol
assayed with NADPH and the surrogate substrate cyto-    5-O-acetyltransferase) in order to additionally determine
chrome  c,  is similar to other cytochrome P450 reduc-    flux through this and the taxoid 10h-hydroxylation branch
tases in general properties (Benveniste et al., 1986, 1991;    of the pathway (see Fig. 1). This effort is under way and
Ponnamperuma and  Croteau, 1996; Shet  et  al.,  1993).     will be reported at a later date.
The T. cuspidata reductase was comparable to other plant-
derived reductases in supporting functional oxygenation by
reconstitution with the T. cuspidata taxoid 10h-hydroxylase.    References
Thus, although there are instances in which the nature of                                                               Auchus RJ, Lee TC, Miller WL. 1998. Cytochrome b5 augments the 17,20-
the reductase influences cytochrome P450 catalysis (Kraus          lyase activity of human P450c17 without direct electron transfer. J
and Kutchan, 1995; Pompon et al., 1996; Ponnamperuma         Biol Chem 273:3158–3165.



596       BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOENGINEERING, VOL. 89, NO. 5, MARCH 5, 2005