MATERIALS AND METHODS                                 restricted pFastBac vectors (Life Technologies, Bethesda,
                                               MD). The orientation and sequence of these reductase and
                                                          hydroxylase clones were confirmed and the pFastBac con-
Substrates and Reagents
                                                                     structs were then used for the preparation of the corre-
The preparations of [20-3H]taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-ol    sponding recombinant Bacmid DNA by transformation
and [20-3H]taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-yl acetate (both at    of E. coli strain DH10Bac (Life Technologies). This pro-
2 Ci/mol) have been described (Lovy Wheeler et al., 2001;     tocol, as well as the transfection of S. fugiperda Sf9 insect
Rubenstein et al., 2000). Rat liver cytochrome b5 and mung     cells, were carried out according to the manufacturer’s
bean NADPH:cytochrome P450 reductase were gifts from     instructions (Life Technologies). For control experiments,
R.W. Estabrook (Univ. Texas SW Med. Ctr., Dallas, TX).    construction was carried out identically, except that the
The commercial  sources  of  other  biochemicals and    recombinant baculovirus contained a h-glucuronidase gene
molecular biologicals are indicated in the text and were    instead of the cytochrome P450 reductase or hydroxylase
used according to the manufacturer’s instructions.            gene. Detailed procedures for the propagation of Sf9 cells,
                                                              protocols for expression (and coexpression), and methods
                                                                  for cell harvest have been described (Jennewein et al., 2001).
Cloning of Cytochrome P450 Reductase
                                                              Several reductase proteins with different truncations of
Sequence alignment of plant-derived NADPH:cytochrome    the presumptive N-terminal membrane insertion sequence
P450 reductases in the GenBank database revealed several    were expressed in yeast as fusions with a C-terminal HA
regions of near identity, thereby allowing a straightforward     epitope-tag. These constructs were amplified with the full-
homology-based approach to acquiring a cDNA encoding    length cDNA as template and the ClonTech Advantage-
this reductase from T. cuspidata. A degenerate forward   HF2 PCR kit using upstream primers encoding a BamHI
primer corresponding to 5V-GMKTTYCCDTCWGCHAA-     site and corresponding to the truncated sequence: TCPR1-
RCCHCCNCTHGGKG-3V and a degenerate reverse primer   N (5V-CCAGGATCCATGCAGGCTAATTCC-3V) encodes
corresponding to 5V-TYACCADACRTCW-CKDAGRTA-   MQANS (aa 1–5); TCPR1-1N (5V-CCAGGATCCATGACC
WCKTCC-3V, designed to two highly conserved regions,   GGCTCGGCTTTG-3V) encodes MTGSAL (aa 41–46);
were synthesized and used to amplify a fragment from   TCPR1-2N (5V-CCAGGATCCATGTGGAGGAGGGGAG-
an induced T. cuspidata suspension cell EZAP-II cDNA   GA-TCGGATAC-3V) encodes MWRRGGSDT (aa 74–81);
library (Schoendorf et al., 2001) as template. The amplicon    the common downstream primer TR2 (5V-CGCGTCGACT-
obtained showed good homology  to cytochrome P450   CAAGCGTAATCTGGAACATCGTATGGGTACCATA-
reductase sequences, and so was labeled and employed to   TATCTCGTAAGTATC) incorporates an SalI site, encodes
screen the same library (2   105 pfu) from which 16 partial   RYLRDIW (aa 711–717), followed by YPYDVPDYA (the
(5V-truncated)  clones were  obtained. By employing  a   HA epitope-tag sequence) and the stop codon. The following
T. cuspidata-induced cell RACE library, constructed using   PCR conditions were employed: 5 min  at 95jC, then
a ClonTech (Palo  Alto, CA) Marathon RACE  library    30 cycles for 40 sec at 95jC, 40 sec at 55jC, and extension
construction  kit,  the  missing  5V-sequence was  readily     for 2 min at 72jC, with final extension for 5 min at 72jC.
obtained with which the full-length gene was acquired   The resulting amplicons were digested with BamHI and
by PCR. T. cuspidata suspension cells used as the source     SalI, gel-purified, ligated into the corresponding sites of
of mRNA were induced for Taxol production with methyl   p425GAL1 or p425GPD (both from American Type Culture
jasmonate (Ketchum et al., 1999).                             Collection, Rockville, MD), and individually transformed
                                                                  into E. coli TOP10 competent cells (Invitrogen) for screen-
                                                            ing using the cracking gel technique and plasmid preparation
Constructs and Heterologous Expression
                                                            using the mini-prep kit (Promega, Madison, WI).
For functional expression and characterization of the newly      For coexpression studies using the pESC-Trp yeast dual
acquired T. cuspidata cytochrome P450 reductase, and for    expression vector (Stratagene, La  Jolla, CA), the cyto-
coexpression with T. cuspidata cytochrome P450 taxoid    chrome P450 taxoid 10h-hydroxylase (Schoendorf et al.,
10h-hydroxylase (Schoendorf et al., 2001), the baculovirus-    2001) and the cytochrome P450 taxoid 13a-hydroxylase
Spodoptera fugiperda (Sf9) system was used. For construc-    (Jennewein  et  al., 2001) were each amplified by PCR
tion of the recombinant baculoviruses, containing either    using Pfu DNA polymerase and gene-specific primers to
the reductase or the hydroxylase, the corresponding open    introduce 5V-NotI and 3V-ClaI restriction sites in the former.
reading frames (ORFs) were amplified by PCR using Pfu    In the latter case, 5V-BamHI and 3V-SalI restriction sites
DNA polymerase and  gene-specific primers containing    were introduced in addition to a C-terminal VSVG epitope-
appropriate restriction sites immediately upstream of the    tag (YTDIEMNRLGK). The resulting sequence-verified
starting ATG and downstream of the stop codon. The    amplicon for the 10h-hydroxylase was digested with NotI/
amplicons so obtained by  standard PCR procedures    ClaI and directionally inserted into the corresponding site
were gel-purified, subcloned first into pCR-Blunt vectors    behind the GAL10 promoter in-frame with the C-terminal
(Invitrogen, La Jolla, CA), and the ORFs then excised,   FLAG epitope (DYKDDDDK). The resulting sequence-
using the added restriction sites, and ligated into similarly     verified amplicon for the 13a-hydroxylase was digested



590       BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOENGINEERING, VOL. 89, NO. 5, MARCH 5, 2005