                                                      cytochrome P450 reductases were coexpressed with two
                                                                early taxoid pathway cytochrome P450 hydroxylases using
                                                               the Gal-inducible yeast dual expression vector pESC-Trp
                                                                (Stratagene). The  taxoid 10h-hydroxylase (Schoendorf
                                                                       et al., 2001) was inserted behind the GAL10 promoter in-
                                                       frame with the vector encoded C-terminal FLAG epitope,
                                                     and the taxoid 13a-hydroxylase (Jennewein et al., 2001)
                                                  was similarly inserted in the same vector behind the GAL1
                                                        promoter with the addition of a C-terminal VSVG epitope;
                                                           C-terminal  tagging  is without  significant  influence on





Figure 3.  Immunoblotting of T. cuspidata NADPH:cytochrome P450
reductase expressed in yeast using the anti-TDR1A (peptide specific)
antibodies. TCPR*1 and the empty vector control (vector) were expressed
and prepared as described in Figure 2 (36 h postinduction). Lane A illus-
trates detection with antibodies directed against the C-terminal HA-epitope
(anti-HA). Lanes B and C illustrate detection of the same sample with the
reductase peptide-specific antibodies (anti-TDR1A) and the lack thereof
with the corresponding preimmune control. Lane D illustrates the failure of
anti-TDR1A to crossreact with two other recombinant pathway enzymes,
geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase (GGPPS) and taxadiene synthase
(TS), expressed in yeast from pESC-Ura. The anti-TDR1A antibodies also
failed to detect taxadienol 5a-O-acetyltransferase and cytochrome P450
taxoid 10h-hydroxylase in experiments similarly performed.


with the anti-TDR1A-specific antibodies (the sizes of the
expressed proteins were as predicted; data not shown) and
by enzyme assay (cytochrome c reduction per mg crude
protein) (Fig. 4). Interestingly, the highest expression level
(by immunoblotting) and highest activity (by reductase
assay)  at  all time points were observed for the reduc-
tase from which both N-terminal insertion sequence and
C-terminal tag had been deleted (about 8-fold higher activ-
ity levels than empty vector control at 30 h). These results
indicated that both the N-terminal membrane insertion se-
quence and the C-terminal HA-tag adversely influenced
the expression of catalytically functional reductase and that                                                                    Figure 4.  Expression and assay of full-length and truncated forms of
(by comparison with the various intermediate truncated      T. cuspidata NADPH:cytochrome P450  reductase. Crude  extracts  of
and tag-deleted forms) the N-terminus exerted the greatest    YPH499 cells transformed with various reductase (TCPR) constructs under
negative influence (by about 3-fold compared to less than      control of the GAL1 promoter (A) or constitutive GPD promoter (B) were
2-fold for the C-terminal tag). This experiment was re-     prepared at the indicated times postinduction and equal aliquots were
                                                                         assayed in triplicate for (cytochrome c) reductase activity (averages are
peated with the same set of constructs but under the con-                                                                             reported and the standard errors were within F 11% of the means). The
trol of the GPD  (constitutive) promoter  (Fig. 4) and,      constructs are the empty vector (endogenous reductase) control (GAL1
although overall expression levels were reduced by about     and GPD), two independently prepared full-length forms (aa 1–717) with
half, the conclusions were the same.                                C-terminal HA-tag (*1), and without the tag (*2), the partially truncated
                                                                  form (aa 41–717) with C-terminal HA-tag (A1), the partially truncated
                                                                  form (aa 56–717) without the HA-tag (A2), the fully truncated form (aa
Coexpression of Reductase With Taxoid                   74–717) with C-terminal HA-tag (B1), and the fully truncated form with-
Hydroxylases in Yeast                                              out the HA-tag (B2). Immunoblotting of the same extracts with the anti-
                                                  TDR1A peptide-specific antibodies showed expression levels to roughly
In order to reconstitute functional taxoid hydroxylating     correspond to activity levels. Expression of the reductase (all forms) from
systems in situ in the yeast host, the variously modified    p425GPD was roughly half as efficient as that from p425GAL1.



594       BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOENGINEERING, VOL. 89, NO. 5, MARCH 5, 2005