
[PDF physical page 1]
Biosynthesis of Biphenomycin-like Macrocyclic Peptides by
Formation and Cross-Linking of Ortho-Tyrosines
Chandrashekhar Padhi, Lingyang Zhu, Jeff Y. Chen, Chuan Huang, Ryan Moreira, Gregory L. Challis,
Max J. Cryle, and Wilfred A. van der Donk*
Cite This: J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Ribosomally synthesized and posttranslationally modified pep-
tides (RiPPs) are a growing class of natural products. Multinuclear nonheme
iron-dependent oxidative enzymes (MNIOs, previously DUF692) are involved
in a range of unprecedented biochemical reactions. Over 13,500 putative
MNIO-encoding biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) have been identified by
sequence similarity networks. In this study, we investigated a set of precursor
peptides containing a conserved FHAFRF motif in MNIO-encoding BGCs.
These BGCs contain genes encoding an MNIO, a RiPP recognition element-
containing protein, an arginase, a hydroxylase, and a vitamin B12-dependent
radical SAM enzyme (B12-rSAM). Using heterologous reconstitution of a
representative BGC from Peribacillus simplex (pbs cluster) in E. coli, we
demonstrated that the MNIO in conjunction with the partner protein catalyzes
ortho-hydroxylation of each of the phenylalanine residues in the conserved FRF
motif, the arginase forms an ornithine from the arginine, the ornithine residue is hydroxylated, and the B12-rSAM cross-links the
ortho-Tyr side chains by a C−C linkage forming a macrocycle. A protease matures the RiPP to its final form. The elucidated
structure shares close similarity to biphenomycins, a class of peptide antibiotics for which the biosynthetic pathway has not been
characterized. Substrate scope studies suggest some tolerance of the MNIO and the B12-rSAM enzymes. This study expands the
diverse array of posttranslational modifications catalyzed by MNIOs and B12-rSAM enzymes, deorphanizes biphenomycin
biosynthesis, and provides a platform for the production of analogs from orthologous BGCs.
■INTRODUCTION
The use of biocatalysis in industry has witnessed a remarkable
rise with most pharmaceutical companies having programs to
use enzymes in especially the production phase of drug
development.1−4 Enzymes decrease step-count of synthetic
routes, provide high stereoselectivities, and result in more cost-
effective and greener manufacturing.5−9 However, a key
limitation is the repertoire of available enzymes. Whereas a
process chemist benefits from a century of synthetic chemistry
methods to devise various potential routes to a drug candidate,
retrosynthetic biosynthesis10 is at present much more limited.
Directed evolution has proven remarkably successful in
improving low enzyme activities to commercially useful
levels,11 but if a given transformation has no precedent in
enzyme catalyzed reactions, the process of finding a starting
point for such evolution is challenging. One source of new
enzymes is the microbial genomes that encode a myriad of
proteins with unknown function, especially those involved in
natural product biosynthesis,12 but assignment of their catalytic
power is difficult because their substrates are unknown and
often not readily accessible.
Natural products (NPs) and NP-derived molecules exhibit
tremendous chemical and structural diversity and serve as a
major source of modern therapeutics13−15 and novel
enzymes.12 One class of NPs is the family of ribosomally
synthesized and posttranslationally modified peptides
(RiPPs)16 that contain intriguing chemical functionalities
that confer various biomedically relevant activities such as
antibiotic, antiviral, and protease inhibitory activities.17−19
Enzymes that introduce these functionalities are typically
encoded by genes near the gene encoding the RiPP precursor
peptide(s) in biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs). This
proximity of the substrate gene provides a key advantage for
assigning function to proteins of unknown function.20 Within
each RiPP family, the types of modifications are numerous and
include methylation, epimerization, peptide skeleton rearrange-
ments, and macrocyclization.16 Classical approaches in NP
discovery typically employ chemical extraction and rely on
producer cultivation and NP production. However, recent
Received:
April 9, 2025
Revised:
June 17, 2025
Accepted:
June 18, 2025
Published: June 26, 2025
Article
pubs.acs.org/JACS
© 2025 The Authors. Published by
American Chemical Society
23781
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0
Downloaded via 112.232.208.57 on August 7, 2025 at 00:52:01 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.



[PDF physical page 2]
advancements in (meta)genomic sequencing techniques have
resulted in the detection of novel RiPP BGCs in genomes of
uncultivated bacteria, thus expanding the chemical space of
NPs.21,22 Since RiPPs are ribosomally produced and modified
by enzymes, transplanting these genomic elements from an
uncultivated organism into a heterologous laboratory strain has
greatly accelerated the discovery of novel RiPP families,16 and
thereby their biosynthetic enzymes.20
A recently characterized family of RiPP modification
enzymes are the multinuclear nonheme iron-dependent
oxidative enzymes (MNIOs), formerly known as domain of
unknown function 692 (DUF692). MNIOs catalyze diverse
posttranslational chemistries23 (Figure 1) such as oxazolone
and thioamide formation in methanobactins,24 carbon excision
in thiaglutamate,25 generation of thiooxazoles in bufferins,26
formation of two rings in chryseobasins,27 C-terminal
amidation in methanobactin analogs,28 and the transformation
of an Asp residue into a C-terminal α-keto acid in
pyruvatides.29 Given the highly diverse reactions, at present,
prediction of the outcome of MNIO-catalyzed transformations
on precursor peptides is not possible for MNIOs that are not
highly homologous to proteins that have been previously
investigated.
In this study, we generated a sequence similarity network
(SSN) for over 13,500 MNIOs using the Enzyme Function
Initiative (EFI) tools,30,31 and extracted the harboring BGCs
using the RODEO program.32 We then analyzed the precursor
sequences to identify putative RiPP precursor peptides sharing
a conserved motif. Based on this approach, putative precursors
with conserved FHAFRF-, FHTFMF-, and YHx1Yx2Y-motifs
(x1 = S/T/A; x2 = T/V/A) were identified. The corresponding
BGCs contain genes encoding an MNIO, a hypothetical
partner protein for the MNIO, and a B12-dependent rSAM. In
certain cases, multiple B12-rSAM-encoding genes were
detected, while an arginase- and a cupin-encoding gene was
only observed in BGCs containing the FHAFRF-motif
precursor. Using pathway reconstitution in Escherichia coli as
a heterologous host, the modified products of the FHAFRF
motif-containing precursor from Peribacillus simplex BE23 (pbs
cluster) were structurally characterized using a combination of
analytical chemistry techniques. The MNIO (PbsC) partners
with a RiPP recognition element-containing33 protein (PbsD)
to introduce ortho-hydroxylations on the two aromatic residues
of the FRF-part of the conserved motif, followed by the
deguanidination of the Arg to Orn catalyzed by the arginase
(PbsE), a transformation that took place exclusively on the bis-
hydroxylated precursor peptide. Next, the cupin-like hydrox-
ylase (PbsQ) hydroxylated the newly formed Orn residue.
Subsequently, the B12-rSAM (PbsB) cross-linked the
hydroxylated aromatic residues via a C−C linkage. The
macrocyclic product is ultimately processed by the TldD
type HExxxH motif containing protease (PbsP), thus releasing
the final RiPP harboring an N-terminal macrocyclic ring. The
modified product shares structural similarity with biphenomy-
cins, a class of biaryl-linked peptide antibiotics for which the
biosynthetic pathway had remained unknown.34−39 We
assessed the substrate tolerance of the MNIO PbsC and the
B12-rSAM PbsB towards a series of FHAFRF-variants
including motifs containing tyrosines at the modification
sites that were identified in orthologous BGCs.
In addition to the studies in E. coli, the activity of the MNIO
and the arginase enzymes of the pbs cluster were reconstituted
in vitro, and utilizing AlphaFold models, we predict the
interactions of the pathway enzymes with the precursor
peptides. To our knowledge, an MNIO catalyzing hydrox-
ylation of aromatic residues, an arginase selectively acting on a
bis-hydroxylated aromatic substrate, a cupin-like protein
hydroxylating an Orn residue, and a B12-rSAM introducing
C−C cross-links on hydroxylated aromatic side chains, have
not been described before. Overall, this study characterizes the
activity of five different metalloenzymes in addition to
deorphanizing the biosynthesis of the biphenomycin class of
peptide antibiotics and providing a platform for production of
analogs.
Figure 1. MNIO catalyzed reactions. The majority of known MNIO reactions utilize Cys residues as the substrate (in blue). Only two noncysteine-
based reactions acting on Asn (green) and Asp (maroon) residues have been reported to date.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23782



[PDF physical page 3]
■RESULTS
Genome Mining of MNIO-Containing BGCs Using a
Sequence Similarity Network. MNIOs belong to the
protein family PF05114 and constitute approximately 13,500
entries in the Uniprot database as of September 2024. Utilizing
the Enzyme Function Initiative Enzyme Similarity Tool (EFI-
EST) version 2024_04/101,31 a sequence similarity network
was created with default parameters and processed with an
alignment score of 55 (Figure 2A). This analysis resulted in 73
clusters with at least 3 interconnected nodes. Subsequently, the
Uniprot IDs of the nodes from individual clusters were
extracted and subjected to RODEO analysis32 to obtain the
genome neighborhood of the selected MNIOs. Open reading
frames (ORFs) ranging from a length of 30 to 150 amino acids
were extracted from the RODEO output files (a combination
of multiple putative clusters and standalone ORFs) and
subjected to multiple sequence alignment. The alignment was
refined with two iterations. Subsequently, aligned precursors
containing a conserved motif were extracted manually and
curated based on their genome neighborhood.
Identification of BGCs Based on Conserved Motifs in
the RiPP Precursor Sequence. A set of precursors
containing a highly conserved FHAFRF motif was identified
in over 30 potential BGCs (Figure 2C and S1). The majority
of these BGCs were found in genomes of members of the
phyla Actinomycetota and Bacillota. These BGCs contained
genes encoding a putative MNIO, a potential partner protein
for the MNIO, a putative B12-rSAM, and a tetratricopeptide
repeat (TPR)-containing putative arginase (Figure 2B and
S2A). We then used the conserved FHAFRF motif as a query
parameter for Pattern Hit Initiated BLAST (PHI-BLAST)40
analysis for 12 iterations at an inclusion threshold of 0.01 to
further identify 99 hits containing similar conserved motifs, i.e.,
FHTFMF and YHx1Yx2Y (x1 = S/T/A; x2 = T/V/A) in
orthologous clusters (Figure S1). Deeper analysis of the BGCs
containing the FHAFRF-, YHx1Yx2Y- and FHTFMF-motif
harboring peptides indicated that the associated MNIOs of all
99 hits are part of the same cluster of enzymes in the MNIO
SSN (Figure 2A; green box), suggesting they may represent
isofunctional MNIOs. All orthologous clusters encoded at least
Figure 2. Genome mining of MNIO-containing BGCs encoding precursors with conserved motifs. (A) An SSN of ca. 13,500 MNIO homologues
was generated with the EFI tools using the UNIREF90 database. RepNode 50 is shown as visualized in cytoscape v3.10. Previously characterized
MNIOs are depicted in black triangles. The lime-colored triangles represent the nodes for HvfB and BufB that remain underneath the other nodes
in the red cluster. The cluster boxed in green contains the MNIO PbsC that is the focus of this study. (B) The pbs gene cluster with the amino acid
sequences of the precursors PbsA1-A4. The numbering in red is based on the GluC-digested peptide fragment isolated for further structural
characterization (vide infra). (C) Sequence logo of precursor peptides containing the conserved FHAFRF motif, extracted from orthologous BGCs
in the SSN (box in panel A). (D) MALDI-TOF mass spectra of N-terminally 6xHis-tagged PbsA1-A4 peptides expressed alone (black trace) or
coexpressed with PbsB, PbsC, PbsD, and PbsE in E. coli (orange trace); subpanels assigned to Roman numerals I−IV for PbsA1−A4, respectively.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23783



[PDF physical page 4]
one B12-dependent radical SAM (B12-rSAM) enzyme with
slight variations in the remaining BGC elements (Figure S2A).
For BGCs containing precursor peptides with the FHTFMF
and YHx1Yx2Y motifs, the arginase was absent suggesting it
may act on the Arg residue in the FHAFRF motif (Figure
S2A). Conversely, a second B12-dependent rSAM and a
DUF5825-containing protein was encoded adjacent to the core
enzyme genes in BGCs containing the YHxYxY precursors. A
recent study has characterized the function of a homologous
B12-rSAM and DUF5825 pair in the biosynthesis of
clavusporins,41 showing C-methylations of amino acids.
Selection of a BGC for Enzyme Function Elucidation.
We selected a BGC (pbs cluster) from the genome of a
recently reported organism, Peribacillus simplex BE23 isolated
from the rhizospere of maize plants in France (GenBank:
RRZF00000000.1).42 Previous studies have reported that P.
simplex strains produce siderophores that help iron uptake in
potatoes, and produce bioactive molecules for inhibition of
plant pathogens such as various fungi, bacteria and
nematodes.43−45 While some antimicrobial activity has been
linked to certain lipopeptides44 and volatile organic com-
pounds,46 structural characterization of the bioactive molecules
remains largely understudied. The pbs cluster (Figure 2B)
encodes four putative precursor peptides containing an
FHAFRF motif (PbsA1-A4), followed by ORFs encoding a
putative B12-rSAM (PbsB), a xylose isomerase-like TIM barrel
family protein with a typical signature of an MNIO (PbsC;
ENA ID: RRN73831.1; RefSeq: WP_125160327), a hypo-
thetical ORF suspected to encode a RiPP recognition element
(RRE)-containing partner protein47 for the MNIO (PbsD)
and a TPR-rich family protein belonging to the (α/β)-
hydrolase superfamily believed to be an arginase (PbsE). The
pbs cluster also contained ORFs for a transporter of the Major
Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) and a putative metalloprotease
PbsP (Figure S2A). When we initiated this study, these genes
appeared to complete the BGC, but as discussed later, another
ORF that partially overlaps with pbsP that was not annotated
encodes for a cupin-fold protein (pbsQ). Since the strain of P.
simplex BE23 was not available in any culture collection,
attempts were made to identify the product of an orthologous
BGC in Bacillus clarus ATCC 21929. B. clarus was grown
under a variety of growth conditions, but we did not observe
production of molecules that could be linked to the BGC.
Characterization of the Posttranslational Modifica-
tions of PbsA Peptides. For pathway reconstitution, we
coexpressed different genetic elements heterologously in E. coli.
Codon-optimized genes encoding the precursor peptides
PbsA1-A4 were cloned into a pETDuet-1 plasmid backbone
encoding a N-terminal 6xHis tag (for sequences, see Table S1).
Codon-optimized ORFs for PbsB, PbsC, PbsD and PbsE were
cloned into a pRSFDuet vector in a polycistronic manner,
separated by ribosomal binding sequences (Table S1).
Constructs were expressed in E. coli BL21 (DE3) TUNER
cells, followed by immobilized metal affinity chromatography
(IMAC) to purify the peptides.
First, we confirmed the production of the unmodified
precursors, PbsA1-A4, by matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF
MS) (Figure 2D; spectra in black). Second, we coexpressed
PbsA1-A4 with PbsB, PbsC, PbsD and PbsE (PbsBCDE)
wherein all four precursor peptides showed mass gains of 15.99
and 31.99 Da and a mass loss of −12.02 Da with respect to the
unmodified precursor (Figure 2D; spectra in brown). We
focused on just one precursor (PbsA3) for subsequent
experiments because of its higher solubility.
For coexpression of PbsA3 with the individual enzymes, we
cloned pbsB, pbsC, pbsD, pbsBE (polycistronic), and pbsCD
(polycistronic) into pRSFDuet vectors. Similarly, pbsE was
cloned into pCDFDuet. PbsA3 was coexpressed with
individual or different combinations of the pathway enzymes.
Figure 3. Mass spectrometric analysis of PbsA3 coexpressed with PbsB, PbsC, PbsD, and PbsE in different combinations. (A) MALDI-TOF MS
spectra of the PbsA3 peptide when expressed (i) alone or coexpressed with (ii) the B12-rSAM, PbsB; (iii) the MNIO, PbsC; (iv) the RRE-
containing partner protein, PbsD; (v) the arginase, PbsE; (vi) PbsC and PbsD; (vii) PbsB, PbsC, and PbsD; (viii) PbsC, PbsD, and PbsE; and (ix)
PbsB, PbsC, PbsD, and PbsE. HR-MS/MS fragmentation patterns for the endopeptidase GluC-digested peptide fragments are shown for (B)
unmodified PbsA3, (C) PbsA3 coexpressed with PbsCD, (D) PbsA3 coexpressed with PbsCDE, and (E) PbsA3 coexpressed with PbsBCDE. The
peptide fragments after endoproteinase GluC digestion are numbered starting at Val1 (Figure 2B) with b-ions displayed in blue and y-ions
displayed in red. The residues undergoing mass changes are shown in small font, further highlighted in boxes with their respective mass shifts. The
hypothesized cross-linking residues are joined by a green bracket in panel E. For ESI MS/MS spectra, see Figure S4.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23784



[PDF physical page 5]
PbsA3 did not undergo any modification (determined by a
shift in mass) when coexpressed with PbsB, PbsC, PbsD or
PbsE individually in E. coli (Figure 3Aii-v). However, when
coexpressed with PbsCD, PbsA3 underwent mass gains of
15.99 and 31.99 Da suggesting that PbsC and PbsD acted in
partnership (Figure 3Avi). PbsA3, coexpressed with PbsBCD
did not undergo any further modification suggesting that the
PbsCD-modified products did not serve as substrates for PbsB
(Figure 3Avii). Coexpression of PbsA3 and PbsCDE resulted
in a mass loss of 42 Da relative to the PbsCD-modified +31.99
Da-product, corresponding to a net mass loss of 10 Da from
the unmodified peptide (Figure 3Aviii). Therefore, PbsE
requires modification of PbsA3 by PbsCD for activity. We then
coexpressed PbsA3 with PbsBCDE with supplementation with
B12 (hydroxocobalamin) and use of a plasmid encoding the
iron−sulfur cluster assembly proteins and the BtuCEDFB
proteins for B12 uptake (pIGB240).48−50 This experiment
resulted in a product that underwent a further mass loss of 2
Da relative to the PbsCDE product (Figure 3Aix and S3).
Collectively, these data show that PbsB requires prior
modification by PbsCD and PbsE for activity.
Figure 4. Structure determination and biosynthetic pathway of modified PbsA3 digested with endoproteinase GluC. (A) 1H−13C HMBC spectrum
of PbsA3-CD highlighting the ortho-hydroxylated Phe8-OH and Phe10-OH residues. (B) 1H−13C HMBC spectrum highlighting the cross-peaks
between the β-protons of Phe8-OH and Phe10-OH and their respective hydroxylated aromatic carbons. This part of the spectrum also shows a
diagnostic cross peak for Arg9 that is consistent with an unmodified residue. (C) 1H−1H TOCSY spectrum of PbsA3-CDE collected at 3 °C in
0.1% formic acid highlighting the cross peaks of the NH3
+ moiety on the Cδ of the residue at position 9 with the other side chain protons (labeled
as Hsc). (D) 1H−13C HMBC correlations in PbsA3-BCDE highlighting the cross-link formed between Cε2 carbons of the ortho-hydroxylated Phe8-
OH and Phe10-OH residues. Cross peaks for the Hζ of Phe10-OH to the Cε2 carbon of Phe8-OH (in green arrow/font) and for the Hδ2-proton
of Phe8-OH to the Cε2 carbon of Phe10-OH (in blue arrow/font) are shown. For panels A−D, the sequences of the analyzed peptides are shown
in the spectra. Modified residues are in red (hydroxylated Phe8/10) or blue font (ornithine). (E) Biosynthetic pathway of PbsA3 modified by
PbsCD, followed by PbsE and PbsB.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23785



[PDF physical page 6]
Through high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (HR-
MS/MS) of the GluC endopeptidase-digested PbsCD product
(C-terminal fragment starting at Val1 as shown in Figure 3B),
we assigned each 15.99 Da mass gain to the Phe8 and Phe10
residues (following the residue numbering in Figure 2B) in the
conserved FRF motif (Figure 3C and S4B, Table S2).
Similarly, the mass loss of 42.02 Da in the PbsCDE product
was localized to Arg9 in the FRF-motif (Figure 3D and S4C,
Table S2), suggesting that an Orn residue may be formed by
the loss of a urea equivalent from the Arg side chain. For the
PbsBCDE product with an additional 2 Da mass loss no
fragment ions were detected inside the FRF-motif (Figure 3E
and S4D, Table S2). This observation suggested the possibility
of a cross-link being formed between the two modified Phe
residues preventing fragmentation.
Large-Scale Purification of Modified PbsA3. To obtain
the modified core peptide of PbsA3, we cloned the putative
protease PbsP into a pET28a vector with an N-terminal 6x His
tag. PbsP has sequence homology with the TldDE protease
family,51−53 but unlike this family which usually constitutes a
heterodimer, the pbs BGC contains only a single gene (pbsP)
and a partner protein was not identified in the genome.
Attempts at purifying PbsP were unsuccessful as the desired
protein was observed in inclusion bodies under various
expression conditions. Therefore, endoproteinase GluC was
again used to access the modified fragment peptides. PbsA3
was coexpressed with PbsCD, PbsCDE and PbsBCDE in 5 L
scale and the products were purified by immobilized metal
affinity chromatography (IMAC). After desalting to remove
imidazole, and proteolysis by GluC endoproteinase, IMAC was
performed again to remove the His-tagged leader peptide
fragment and the His-tagged GluC. The collected flowthrough
was subjected to HPLC purification, which led to the isolation
of the bis-hydroxylated PbsA3 C-terminal fragment (which we
will term PbsA3-CD henceforth; 1.2 mg/L of culture), the bis-
hydroxylated and deguanidinated product, PbsA3-CDE (0.5
mg/L of culture), and the bis-hydroxylated, deguanidinated
and cross-linked product, PbsA3-BCDE (0.2 mg/L of culture).
Structural Elucidation of Modified PbsA3. The 15.99
Da mass gains on Phe8 and Phe10 in PbsA3 when coexpressed
with PbsCD are typical of hydroxylation events. To probe this
hypothesis, we conducted advanced Marfey’s analysis54 on the
HPLC-purified, GluC-digested PbsA3-CD product and
compared the derivatized amino acids to different hydroxylated
tyrosine standards (Figure S5). Based on the LC-MS analysis,
we inferred that a putative hydroxyl group was either
introduced at the ortho-position of the Phe rings (Cδ1, Figure
4A) or on the β-carbon. We next elucidated the structures of
the three products PbsA3-CD, PbsA3-CDE and PbsA3-BCDE
by one-dimensional (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) NMR
experiments including
1H−1H TOCSY,
1H−1H NOESY,
1H−13C HSQC and 1H−13C HMBC.
For the PbsA3-CD peptide, all backbone and side chain
protons including the 16 amide protons of the 17-mer peptide
were observed in a TOCSY spectrum of the sample in 90%
H2O and 10% D2O (Table S3). The aromatic protons of Phe8
and Phe10 showed different splitting patterns from a normal
Phe residue. Their aromatic side chain protons integrated to
four protons, and the 1D 1H−1H TOCSY spectra showed four
protons that displayed two doublets and two triplets (Figure
S6A). More detailed analysis of 1H−13C HSQC and HMBC
spectra was consistent with the addition of a hydroxyl (OH)
group at the ortho-position (Cδ1, Figure 4A). Both β-protons
of Phe8 and Phe10 showed a cross peak to their corresponding
Cδ1 carbon (C5) at 154.1 ppm (Figure 4B). This assignment
is consistent with the 15.998 and 31.998 Da mass gains for the
PbsA3-CD product that were observed by HR-MS/MS and
indicated that both Phe residues in the conserved FRF-motif
where hydroxylated to produce ortho-Tyr.
In the advanced Marfey’s analysis the hydroxylated Phe
residues coeluted with both the L-ortho-tyrosine and DL-3-
hydroxy-phenylserine standards. However, hydroxylation of Cβ
is inconsistent with the observed integration in the NMR
spectra indicating four protons at each of the aromatic rings of
Phe8 and Phe10 (Figure S6A). Additionally, the
1H−13C
multiplicity-edited HSQC showed the Cβ as a methylene
group and not a methine (Figure S6B). Thus, both Phe
residues were hydroxylated at Cδ1.
To confirm the formation of Orn by PbsE and that no
isobaric modification (e.g., epimerization) was performed on
this residue by the rSAM PbsB, we conducted advanced
Marfey’s analysis on the GluC-digested and HPLC-purified
PbsA3-CDE and PbsA3-BCDE peptides (Figure S7). LC-MS
analysis of the derivatized samples and L-Orn, D-Orn and L-Arg
standards supported the conclusion that the Arg was converted
into L-Orn by PbsE and that no epimerization had occurred.
Formation of Orn was confirmed by NMR spectroscopic
analysis. The 1H spectrum of the PbsA3-CDE product was
similar to that of PbsA3-CD (Figure S8). The 1D 1H−1H
TOCSY showed four protons each for the aromatic side chains
of Phe8 and Phe10 that were also observed in the PbsA3-CD
product (Figure S9). The major difference between PbsA3-
CDE and PbsA3-CD was the disappearance of the side chain
NHε proton of Arg9 in the PbsA3-CDE spectrum (Figure
S8B). In PbsA3-CD, the NHε peak formed a sharp triplet at
6.99 ppm showing cross peaks with the other side chain
protons and the amide proton of Arg9 in the TOCSY spectrum
(Figure S10). However, in PbsA3-CDE, this peak was not
detected (Figure S8B and Table S4). After lowering the
temperature to 3 °C to slow down exchange with bulk water
and adding 0.1% formic acid to maintain the NHε in a
protonated state, a broad peak was observed at 7.46 ppm
integrating for approximately three protons, which showed
cross peaks in a TOCSY spectrum with the other side chain
protons of the residue at the ninth position in the peptide,
consistent with a protonated primary amine group (Figure 4C
and S11). All of these observations provided further evidence
that Arg9 was transformed into an Orn residue.
For PbsA3-BCDE all backbone and side chain protons
including 16 amide protons were observed in a TOCSY
spectrum of a sample in 90% H2O and 10% D2O with 0.1%
formic acid-d2 (1H and 13C NMR assignments in Table S5).
Compared to the PbsA3-CD and PbsA3-CDE peptides, the
aromatic protons of Phe8-OH and Phe10-OH in PbsA3-BCDE
showed splitting patterns unlike the aromatic side chain of Phe
and also different from the aromatic peaks observed in the
PbsA3-CD and PbsA3-CDE peptides. In PbsA3-BCDE,
integration of the aromatic signals from the former Phe8-OH
and Phe10-OH indicated three protons each, and the 1D
TOCSY spectrum (Figure S12) showed for each residue one
doublet (d, J = 8.5 Hz), one doublet of doublets (dd, J = 8.5
Hz, 1.9 Hz) and one singlet (br). The
1H−13C HMBC
revealed a C−C cross-link between the Cε2-carbons of Phe8-
OH and Phe10-OH (Figure 4D,E). The β-protons of both
Phe8-OH and Phe10-OH showed cross peaks to the
hydroxylated Cδ1 carbons, as well as to the Cδ2-carbons
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23786



[PDF physical page 7]
(Figure S13). Additionally, the presence of a cross-link
between the two Cε2-carbons of the aromatic rings of Phe8-
OH and Phe10-OH was suggested by the observation of
additional cross peaks between the two rings. For example, the
peak at 7.12 ppm (Hξ of Phe10-OH) showed a cross peak to
the Cε2 carbon of Phe8-OH at 131.3 ppm (Figure 4D, green
arrow). Similarly, the Hδ2-proton at 6.89 ppm of Phe8-OH
showed a cross peak to the Cε2 carbon of Phe10-OH at 131.0
ppm (Figure 4D, blue arrow). The HMBC bond connectivity
of Phe8-OH and Phe10-OH in the PbsA3-BCDE peptide is
depicted in Figure 4D. The NMR analysis also confirmed an
Orn instead of an Arg at position 9, based on the same analysis
as discussed above for the PbsA3-CDE peptide (Figure S14).
Investigation of Unmodified Residues in the Con-
served FHAFRF Motif. All enzymatic modifications are
restricted to the FRF region of PbsA3, but the sequence that is
fully conserved in all precursor peptides is considerably larger
(AFHAFRF, Figure 2C). Therefore, we investigated the
importance of the conserved Phe5 and His6 residues by
replacement with Ala (F5A and H6A; residue numbering from
Figure 2B) and coexpression with PbsCD and PbsBCDE in E.
coli. The F5A variant resulted in significantly reduced
conversion by the MNIO (Figure S15A; red spectra). No
arginase- and B12-rSAM enzyme-mediated modification was
observed, likely because of the low hydroxylation activity,
which is required for PbsB and PbsE activity (Figure S15A;
orange spectra). The MNIO retained considerable activity with
the H6A variant, resulting in wild type-like bis-hydroxylation
(Figure S15B; red spectra), but the arginase and the rSAM
enzymes did not introduce any further modifications (Figure
S15B; orange spectra). Together, these results suggest that
Phe5 is important for MNIO catalysis and that His6 is not
necessary for MNIO activity but seems critical for the activity
of the arginase PbsE and the B12-rSAM PbsB.
In Vitro Reconstitution Of Enzyme Activity. Following
the reconstitution of the PbsA3 biosynthetic pathway in E. coli,
we focused on in vitro reconstitution of the individual enzyme
activities. For the purification of PbsCD, we constructed a
pRSFDuet plasmid encoding an N-terminally 6xHis-tagged
PbsC. The plasmid also contained untagged pbsD under a
second T7 promoter in the multiple cloning site (MCS) 2 of
the pRSFDuet vector. When expressed in E. coli, PbsD
copurified with PbsC, validating that PbsD is an interacting
partner for PbsC (Figure S16). HPLC-purified unmodified
Figure 5. In vitro reconstitution of MNIO and arginase activity and minimal substrate determination for the MNIO. (A) MALDI-TOF MS spectra
of PbsA3 after in vitro reaction with (i) no enzyme, (ii) PbsCD, as isolated; (iii) PbsCD, in the presence of FeSO4; and (iv) PbsCD, in the presence
of sodium ascorbate. (B) MALDI-TOF mass spectra of PbsA3 after in vitro reaction with (i) no enzyme and (ii) PbsE in the presence of MnSO4.
No arginase activity was detected on unmodified PbsA3. MALDI-TOF mass spectra of (iii) PbsCD-modified PbsA3, containing a mixture of
unmodified, singly hydroxylated and bis-hydroxylated product, and (iv) PbsA3-CD when reacted in vitro with PbsE in the presence of MnSO4. (C)
Sequence logo of the FHAFRF motif containing precursors showing conserved residues in the leader peptide, highlighted in the box. (D) Partial
LysC proteolysis of PbsA3 generated 20-mer and 31-mer fragments that were purified by HPLC. The 31-mer fragment contains the conserved
residues of the leader peptide, which are absent in the 20-mer fragment. (E) MALDI-TOF mass spectra of the 31-mer fragment after in vitro
reaction with (i) no enzyme and (ii) PbsCD in the presence of sodium ascorbate. (F) MALDI-TOF mass spectra of the 20-mer fragment after in
vitro reaction with (i) no enzyme and (ii) PbsCD in the presence of sodium ascorbate.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23787



[PDF physical page 8]
PbsA3 was reacted with the as-purified PbsCD, and no
modification was observed (Figure 5Aii). Addition of freshly
prepared FeSO4 to the reaction (under aerobic conditions) led
to the formation of mono- and bis-hydroxylated products
(Figure 5Aiii), suggesting the involvement of Fe(II) ions in
enzyme catalysis. Preincubation of as-purified PbsCD with
sodium ascorbate (for possible reduction of enzyme-bound
Fe(III) to Fe(II) in the enzyme active site) followed by
addition of PbsA3 also led to the formation of mono- and bis-
hydroxylated products (Figure 5Aiv).
For the purification of PbsE, another plasmid was
constructed to express the enzyme with an N-terminal 6xHis
tag. The purified 6xHis-TEV-PbsE fusion protein was directly
used for in vitro assays (in the presence of manganese sulfate)
with either unmodified PbsA3 (Figure 5Bii), or the PbsCD
product containing PbsA3 and mono- and bis-hydroxylated
PbsA3 (Figure 5Biii, iv). As observed in the in vivo
coexpression studies, PbsE selectively modified the bis-
hydroxylated product whereas unmodified PbsA3 and the
monohydroxylated product did not undergo deguanidination
(Figure 5Biv). Apart from establishing the in vitro activity of
PbsE, this observation validated our hypothesis that the
PbsCD-mediated hydroxylation is the first step in the
biosynthetic pathway, providing the substrate for the arginase
PbsE. Attempts to reconstitute the activity of PbsB in vitro
have not been successful.
Minimal Substrate Required for MNIO Activity.
Sequence alignment of the predicted precursors containing
the conserved core motifs also revealed a conservation pattern
in the putative leader peptide (LP) region (Figure 5C). To
investigate the importance of these residues, we made
truncated substrates by conducting a partial digestion of the
unmodified PbsA3 peptide using LysC endopeptidase. After 15
min at room temperature with 1:10,000 enzyme:substrate,
peptide fragments of varying lengths were isolated by HPLC
(Figure 5D) including a 20-mer fragment without the
conserved LP stretch, and a 31-mer fragment with the
conserved stretch of amino acids in the LP (Figure 5D).
These purified fragments were reacted with PbsCD in vitro,
which resulted in the successful bis-hydroxylation of the 31-
mer fragment (Figure 5E). No modification was observed for
the 20-mer fragment, suggesting that the conserved LP region
is important for MNIO activity (Figure 5F).
Determining the Substrate Scope of PbsCD. To
investigate the possibility of a required order of hydroxylation
of Phe8 and Phe10, we mutated these residues to Ala. When
coexpressed with PbsCD or PbsBCDE in E. coli, the F8A and
F10A variants (hereafter named ARF and FRA-variants,
respectively, mutated residues in bold) underwent only one
hydroxylation (Figure S17A,B). Using HR-MS/MS we
assigned these hydroxylations to the Phe residues (Figures
S18 and S19). Upon coexpression with PbsBCDE, no arginase
activity and no PbsB-mediated cross-linking was detected for
either peptide suggesting that both Phe8 and Phe10 need to be
hydroxylated for these activities. As expected based on the data
in the previous sections, the ARA variant of PbsA3 was not
modified by any of the enzymes (Figure S17C).
The SSN cluster harboring PbsC (Figure 2A) also contains
enzymes that are encoded in BGCs with precursor peptides
containing alternative conserved motifs in the core region, such
as FHTFMF and YHxYxY motifs (Figure S1). We therefore
made a series of variants of PbsA3 to investigate if the Pbs
enzymes would accept these as substrates. The YRF, FRY and
YRY variants were processed by PbsCD (Figure S20) resulting
in mostly one and two hydroxylations (Figures S21−S23). The
patterns observed in HR-MS/MS analysis showed the
hydroxylation to occur on the aromatic residues. The fragment
ions for the doubly hydroxylated YRY product suggested that
both Tyr8 and Tyr10 were modified (Figure S23).
Coexpression of the YRF, FRY and YRY variants with
PbsBCDE resulted in successful arginase activity for all three
variants (Figure S20). Only the YRF and FRY variants were
accepted as substrates for PbsB resulting in a cross-link as
inferred from the 2 Da mass loss in HR-MS. These data show
that PbsCD can hydroxylate Tyr residues, consistent with the
motifs seen in the substrates for PbsCD orthologs.
Characterization of Tyrosine Modifications Catalyzed
by Pbs Enzymes. PbsA3-YRY variants were bis-hydroxylated
by PbsCD, but not cross-linked by PbsB (Figure S20C). We
therefore replaced the FRF motif in PbsA3 with the YTY motif
found in the precursor from the stg BGC (Figure S2) in the
genome of Streptomyces turgidiscabies ATCC 700248 (YH-
TYTY-motif). Upon coexpression with PbsCD, the PbsA3-
YTY precursor was successfully bis-hydroxylated (YTY-CD
product; Figures S24B and S25B; Table S1). A monohydroxy-
lated product (YTY-CD 1-OH; Figure S24B and Table S1)
was also detected with the hydroxylation localized on Tyr10 as
determined by HR-MS/MS (Figure S25A). Upon coexpres-
sion with PbsBCD, besides the mono- and bis-hydroxylated
products, we also observed cross-linking of the PbsA3-YTY
precursor that was not hydroxylated (YTY-B product; Figures
S24B and S26A) showing that PbsB can macrocyclize tyrosines
independent of MNIO-mediated hydroxylation. In addition to
the aforementioned products formed in the PbsBCD
coexpression, we also observed a minor bis-hydroxylated and
cross-linked product (YTY-BCD 2-OH) along with a minor
monohydroxylated-cross-linked product (YTY-BCD 1-OH;
Figures S24B and S26B and Table S1).
Structure Elucidation of YTY-B and the Two Products
of YTY-CD. Large-scale purification of the PbsA3-YTY
products from coexpression with PbsCD (YTY-CD) and
PbsB (YTY-B) was conducted followed by GluC endoprotei-
nase digestion and subsequent HPLC purification. The NMR
structures of the YTY-B and mono and bishydroxylated YTY-
CD peptides were determined by 1D and 2D NMR
experiments (1H−1H TOCSY,
1H−1H NOESY,
1H−13C
HSQC, and 1H−13C HMBC). For the YTY-B peptide, all
backbone and side-chain protons including 16 amide protons
of the 17-mer peptide were observed in the TOCSY spectrum
for the sample in 90% H2O and 10% D2O and 0.1% formic
acid-d2 (Table S6). The aromatic protons of Tyr8 and Tyr10
showed different splitting patterns from a normal Tyr,
integrating to three protons each. The 1D TOCSY spectrum
showed three protons associated with two doublet peaks and 1
singlet (or 1 doublet with a small J coupling of 2.5 Hz; Figure
S27). Detailed analysis of 1H−13C HSQC (Figure S28) and
HMBC (Figure S29) data revealed a C−C cross-link between
the two aromatic rings of Tyr8 and Tyr10 at the Cε2 positions.
The Hδ2 proton at 6.64 ppm of Tyr8 showed a cross peak to
the Cε2 carbon at 125.4 ppm of Tyr10. Both beta protons of
Tyr8 and Tyr10 showed NOE cross-peaks to their respective
Hδ1 and Hδ2 protons in a 1H−1H NOESY spectrum, which
provides additional support that the C−C cross-link occurred
between the Cε2 carbons of the two rings (Figure S30). The
structure in Figure 6 is also consistent with the HR-MS and
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23788



[PDF physical page 9]
HR-MS/MS analysis as shown in Figures S24B and S26A,
respectively.
The mono and bishydroxylated YTY-CD peptides coeluted
during HPLC purification. Hence, their structural character-
ization was conducted as a mixture. Although the 1H spectrum
is complicated, two sets of signals with a ratio of 2:3 (based on
peak integration values) were clearly observed. The 1D 1H−1H
TOCSY spectrum in the aromatic region revealed two distinct
types of spin systems (Figure S31). One displayed the original
pattern of a Tyr residue, the other showed three peaks for each
ring: one doublet, one doublet of doublets, and one singlet.
Based on the proton integration values, one of the peptides
contained one intact Tyr residue and one modified Tyr
residue, whereas the other contained two modified Tyr
residues. Further analysis of 2D
1H−1H TOCSY (Figure
S32), 1H−13C HSQC (Figure S33) and HMBC (Figure S34)
revealed that the modified Tyr residue was hydroxylated at the
Cδ1 position. The proton Hδ2 at 6.80 ppm of Tyr8 in the
bishydroxylated YTY-CD peptide showed a cross peak to the
Cδ1 carbon at 155.3 ppm and a cross peak to the Cζ carbon at
155.7 ppm (carrying the original −OH of Tyr). Likewise, the
Hδ2 proton at 6.87 ppm of Tyr10 in monohydroxylated YTY-
CD showed a cross peak to the Cδ1 carbon at 155.3 ppm and a
cross peak to its original Cζ−OH at 155.7 ppm (Figure S34).
The beta-protons of Tyr10 in this peptide showed cross peaks
to their respective downfield shifted Cδ1 carbon at 155.3 ppm
(Figure S35), confirming the location of the hydroxylation.
The assignments for both peptides are given in Table S7, and
the structures of both peptides are consistent with the HR-
MS/MS results (Figure S25). Collectively, these data show
that the site of hydroxylation by PbsCD is the same for Phe
and Tyr, and that PbsB cross-links Tyr, ortho-Tyr and Cδ1-
hydroxy-Tyr residues with the same regiochemistry.
AlphaFold 3 Prediction of Pbs Pathway Enzymes in
Complex with Precursor Peptides. To understand the
mechanism of substrate recognition and modification by
PbsCD, we generated AlphaFold 3 models55 of PbsCD
bound to PbsA1-A4 and three iron ions (Figure S36; model
shown for PbsCD in complex with PbsA2). The predicted
model showed PbsC and PbsD as heterodimeric molecules,
consistent with copurification of untagged PbsD with tagged
PbsC (Figure S16). The per-residue measure of local
confidence (pLDDT) values for both proteins are generally
very high (>90), with lower confidence in the orientation of
the PbsA substrate peptides. The model suggests an
antiparallel β-sheet interaction between a conserved region of
the leader peptide of the four precursors (Figures S36B and
S37) with the RiPP recognition element (RRE) in the PbsD
partner protein, as observed in various other enzymes for
which the substrate engagement has been structurally
characterized.56−63 The model placed three Fe ions in the
putative active site of the enzyme (Figure S36C), consistent
with other MNIO structures, although it is still unclear
whether the active form of this family of enzymes contains two
or three Fe ions.23 His97, Asp133 and Glu178 are predicted to
coordinate with one Fe ion, His216, Asp260 and His262 with a
second Fe ion, and Asp213, His247 and Glu290 with the third
iron. Interestingly, for PbsA1, A2 and A4, although the
pLDDT values are considerably lower, the predicted substrate-
bound structure placed one of the two Phe residues in the FRF
motif in close proximity to the Fe ions in the enzyme active site
(Figure S38A,B and D). However, for the PbsA3-complexed
model, the His residue (His5) of the FHAFRF motif was
placed in proximity to the active site metals (Figure S38C).
Since PbsA3 has been experimentally shown to undergo
modification at Phe8/Phe10 residues, the prediction shows the
limitations of AlphaFold 3 and the need for experimental
validations of the model. Nevertheless, the predicted
complexes shed light on the putative RRE-containing partner
protein that may interact with the leader region, helping the
enzyme recognize the substrate.
A similar prediction was also made for the arginase PbsE in
conjunction with the precursors PbsA1-A4 and two manganese
ions (Figure S39A). The putative metal-coordinating residues
in the active site were predicted to be His10, Asp31, His33,
Asp35, Asp165 and Asp167 (Figure S39B). The model for the
substrate-bound complex placed Arg9 residue of the FHAFRF
motif proximal to the Mn ions (Figure S39D−G). In general,
we believe that the complexes of the arginase and the
unmodified precursor predictions may not be completely
reliable, considering the specific selectivity of PbsE for PbsCD-
modified bis-hydroxylated intermediates as the substrate. We
did not use AlphaFold to model the B12-rSAM PbsB and the
unmodified precursor interactions since the enzyme selectively
cross-links bis-hydroxylated and deguanidinated intermediates,
which are not accessible in the current versions of AlphaFold3.
PbsA3-BCDE Product Shares Structural Similarity
with Biphenomycins. The unusual cross-linked peptide
structure assembled by PbsBCDE is reminiscent of the core
structure common to the biphenomycin antibiotics produced
by Streptomyces filipinensis NRRL 321734,35 (also called LL-
AF283) and Streptomyces griseorubiginosus No. 4370836,37,64
(also called WS-43708A), with a few key differences (Figure
7A). All biphenomycin analogs contain a hydroxyl group at the
γ-carbon of the Orn residue, while biphenomycin A and C also
harbor a β-hydroxylation at one of the ortho-tyrosine residues
in the macrocycle. No information on biphenomycin biosyn-
thesis has been reported. We thus sequenced the genome of S.
filipinensis NRRL 3217, which enabled identification of a BGC
(bpm cluster; Figure 7B, NCBI Accession ID: PV659837) that
is very similar to the pbs BGC. The bpm cluster encodes a
putative precursor peptide (BpmA) that contains the
conserved AFHAFRF motif followed by an Arg and a Ser. In
Figure 6. PbsA3-YTY variant modification catalyzed by PbsBCD. The
B12-rSAM enzyme PbsB-mediated cross-linking of Tyr residues in the
PbsA3-YTY variant. PbsCD first hydroxylates the Tyr10 residue and
then Tyr8.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23789



[PDF physical page 10]
addition, genes predicted to encode an arginase (BpmC), a
B12-rSAM (BpmD), an MNIO (BpmE), and a RiPP
recognition element-containing protein (BpmF) were identi-
fied in the BGC (Figure 7B and Table S8). We propose that
these enzymes perform the same chemistry as their Pbs
orthologs on the FRF motif in BpmA. Three additional genes
are predicted to encode a JmjC domain-containing hydroxylase
(BpmG), an α-ketoglutarate HExxH-type peptide β-hydrox-
ylase (BpmH), and a TldD-type metallopeptidase (BpmI).
These enzymes are likely responsible for the two additional
side-chain hydroxylations and proteolytic trimming to arrive at
biphenomycin A.39 These findings are fully consistent with the
bpm BGC directing biphenomycin biosynthesis in S. filipinensis
NRRL 3217.
Comparison of the pbs and bpm gene clusters revealed the
presence of pbsQ, encoding a cupin-like domain-containing
protein related to the JmjC domain-containing protein BpmG,
in the pbs BGC (Figure 7B). The start codon for pbsQ lies
several base pairs upstream of the pbsP stop codon.
Coexpression of the Pbs A1-A4 precursors with recombinant
PbsQ and PbsCD did not yield any further modification of the
MNIO-modified bis-hydroxylated products (Figures S40−
S43). However, coexpression of the precursors with PbsQ
and PbsCDE (i.e., inclusion of the arginase) resulted in an
additional 15.99 Da mass gain equivalent to a hydroxyl group
(Figures S40−S43), which was localized to the Orn9 residue
by HR-MS/MS (Figure S44). This finding suggest that PbsQ
selectively hydroxylates the Orn residue and acts after
PbsCDE. Because of the low conversion and formation of a
mixture of products, further structural characterization of the
PbsCDEQ products was not performed. Unlike the bipheno-
mycin BGC, a gene encoding for a BpmH homologue was not
present in the pbs BGC.
In order to directly connect the pbs pathway products to the
bpm cluster, we also coexpressed the Pbs precursors with
PbsCDE and the Orn hydroxylase (BpmG) from the bpm
BGC. All four precursors PbsA1-A4 underwent an additional
15.99 Da mass gain in addition to the bis-hydroxylation and
deguadinination catalyzed by the MNIO and the arginase,
respectively. Similar to the modification by PbsQ, BpmG-
mediated hydroxylation was localized to the Orn9 residue in
PbsA1-A4 by HR-MS/MS analysis (Figures S45 and S46).
These findings convincingly link the bpm pathway to the Pbs
pathway and in turn the pbs pathway to the biphenomycins.
Characterization of the Protease PbsP. Prompted by
the link between the biphenomycins and the product of the pbs
cluster, we returned to the PbsP protease and added an N-
terminal maltose binding protein (MBP) solubility tag to the
previously insoluble enzyme. The MBP-PbsP fusion protein
was purified and successfully processed all four PbsBCDE-
modified precursor peptides (Figure S47) in the presence of
ZnSO4 as determined by HR-MS/MS analysis (Figure S48).
We did not observe any C-terminal proteolysis. We believe the
homologous protease encoded in the bpm cluster would act in
a similar manner to form biphenomycin C. Further maturation
of biphenomycin C to its A and B forms may be catalyzed by a
generic carboxypeptidase encoded elsewhere in the genome of
the producer.
■DISCUSSION
Enzymes involved in posttranslational modifications (PTMs)
of RiPPs offer a plethora of diverse and interesting chemical
transformations that are challenging to perform synthetically.20
To identify enzymes with new functions, SSNs are a valuable
tool to group thousands of uncharacterized enzymes based on
variable sequence similarity cut-offs. In many cases, enzymes
that make up one cluster have been reported as being
isofunctional.65,66 In this study, we made an SSN for MNIOs
and focused on associated substrate peptides containing
conserved motifs that were predicted to result in novel
chemistry. Indeed, investigation of one such BGC uncovered
five different metalloenzymes involved in the PTM of a
conserved FHAFRF motif-containing RiPP precursor from the
genome of P. simplex BE23.
Prior to this study, MNIO-catalyzed reactions had been
characterized that involve modification of Cys, Asn, and Asp
residues (Figure 1);23 aromatic residues had not been reported
as sites for MNIO modification. The hydroxylation of aromatic
side chains reported here thereby further expands the diverse
range of chemical reactions performed by MNIOs. Hydrox-
ylation of aromatic amino acids has been reported to be
catalyzed by heme-containing cytochrome P450 enzymes,
pterin-dependent hydroxylases, flavin-dependent monooxyge-
nases, nonheme mononuclear iron dioxygenases and diiron
hydroxylases.67−70 While enzymatic ortho-hydroxylation of
phenolic moieties has been reported for certain natural
products,71 reports on Cδ1-hydroxylation of Phe residues in
RiPPs are scarce. To the best of our knowledge, the only
known example is in the case of thioviridamide-like
compounds where ortho-hydroxylation of a Phe residue is
catalyzed by a cytochrome P450 enzyme.72
AlphaFold3 prediction models of the MNIO and precursor
substrate complexes provide structural insights of the
interaction of the MNIO and precursor peptides. The RRE-
Figure 7. Biphenomycin structure and its BGC. (A) Structures of
biphenomycins A, B, and C. (B) BGC identified in one of the
biphenomycin producer strains, S. filipeninensis NRRL 3217, encoding
enzymes that are homologous to the Pbs enzymes characterized in
this study. The corresponding precursors are aligned. (C) Structure of
PbsP-digested PbsA3-BCDE displaying structural similarity with the
biphenomycins.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23790



[PDF physical page 11]
containing partner protein PbsD likely recognizes the substrate
through an antiparallel β-sheet interaction with the leader
region of the precursor peptide. Consistent with the model,
deletion of the leader fragment predicted to form the beta-
sheet led to loss of enzymatic processing (Figure 5F).
Interestingly, in all the pbs precursors except PbsA3, one of
the Phe residues involved in modification was placed close to
the Fe ions in the predicted active site of the MNIO in the
AlphaFold3 models. The mechanism of hydroxylation of the
two Phe residues in the FRF motif is at present not clear. Most
MNIOs catalyze four-electron oxidations of their substrates,
shuttling the four electron equivalents to molecular oxygen and
regenerating a ferrous ion that can initiate the next catalytic
cycle.23 Only one MNIO has thus far been shown to catalyze a
two-electron oxidation, MovX that oxidatively cleaves the
Cα−N bond in an Asn residue generating hydrogen peroxide
in the process (Figure 1).28 Furthermore, thus far, all proposed
MNIO mechanisms have involved C−H activation at an sp3−
hybridized carbon, which has been hypothesized to be carried
out by a ferric superoxide species.23 The double hydroxylation
of two Phe residues in PbsA in principle could be a four-
electron process in which both oxygens from O2 are
incorporated into two different Phe residues, but that would
require the oxidations of the two Phe residues to be carried out
by two different oxidating species on PbsC (e.g., Figure S49).
Alternatively, the reaction could involve two sequential two-
electron oxidations that each involve a different molecule of
O2. In other enzymes that carry out aromatic ring oxidations
such as cytochrome P450 or tetrahydrobiopterin-dependent
enzymes, an Fe(IV)-oxo is required.69,70 If PbsC uses an
Fe(IV)-oxo or a peroxo species for the two-electron oxidation
of one of the Phe residues (Figure 8A,B), reducing equivalents
would be needed from the environment. The observation that
ascorbate activated the enzyme (Figure 5Aiv) could be
consistent with such a mechanism, but detailed studies will
be needed to distinguish the various possibilities.
Ornithine-containing peptides are found in both non-
ribosomal peptides and RiPPs. Orn is present in various
bioactive compounds including the biphenomycins37 and
landornamide.74 In the latter case, two ornithine residues are
installed by the arginase OspR, which showed considerable
substrate tolerance.75 In contrast, the arginase PbsE selectively
acts on an Arg residue that is bordered by hydroxylated Phe
residues. Such selectivity perhaps guides the directionality of
the pbs biosynthetic pathway and provides the substrate for
downstream processing by the Orn hydroxylase and the B12-
dependent rSAM enzyme. Interestingly, orthologous precursor
peptides missing the conserved Arg residue also lacked the
gene for an arginase in the BGC suggesting a precursor-
mediated evolution of the BGCs across different organisms.
Similarly, BGCs containing substrates that do not contain the
conserved Arg residue also lack a gene for a PbsQ homologue
that hydroxylates the Orn. Like PbsE, PbsQ acts in a strictly
ordered manner after Phe hydroxylation and Orn formation
whereas Arg was not hydroxylated.
Aromatic side-chain cross-linking in RiPP biosynthesis is
well-studied.76 C−C cross-link formation between the
aromatic side chains of Tyr has been reported for cytochrome
P450 enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of cittilin,77
arylomycin,78 the biarylitides,79−82 pyruvatides,29 and vanco-
mycin,83,84 but has not been reported for B12-rSAMs. Other
families of rSAM enzymes generate cross-links between the
side chains of various aliphatic amino acids and the side chains
of aromatic amino acids in the triceptide group of RiPPs.85,86
The mechanism of these latter reactions involves hydrogen
atom abstraction from the aliphatic amino acid and then
addition of the resulting carbon-based radical to the aromatic
rings of the partner amino acid.83,87 PbsB on the other hand
cross-links two aromatic amino acids, a process that has not
been previously reported for a B12-rSAM enzyme. Originally
believed to be limited to methylation,88 this group of enzymes
has been implicated in a variety of other transformations
including ring rearrangement reactions.89 Regarding the
possible mechanism of the PbsB-catalyzed cross-linking
reaction, the required MNIO-catalyzed introduction of
hydroxyl groups on two Phe residues likely activates the
aromatic rings, by making the aromatic ring more electron rich
and potentially by providing a site for hydrogen atom
Figure 8. Possible reaction mechanisms for the MNIO and B12-dependent rSAM enzyme from the pbs BGC. (A) Possible mechanism of
hydroxylation catalyzed by the MNIO PbsC using an Fe(IV)-oxo through an epoxide intermediate followed by a hydride shift (1,2-NIH shift).73
Other mechanisms that do not involve a hydride migration (electrophilic aromatic substitution like) can also be drawn. (B) An alternate
mechanism potentially initiated by a Fe(III)-peroxo species. (C) Proposed mechanism of C−C cross-linking between the hydroxylated Phe8 and
Phe10 residues initiated by hydrogen abstraction by a 5′-deoxyadenosyl radical.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23791



[PDF physical page 12]
abstraction from the phenol. We suggest the formation of an
ortho-Tyr radical by hydrogen atom transfer to the canonical
5′-deoxyadenosyl radical (Figure 8C), which results in spin
density at the Cε2 carbon. Addition to the partner ortho-Tyr in
the confines of the enzyme active site would result in an
aromatic radical that can be oxidized by one electron (possibly
to an FeS cluster as shown for streptide)87 and be
deprotonated to rearomatize the ring (tautomerization also
rearomatizes the other ring). It is not clear, however, why the
reaction requires a vitamin B12-dependent rSAM enzyme as
the proposed mechanism does not suggest an obvious role for
cobalamin. It is possible that the B12-dependence is vestigial or
that it acts as an electron transfer conduit as suggested for the
ring contraction B12-rSAM enzyme OxsB.90 Our data show
that the YTY sequence gave rise to the same cross-linking
pattern, consistent with the hypothesis that cyclization requires
phenolic substrates. The position of hydroxylation (on Cδ1 or
on Cζ) appears not critical for cyclization as the resulting
tyrosyl radicals are both activated for coupling at Cε2. But if
the mechanism in Figure 8C is indeed operational, then it is
surprising that the 5′-deoxy adenosyl radical would be able to
perform hydrogen atom abstraction from a phenolic O−H
bond at the δ1 position as well as the ζ position. Another
interesting question is why MNIO activation of Phe residues
would have evolved when Tyr residues apparently give the
same cyclized framework. One possibility is that cross-linking
of two ortho-Tyr residues (the products of the PbsC-mediated
Phe hydroxylation) probably does not result in two different
atropisomeric structures as the rotational barrier of the
biphenyl rings is likely not sufficiently high (assuming the
cyclic peptide does not increase the barrier by conformational
restrictions). Cyclization of two regular (not ortho) Tyr
residues at Cε on the other hand will give rise to two
atropisomeric structures, one of which is likely favored in the
context of the enzyme active site, as seen for instance in the
P450-catalyzed Tyr-Tyr cross-links in pyruvatides.29 It is
possible that the less conformationally constrained cross-link
of two ortho-Tyr residues is favorable for the bioactivity of the
biphenomycins. These compounds were first isolated from S.
filipinensis at Lederle laboratories in 1967 (LL-AF283),34 and
later also isolated from S. griseorubiginosus at the Fujisawa
company and termed biphenomycins.36−39 They display
potent antimicrobial activities against Gram-positive bacteria
in mice by an unknown mechanism. This work shows that
these compounds are RiPPs and that BGCs for analogs are
widely encoded in the genomes (Figures S1 and S2). Reported
total syntheses of biphenomycins required 16−22 steps.91,92
Deorphanizing their biosynthesis provides an alternate
production strategy that may involve fermentation or chemo-
enzymatic approaches, or a combination of both.
The Pbs peptides are matured by a TldD-type HExxxH-
motif containing metallopeptidase PbsP to release the
macrocyclic core peptide. While TldD requires a partner
TldE in a heterodimeric complex for proteolytic activity,51−53
PbsP was active independently and a potential partner protein
was not detected elsewhere in the genome of P. simplex BE23.
Based on the structure of biphenomycin C and the bpm BGC,
the modified precursor BpmA is perhaps processed similarly by
the PbsP homologue BpmI where the C-terminal Arg-Ser is
retained. A generic carboxypeptidase may then be involved in
further maturation of biphenomycin C to its A and B variants.
An equivalent process could also be utilized in the C-terminal
trimming of the modified Pbs peptides to release a
biphenomycin B-like macrocyclic product.
The biphenomycins are examples of a growing number of
RiPPs that generate one or more three-amino-acid membered
rings that can be generally described as biaryl linked peptides
ΩXΩ (Ω = aromatic amino acid; X = variable amino acid), or
aryl-aliphatic cross-linked peptides ΩXY and YXΩ (Y = any
amino acid cross-linked on an sp3 carbon of its side chain).
These include the triceptides,85,86 biarylitides,79−82,93−96
dynobactin97 and darobactin.98 The cross-links in these and
other molecules are introduced by both P45080,99,100 and
rSAM enzymes20,101 and are diverse in structure but
remarkably uniform in consisting of three amino acids.
Whereas for the triceptides and biarylitides the bioactivities
have not yet been elucidated and for the biphenomycins the
mode of action is not known, for dynobactin and darobactin
the biological activities are well understood. The cross-linked
peptides generate conformationally restricted peptides that are
locked in a β-strand-like mimic that interact with a β-sheet in
their target.102 With the characterization of the biphenomycins
as products of RiPP biosynthesis, this study further expands
the list of such three amino acids-cross-linked natural products.
■CONCLUSION
This study reveals the activity of five enzymes from a BGC
from P. simplex. They carry out novel post-translational
modifications that result in a final macrocyclic product that
is structurally similar to the biphenomycins. Sequencing of the
genome of a producer of biphenomycin confirmed that these
long-known compounds with potent in vivo antimicrobial
activity are made by a similar pathway. Thus, this work adds
Phe and Tyr hydroxylation to the reactions catalyzed by
MNIOs, adds B12-rSAM enzymes to the growing list of
enzymes that macrocyclize peptides, and deorphanizes the
biosynthesis of the biphenomycins.
■ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/jacs.5c06044.
Experimental procedures; Figures S1−S54: spectro-
scopic data; Tables S1−S8: gene sequences, primers,
MS data, and NMR annotations (PDF)
■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
Wilfred A. van der Donk −Department of Chemistry and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Illinois at
Urbana−Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States;
Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of
Illinois at Urbana−Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801,
United States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-5467-7071;
Email: vddonk@illinois.edu
Authors
Chandrashekhar Padhi −Department of Chemistry and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Illinois at
Urbana−Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States;
orcid.org/0009-0009-1305-0377
Lingyang Zhu −School of Chemical Sciences NMR
Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana−Champaign,
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23792



[PDF physical page 13]
Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States;
orcid.org/0000-
0002-6657-271X
Jeff Y. Chen −Department of Chemistry and Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, University of Illinois at
Urbana−Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States;
Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of
Illinois at Urbana−Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801,
United States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-8507-8215
Chuan Huang −Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University,
Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia; ARC Centre of Excellence
for Innovations in Peptide and Protein Science, Biomedicine
Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria
3800, Australia;
orcid.org/0009-0002-5364-3053
Ryan Moreira −Department of Chemistry and Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, University of Illinois at
Urbana−Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States;
orcid.org/0000-0003-0694-219X
Gregory L. Challis −Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash
University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia; ARC Centre of
Excellence for Innovations in Peptide and Protein Science,
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria 3800, Australia; Department of Chemistry,
University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK;
orcid.org/0000-0001-5976-3545
Max J. Cryle −Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University,
Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia; ARC Centre of Excellence
for Innovations in Peptide and Protein Science, Biomedicine
Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria
3800, Australia;
orcid.org/0000-0002-9739-6157
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
Funding
This work was supported in part by a grant from the National
Institutes of Health (GM058822 to W.A.vdD.). G.L.C. and
M.J.C. were supported by the Australian Research Council
Centre of Excellence for Innovations in Peptide and Protein
Science (CE200100012). R.M. was supported by the Life
Science Research Foundation. W.A.vdD. is an Investigator of
the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and a Partner
Investigator of the Australian Research Council Centre of
Excellence for Innovations in Peptide and Protein Science. A
Bruker UltrafleXtreme mass spectrometer used was purchased
with support from the National Institutes of Health (S10
RR027109).
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
■ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Denys Lytviak for help with preparing reagents for
experiments and Prof. Jasna Kovac (Penn State University) for
providing materials. HHMI lab heads have previously granted a
nonexclusive CC BY 4.0 license to the public and a
sublicensable license to HHMI in their research articles.
Pursuant to those licenses, the author-accepted manuscript of
this article can be made freely available under a CC BY 4.0
license immediately upon publication.
■REFERENCES
(1) Fryszkowska, A.; Devine, P. N. Biocatalysis in drug discovery and
development. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2020, 55, 151−160.
(2) Wu, S.; Snajdrova, R.; Moore, J. C.; Baldenius, K.; Bornscheuer,
U. T. Biocatalysis: enzymatic synthesis for industrial applications.
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60, 88−119.
(3) Intasian, P.; Prakinee, K.; Phintha, A.; Trisrivirat, D.;
Weeranoppanant, N.; Wongnate, T.; Chaiyen, P. Enzymes, in vivo
biocatalysis, and metabolic engineering for enabling a circular
economy and sustainability. Chem. Rev. 2021, 121, 10367−10451.
(4) Buller, R.; Lutz, S.; Kazlauskas, R. J.; Snajdrova, R.; Moore, J. C.;
Bornscheuer, U. T. From nature to industry: Harnessing enzymes for
biocatalysis. Science 2023, 382 (6673), No. eadh8615.
(5) Savile, C. K.; Janey, J. M.; Mundorff, E. C.; Moore, J. C.; Tam,
S.; Jarvis, W. R.; Colbeck, J. C.; Krebber, A.; Fleitz, F. J.; Brands, J.;
Devine, P. N.; Huisman, G. W.; Hughes, G. J. Biocatalytic asymmetric
synthesis of chiral amines from ketones applied to sitagliptin
manufacture. Science 2010, 329, 305−309.
(6) Huffman, M. A.; Fryszkowska, A.; Alvizo, O.; Borra-Garske, M.;
Campos, K. R.; Canada, K. A.; Devine, P. N.; Duan, D.; Forstater, J.
H.; Grosser, S. T.; Halsey, H. M.; Hughes, G. J.; Jo, J.; Joyce, L. A.;
Kolev, J. N.; Liang, J.; Maloney, K. M.; Mann, B. F.; Marshall, N. M.;
McLaughlin, M.; Moore, J. C.; Murphy, G. S.; Nawrat, C. C.; Nazor,
J.; Novick, S.; Patel, N. R.; Rodriguez-Granillo, A.; Robaire, S. A.;
Sherer, E. C.; Truppo, M. D.; Whittaker, A. M.; Verma, D.; Xiao, L.;
Xu, Y.; Yang, H. Design of an in vitro biocatalytic cascade for the
manufacture of islatravir. Science 2019, 366, 1255−1259.
(7) McIntosh, J. A.; Benkovics, T.; Silverman, S. M.; Huffman, M.
A.; Kong, J.; Maligres, P. E.; Itoh, T.; Yang, H.; Verma, D.; Pan, W.;
Ho, H. I.; Vroom, J.; Knight, A. M.; Hurtak, J. A.; Klapars, A.;
Fryszkowska, A.; Morris, W. J.; Strotman, N. A.; Murphy, G. S.;
Maloney, K. M.; Fier, P. S. Engineered Ribosyl-1-Kinase Enables
Concise Synthesis of Molnupiravir, an Antiviral for COVID-19. ACS
Cent. Sci. 2021, 7, 1980−1985.
(8) McIntosh, J. A.; Liu, Z.; Andresen, B. M.; Marzijarani, N. S.;
Moore, J. C.; Marshall, N. M.; Borra-Garske, M.; Obligacion, J. V.;
Fier, P. S.; Peng, F.; Forstater, J. H.; Winston, M. S.; An, C.; Chang,
W.; Lim, J.; Huffman, M. A.; Miller, S. P.; Tsay, F. R.; Altman, M. D.;
Lesburg, C. A.; Steinhuebel, D.; Trotter, B. W.; Cumming, J. N.;
Northrup, A.; Bu, X.; Mann, B. F.; Biba, M.; Hiraga, K.; Murphy, G.
S.; Kolev, J. N.; Makarewicz, A.; Pan, W.; Farasat, I.; Bade, R. S.;
Stone, K.; Duan, D.; Alvizo, O.; Adpressa, D.; Guetschow, E.; Hoyt,
E.; Regalado, E. L.; Castro, S.; Rivera, N.; Smith, J. P.; Wang, F.;
Crespo, A.; Verma, D.; Axnanda, S.; Dance, Z. E. X.; Devine, P. N.;
Tschaen, D.; Canada, K. A.; Bulger, P. G.; Sherry, B. D.; Truppo, M.
D.; Ruck, R. T.; Campeau, L. C.; Bennett, D. J.; Humphrey, G. R.;
Campos, K. R.; Maddess, M. L. A kinase-cGAS cascade to synthesize a
therapeutic STING activator. Nature 2022, 603, 439−444.
(9) Reisenbauer, J. C.; Sicinski, K. M.; Arnold, F. H. Catalyzing the
future: recent advances in chemical synthesis using enzymes. Curr.
Opin. Chem. Biol. 2024, 83, 102536.
(10) Finnigan, W.; Lubberink, M.; Hepworth, L. J.; Citoler, J.;
Mattey, A. P.; Ford, G. J.; Sangster, J.; Cosgrove, S. C.; da Costa, B.
Z.; Heath, R. S.; Thorpe, T. W.; Yu, Y.; Flitsch, S. L.; Turner, N. J.
RetroBioCat database: a platform for collaborative curation and
automated meta-analysis of biocatalysis data. ACS Catal. 2023, 13,
11771−11780.
(11) Arnold, F. H.; Volkov, A. A. Directed evolution of biocatalysts.
Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 1999, 3, 54−59.
(12) van der Donk, W. A. Introduction: unusual enzymology in
natural product synthesis. Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 5223−5225.
(13) Shen, B. A New Golden Age of Natural Products Drug
Discovery. Cell 2015, 163, 1297−1300.
(14) Newman, D. J.; Cragg, G. M. Natural products as sources of
new drugs over the nearly four decades from 01/1981 to 09/2019. J.
Nat. Prod. 2020, 83, 770−803.
(15) Atanasov, A. G.; Zotchev, S. B.; Dirsch, V. M.; Orhan, I. E.;
Banach, M.; Rollinger, J. M.; Barreca, D.; Weckwerth, W.; Bauer, R.;
Bayer, E. A.; Majeed, M.; Bishayee, A.; Bochkov, V.; Bonn, G. K.;
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23793



[PDF physical page 14]
Braidy, N.; Bucar, F.; Cifuentes, A.; D’Onofrio, G.; Bodkin, M.;
Diederich, M.; Dinkova-Kostova, A. T.; Efferth, T.; El Bairi, K.;
Arkells, N.; Fan, T.-P.; Fiebich, B. L.; Freissmuth, M.; Georgiev, M. I.;
Gibbons, S.; Godfrey, K. M.; Gruber, C. W.; Heer, J.; Huber, L. A.;
Ibanez, E.; Kijjoa, A.; Kiss, A. K.; Lu, A.; Macias, F. A.; Miller, M. J. S.;
Mocan, A.; Müller, R.; Nicoletti, F.; Perry, G.; Pittalá, V.; Rastrelli, L.;
Ristow, M.; Russo, G. L.; Silva, A. S.; Schuster, D.; Sheridan, H.;
Skalicka-Woźniak, K.; Skaltsounis, L.; Sobarzo-Sánchez, E.; Bredt, D.
S.; Stuppner, H.; Sureda, A.; Tzvetkov, N. T.; Vacca, R. A.; Aggarwal,
B. B.; Battino, M.; Giampieri, F.; Wink, M.; Wolfender, J.-L.; Xiao, J.;
Yeung, A. W. K.; Lizard, G.; Popp, M. A.; Heinrich, M.; Berindan-
Neagoe, I.; Stadler, M.; Daglia, M.; Verpoorte, R.; Supuran, C. T.
Natural products in drug discovery: advances and opportunities. Nat.
Rev. Drug Discovery 2021, 20, 200−216.
(16) Montalbán-López, M.; Scott, T. A.; Ramesh, S.; Rahman, I. R.;
van Heel, A. J.; Viel, J. H.; Bandarian, V.; Dittmann, E.; Genilloud, O.;
Goto, Y.; Grande Burgos, M. J.; Hill, C.; Kim, S.; Koehnke, J.;
Latham, J. A.; Link, A. J.; Martínez, B.; Nair, S. K.; Nicolet, Y.;
Rebuffat, S.; Sahl, H.-G.; Sareen, D.; Schmidt, E. W.; Schmitt, L.;
Severinov, K.; Süssmuth, R. D.; Truman, A. W.; Wang, H.; Weng, J.-
K.; van Wezel, G. P.; Zhang, Q.; Zhong, J.; Piel, J.; Mitchell, D. A.;
Kuipers, O. P.; van der Donk, W. A. New developments in RiPP
discovery, enzymology and engineering. Nat. Prod. Rep. 2021, 38,
130−239.
(17) Cao, L.; Do, T.; James Link, A. Mechanisms of action of
ribosomally synthesized and posttranslationally modified peptides
(RiPPs). J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2021, 48 (3−4), kuab005.
(18) Ongpipattanakul, C.; Desormeaux, E. K.; DiCaprio, A.; van der
Donk, W. A.; Mitchell, D. A.; Nair, S. K. Mechanism of action of
ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides.
Chem. Rev. 2022, 122, 14722−14814.
(19) Rebuffat, S. Ribosomally synthesized peptides, foreground
players in microbial interactions: recent developments and
unanswered questions. Nat. Prod. Rep. 2022, 39, 273−310.
(20) Nguyen, D. T.; Mitchell, D. A.; van der Donk, W. A. Genome
mining for new enzyme chemistry. ACS Catal 2024, 14, 4536−4553.
(21) Zdouc, M. M.; van der Hooft, J. J. J.; Medema, M. H.
Metabolome-guided genome mining of RiPP natural products. Trends
Pharmacol. Sci. 2023, 44, 532−541.
(22) Padhi, C.; Field, C. M.; Forneris, C. C.; Olszewski, D.; Fraley,
A. E.; Sandu, I.; Scott, T. A.; Farnung, J.; Ruscheweyh, H.-J.; Narayan
Panda, A.; Oxenius, A.; Greber, U. F.; Bode, J. W.; Sunagawa, S.;
Raina, V.; Suar, M.; Piel, J. Metagenomic study of lake microbial mats
reveals protease-inhibiting antiviral peptides from a core microbiome
member. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2024, 121 (49),
No. e2409026121.
(23) Chen, J. Y.; van der Donk, W. A. Multinuclear non-heme iron
dependent oxidative enzymes (MNIOs) involved in unusual peptide
modifications. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2024, 80, 102467.
(24) Kenney, G. E.; Dassama, L. M. K.; Pandelia, M.-E.; Gizzi, A. S.;
Martinie, R. J.; Gao, P.; DeHart, C. J.; Schachner, L. F.; Skinner, O. S.;
Ro, S. Y.; Zhu, X.; Sadek, M.; Thomas, P. M.; Almo, S. C.; Bollinger, J.
M.; Krebs, C.; Kelleher, N. L.; Rosenzweig, A. C. The biosynthesis of
methanobactin. Science 2018, 359, 1411−1416.
(25) Ting, C. P.; Funk, M. A.; Halaby, S. L.; Zhang, Z.; Gonen, T.;
van der Donk, W. A. Use of a scaffold peptide in the biosynthesis of
amino acid-derived natural products. Science 2019, 365, 280−284.
(26) Leprevost, L.; Jünger, S.; Lippens, G.; Guillaume, C.; Sicoli, G.;
Oliveira, L.; Falcone, E.; de Santis, E.; Rivera-Millot, A.; Billon, G.;
Stellato, F.; Henry, C.; Antoine, R.; Zirah, S.; Dubiley, S.; Li, Y.;
Jacob-Dubuisson, F. A widespread family of ribosomal peptide
metallophores involved in bacterial adaptation to metal stress. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2024, 121, No. e2408304121.
(27) Ayikpoe, R. S.; Zhu, L.; Chen, J. Y.; Ting, C. P.; van der Donk,
W. A. Macrocyclization and backbone rearrangement during RiPP
biosynthesis by a SAM-dependent domain-of-unknown-function 692.
ACS Cent. Sci. 2023, 9, 1008−1018.
(28) Chioti, V. T.; Clark, K. A.; Ganley, J. G.; Han, E. J.;
Seyedsayamdost, M. R. N-Cα bond cleavage catalyzed by a
multinuclear iron oxygenase from a divergent methanobactin-like
RiPP gene cluster. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2024, 146, 7313−7323.
(29) Nguyen, D. T.; Zhu, L.; Gray, D. L.; Woods, T. J.; Padhi, C.;
Flatt, K. M.; Mitchell, D. A.; van der Donk, W. A. Biosynthesis of
macrocyclic peptides with C-terminal β-amino-α-keto acid groups by
three different metalloenzymes. ACS Cent. Sci. 2024, 10, 1022−1032.
(30) Zallot, R.; Oberg, N.; Gerlt, J. A. The EFI web resource for
genomic enzymology tools: Leveraging protein, genome, and
metagenome databases to discover novel enzymes and metabolic
pathways. Biochemistry 2019, 58, 4169−4182.
(31) Oberg, N.; Zallot, R.; Gerlt, J. A. EFI-EST, EFI-GNT, and EFI-
CGFP: Enzyme Function Initiative (EFI) web resource for genomic
enzymology tools. J. Mol. Biol 2023, 435, 168018.
(32) Tietz, J. I.; Schwalen, C. J.; Patel, P. S.; Maxson, T.; Blair, P. M.;
Tai, H. C.; Zakai, U. I.; Mitchell, D. A. A new genome-mining tool
redefines the lasso peptide biosynthetic landscape. Nat. Chem. Biol
2017, 13, 470−478.
(33) Burkhart, B. J.; Hudson, G. A.; Dunbar, K. L.; Mitchell, D. A. A
prevalent peptide-binding domain guides ribosomal natural product
biosynthesis. Nat. Chem. Biol 2015, 11, 564−570.
(34) Martin, J. H.; Mitscher, L. A.; Shu, P.; Porter, J. N.; Bohonos,
N.; DeVoe, S. E.; Patterson, E. L. Antimicrobial Agents and
Chemotherapy; American Society for Microbiology: Bethesda, 1967;
Vol. 7, pp. 422−425.
(35) Chang, C. C.; Morton, G. O.; James, J. C.; Siegel, M. M.; Kuck,
N. A.; Testa, R. T.; Borders, D. B. LL-AF283 antibiotics, cyclic
biphenyl peptides. J. Antibiot 1991, 44, 674−677.
(36) Ezaki, M.; Iwami, M.; Yamashita, M.; Hashimoto, S.; Komori,
T.; Umehara, K.; Mine, Y.; Kohsaka, M.; Aoki, H.; Imanaka, H.
Biphenomycins A and B, novel peptide antibiotics. I. Taxonomy,
fermentation, isolation and characterization. J. Antibiot 1985, 38,
1453−1461.
(37) Uchida, I.; Shigematsu, N.; Ezaki, M.; Hashimoto, M.; Aoki, H.;
Imanaka, H. Biphenomycins A and B, novel peptide antibiotics. II.
Structural elucidation of biphenomycins A and B. J. Antibiot 1985, 38,
1462−1468.
(38) Ezaki, M.; Iwami, M.; Yamashita, M.; Komori, T.; Umehara, K.;
Imanaka, H. Biphenomycin A production by a mixed culture. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol 1992, 58, 3879−3882.
(39) Ezaki, M.; Shigematsu, N.; Yamashita, M.; Komori, T.;
Umehara, K.; Imanaka, H. Biphenomycin C, a precursor of
biphenomycin A in mixed culture. J. Antibiot 1993, 46, 135−140.
(40) Zhang, Z.; Miller, W.; Schäffer, A. A.; Madden, T. L.; Lipman,
D. J.; Koonin, E. V.; Altschul, S. F. Protein sequence similarity
searches using patterns as seeds. Nucleic Acids Res 1998, 26, 3986−
3990.
(41) Zhang, C.; Li, Y.; Overton, E. N.; Seyedsayamdost, M. R.
Peptide surfactants with post-translational C-methylations that
promote bacterial development. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2025.
(42) Esmaeel, Q.; Ait Barka, E. Draft genome sequences of Bacillus
strains isolated from the rhizosphere of maize cultivated in the northeast
of France, University of Reims: 2018.
(43) Manetsberger, J.; Caballero Gómez, N.; Soria-Rodríguez, C.;
Benomar, N.; Abriouel, H. Simply versatile: The use of Peribacillus
simplex in sustainable agriculture. Microorganisms 2023, 11, 2540.
(44) Allioui, N.; Driss, F.; Dhouib, H.; Jlail, L.; Tounsi, S.; Frikha-
Gargouri, O.; Ahmad, A. Two novel Bacillus Strains (subtilis and
simplex species) with promising potential for the biocontrol of
Zymoseptoria tritici, the causal agent of septoria tritici blotch of wheat.
BioMed. Res. Int 2021, 2021, 6611657.
(45) Manetsberger, J.; Caballero Gómez, N.; Benomar, N.; Christie,
G.; Abriouel, H. Antimicrobial profile of the culturable olive
sporobiota and its potential as a source of biocontrol agents for
major phytopathogens in olive agriculture. Pest Manage. Sci 2024, 80,
724−733.
(46) Gu, Y.-Q.; Mo, M.-H.; Zhou, J.-P.; Zou, C.-S.; Zhang, K.-Q.
Evaluation and identification of potential organic nematicidal volatiles
from soil bacteria. Soil Biol. Biochem 2007, 39, 2567−2575.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23794



[PDF physical page 15]
(47) Kloosterman, A. M.; Shelton, K. E.; Wezel, G. P. V.; Medema,
M. H.; Mitchell, D. A.; Gutierrez, M. RRE-Finder: a genome-mining
tool for class-independent RiPP discovery. mSystems 2020, 5, 10−
1128.
(48) Zheng, L.; Cash, V. L.; Flint, D. H.; Dean, D. R. Assembly of
iron-sulfur clusters: Identification of an iscSUA-hscBA-fdx gene
cluster from Azotobacter vinelandii. J. Biol. Chem 1998, 273, 13264−
13272.
(49) Lanz, N. D.; Blaszczyk, A. J.; McCarthy, E. L.; Wang, B.; Wang,
R. X.; Jones, B. S.; Booker, S. J. Enhanced solubilization of class B
radical S-adenosylmethionine methylases by improved cobalamin
uptake in Escherichia coli. Biochemistry 2018, 57, 1475−1490.
(50) Yu, Y.; van der Donk, W. A. Biosynthesis of 3-thia-α-amino
acids on a carrier peptide. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2022, 119,
No. e2205285119.
(51) Vobruba, S.; Kadlcik, S.; Janata, J.; Kamenik, Z. TldD/TldE
peptidases and N-deacetylases: A structurally unique yet ubiquitous
protein family in the microbial metabolism. Microbiol. Res 2022, 265,
127186.
(52) Allali, N.; Afif, H.; Couturier, M.; Van Melderen, L. The highly
conserved TldD and TldE proteins of Escherichia coli are involved in
microcin B17 processing and in CcdA degradation. J. Bacteriol 2002,
184, 3224−3231.
(53) Ghilarov, D.; Serebryakova, M.; Stevenson, C. E. M.;
Hearnshaw, S. J.; Volkov, D. S.; Maxwell, A.; Lawson, D. M.;
Severinov, K. The origins of specificity in the microcin-processing
protease TldD/E. Structure 2017, 25, 1549−1561.e5.
(54) Harada, K.-I.; Fujii, K.; Hayashi, K.; Suzuki, M.; Ikai, Y.; Oka,
H. Application of d,l-FDLA derivatization to determination of
absolute configuration of constituent amino acids in peptide by
advanced Marfey’s method. Tetrahedron Lett 1996, 37, 3001−3004.
(55) Abramson, J.; Adler, J.; Dunger, J.; Evans, R.; Green, T.; Pritzel,
A.; Ronneberger, O.; Willmore, L.; Ballard, A. J.; Bambrick, J.;
Bodenstein, S. W.; Evans, D. A.; Hung, C.-C.; O’Neill, M.; Reiman,
D.; Tunyasuvunakool, K.; Wu, Z.; Žemgulytė, A.; Arvaniti, E.; Beattie,
C.; Bertolli, O.; Bridgland, A.; Cherepanov, A.; Congreve, M.; Cowen-
Rivers, A. I.; Cowie, A.; Figurnov, M.; Fuchs, F. B.; Gladman, H.; Jain,
R.; Khan, Y. A.; Low, C. M. R.; Perlin, K.; Potapenko, A.; Savy, P.;
Singh, S.; Stecula, A.; Thillaisundaram, A.; Tong, C.; Yakneen, S.;
Zhong, E. D.; Zielinski, M.; Žídek, A.; Bapst, V.; Kohli, P.; Jaderberg,
M.; Hassabis, D.; Jumper, J. M. Accurate structure prediction of
biomolecular interactions with AlphaFold 3. Nature 2024, 630, 493−
500.
(56) Ortega, M. A.; Hao, Y.; Zhang, Q.; Walker, M. C.; van der
Donk, W. A.; Nair, S. K. Structure and mechanism of the tRNA-
dependent lantibiotic dehydratase NisB. Nature 2015, 517, 509−512.
(57) Koehnke, J.; Mann, G.; Bent, A. F.; Ludewig, H.; Shirran, S.;
Botting, C.; Lebl, T.; Houssen, W. E.; Jaspars, M.; Naismith, J. H.
Structural analysis of leader peptide binding enables leader-free
cyanobactin processing. Nat. Chem. Biol 2015, 11, 558−563.
(58) Evans, R. L., III; Latham, J. A.; Xia, Y.; Klinman, J. P.; Wilmot,
C. M. Nuclear magnetic resonance structure and binding studies of
PqqD, a chaperone required in the biosynthesis of the bacterial
dehydrogenase cofactor pyrroloquinoline quinone. Biochemistry 2017,
56, 2735−2746.
(59) Grove, T. L.; Himes, P. M.; Hwang, S.; Yumerefendi, H.;
Bonanno, J. B.; Kuhlman, B.; Almo, S. C.; Bowers, A. A. Structural
insights into thioether bond formation in the biosynthesis of
sactipeptides. J. Am. Chem. Soc 2017, 139, 11734−11744.
(60) Chekan, J. R.; Ongpipattanakul, C.; Nair, S. K. Steric
complementarity directs sequence promiscuous leader binding in
RiPP biosynthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2019, 116, 24049−
24055.
(61) Sumida, T.; Dubiley, S.; Wilcox, B.; Severinov, K.; Tagami, S.
Structural basis of leader peptide recognition in lasso peptide
biosynthesis pathway. ACS Chem. Biol 2019, 14, 1619−1627.
(62) Ghilarov, D.; Stevenson, C. E. M.; Travin, D. Y.; Piskunova, J.;
Serebryakova, M.; Maxwell, A.; Lawson, D. M.; Severinov, K.
Architecture of microcin B17 synthetase: an octameric protein
complex converting a ribosomally synthesized peptide into a DNA
gyrase poison. Mol. Cell 2019, 73, 749−762.
(63) Shelton, K. E.; Mitchell, D. A. Bioinformatic prediction and
experimental validation of RiPP recognition elements. Methods
Enzymol 2023, 679, 191−233.
(64) Uchida, I.; Ezaki, M.; Shigematsu, N.; Hashimoto, M. Structure
of WS-43708A, a novel cyclic peptide antibiotic. J. Org. Chem 1985,
50, 1341−1342.
(65) Gerlt, J. A.; Bouvier, J. T.; Davidson, D. B.; Imker, H. J.;
Sadkhin, B.; Slater, D. R.; Whalen, K. L. Enzyme Function Initiative-
Enzyme Similarity Tool (EFI-EST): A web tool for generating protein
sequence similarity networks. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Protein Struct.
Mol. Enzymol. 2015, 1854, 1019−1037.
(66) Atkinson, H. J.; Morris, J. H.; Ferrin, T. E.; Babbitt, P. C. Using
sequence similarity networks for visualization of relationships across
diverse protein superfamilies. PLoS One 2009, 4, No. e4345.
(67) Fitzpatrick, P. F. Mechanism of aromatic amino acid
hydroxylation. Biochemistry 2003, 42, 14083−14091.
(68) Mitchell, K. H.; Rogge, C. E.; Gierahn, T.; Fox, B. G. Insight
into the mechanism of aromatic hydroxylation by toluene 4-
monooxygenase by use of specifically deuterated toluene and p-
xylene. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 2003, 100, 3784−3789.
(69) Ullrich, R.; Hofrichter, M. Enzymatic hydroxylation of aromatic
compounds. Cell. Mol. Life Sci 2007, 64, 271−293.
(70) de Visser, S. P. Predictive studies of oxygen atom transfer
reactions by Compound I of cytochrome P450: Aliphatic and
aromatic hydroxylation, epoxidation, and sulfoxidation. In Advances in
Inorganic Chemistry, Eldik, R. V.; Ivanović-Burmazović, I., Eds.;
Academic Press, 2012, Vol. 64, pp. 1−31.
(71) Shen, X.; Zhou, D.; Lin, Y.; Wang, J.; Gao, S.; Kandavelu, P.;
Zhang, H.; Zhang, R.; Wang, B.-C.; Rose, J.; Yuan, Q.; Yan, Y.
Structural insights into catalytic versatility of the flavin-dependent
hydroxylase (HpaB) from Escherichia coli. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 7087.
(72) Frattaruolo, L.; Lacret, R.; Cappello, A. R.; Truman, A. W. A
Genomics-Based Approach Identifies a Thioviridamide-Like Com-
pound with Selective Anticancer Activity. ACS Chem. Biol. 2017, 12,
2815−2822.
(73) Guroff, G.; Daly, J. W.; Jerina, D. M.; Renson, J.; Witkop, B.;
Udenfriend, S. Hydroxylation-induced migration: the NIH shift.
Recent experiments reveal an unexpected and general result of
enzymatic hydroxylation of aromatic compounds. Science 1967, 157,
1524−1530.
(74) Mordhorst, S.; Badmann, T.; Bösch, N. M.; Morinaka, B. I.;
Rauch, H.; Piel, J.; Groll, M.; Vagstad, A. L. Structural and
biochemical insights into post-translational arginine-to-ornithine
peptide modifications by an atypical arginase. ACS Chem. Biol
2023, 18, 528−536.
(75) Mordhorst, S.; Morinaka, B. I.; Vagstad, A. L.; Piel, J.
Posttranslationally acting arginases provide a ribosomal route to non-
proteinogenic ornithine residues in diverse peptide sequences. Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed 2020, 59, 21442−21447.
(76) Kandy, S. K.; Pasquale, M. A.; Chekan, J. R. Aromatic side-
chain crosslinking in RiPP biosynthesis. Nat. Chem. Biol 2025, 21,
168−181.
(77) Hug, J. J.; Dastbaz, J.; Adam, S.; Revermann, O.; Koehnke, J.;
Krug, D.; Müller, R. Biosynthesis of cittilins, unusual ribosomally
synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides from Myx-
ococcus xanthus. ACS Chem. Biol 2020, 15, 2221−2231.
(78) Molinaro, C.; Kawasaki, Y.; Wanyoike, G.; Nishioka, T.;
Yamamoto, T.; Snedecor, B.; Robinson, S. J.; Gosselin, F. Engineered
cytochrome P450-catalyzed oxidative biaryl coupling reaction
provides a scalable entry into arylomycin antibiotics. J. Am. Chem.
Soc 2022, 144, 14838−14845.
(79) Zdouc, M. M.; Alanjary, M. M.; Zarazúa, G. S.; Maffioli, S. I.;
Crüsemann, M.; Medema, M. H.; Donadio, S.; Sosio, M. A biaryl-
linked tripeptide from Planomonospora reveals a widespread class of
minimal RiPP gene clusters. Cell Chem. Biol 2021, 28, 733−739.
(80) Padva, L.; Gullick, J.; Coe, L. J.; Hansen, M. H.; De Voss, J. J.;
Crüsemann, M.; Cryle, M. J. The biarylitides: Understanding the
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23795



[PDF physical page 16]
structure and biosynthesis of a fascinating class of cytochrome P450
modified RiPP natural products. ChemBiochem 2024, 26,
No. e202400916.
(81) Hug, J. J.; Frank, N. A.; Walt, C.; Šenica, P.; Panter, F.; Müller,
R. Genome-guided discovery of the first myxobacterial biarylitide
myxarylin reveals distinct C-N biaryl crosslinking in RiPP biosyn-
thesis. Molecules 2021, 26, 7483.
(82) Padva, L.; Zimmer, L.; Gullick, J.; Zhao, Y.; Sasi, V. M.;
Schittenhelm, R. B.; Jackson, C. J.; Cryle, M. J.; Crüsemann, M.
Ribosomal pentapeptide nitration for non-ribosomal peptide anti-
biotic precursor biosynthesis. Chem 2025, 11, 102438.
(83) Schramma, K. R.; Forneris, C. C.; Caruso, A.; Seyedsayamdost,
M. R. Mechanistic investigations of lysine-tryptophan cross-link
formation catalyzed by streptococcal radical S-adenosylmethionine
enzymes. Biochemistry 2018, 57, 461−468.
(84) Haslinger, K.; Peschke, M.; Brieke, C.; Maximowitsch, E.;
Cryle, M. J. X-domain of peptide synthetases recruits oxygenases
crucial for glycopeptide biosynthesis. Nature 2015, 521, 105−109.
(85) Sugiyama, R.; Suarez, A. F. L.; Morishita, Y.; Nguyen, T. Q. N.;
Tooh, Y. W.; Roslan, M.; Lo Choy, J.; Su, Q.; Goh, W. Y.; Gunawan,
G. A.; Wong, F. T.; Morinaka, B. I. The biosynthetic landscape of
triceptides reveals radical SAM enzymes that catalyze cyclophane
formation on Tyr- and His-containing motifs. J. Am. Chem. Soc 2022,
144, 11580−11593.
(86) Phan, C. S.; Morinaka, B. I. A prevalent group of
Actinobacterial radical SAM/SPASM maturases involved in triceptide
biosynthesis. ACS Chem. Biol 2022, 17, 3284−3289.
(87) Balo, A. R.; Caruso, A.; Tao, L.; Tantillo, D. J.;
Seyedsayamdost, M. R.; Britt, R. D. Trapping a cross-linked lysine−
tryptophan radical in the catalytic cycle of the radical SAM enzyme
SuiB. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2021, 118, No. e2101571118.
(88) Zhang, Q.; van der Donk, W. A.; Liu, W. Radical-mediated
enzymatic methylation: a tale of two SAMS. Acc. Chem. Res 2012, 45,
555−564.
(89) Bridwell-Rabb, J.; Li, B.; Drennan, C. L. Cobalamin-dependent
radical S-adenosylmethionine enzymes: capitalizing on old motifs for
new functions. ACS Bio Med. Chem. Au. 2022, 2, 173−186.
(90) Bridwell-Rabb, J.; Zhong, A.; Sun, H. G.; Drennan, C. L.; Liu,
H.-W. A B12-dependent radical SAM enzyme involved in oxetanocin
A biosynthesis. Nature 2017, 544, 322−326.
(91) Waldmann, H.; He, Y. P.; Tan, H.; Arve, L.; Arndt, H. D.
Flexible total synthesis of biphenomycin B. Chem. Commun 2008,
5562−5564.
(92) Schmidt, U.; Leitenberger, V.; Griesser, H.; Schmidt, J.; Meyer,
R. Total synthesis of the biphenomycins; V.1 synthesis of
biphenomycin A. Synthesis 1992, 1992, 1248−1254.
(93) Zdouc, M. M.; Iorio, M.; Vind, K.; Simone, M.; Serina, S.;
Brunati, C.; Monciardini, P.; Tocchetti, A.; Zarazúa, G. S.;
Crüsemann, M.; Maffioli, S. I.; Sosio, M.; Donadio, S. Effective
approaches to discover new microbial metabolites in a large strain
library. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2021, 48, kuab017.
(94) Zhao, Y.; Marschall, E.; Treisman, M.; McKay, A.; Padva, L.;
Crüsemann, M.; Nelson, D. R.; Steer, D. L.; Schittenhelm, R. B.;
Tailhades, J.; Cryle, M. J. Cytochrome P450 Blt Enables Versatile
Peptide Cyclisation to Generate Histidine- and Tyrosine-Containing
Crosslinked Tripeptide Building Blocks. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2022,
61, No. e202204957.
(95) Coe, L. J.; Zhao, Y.; Padva, L.; Keto, A.; Schittenhelm, R.;
Tailhades, J.; Pierens, G.; Krenske, E. H.; Crüsemann, M.; De Voss, J.
J.; Cryle, M. J. Reassignment of the Structure of a Tryptophan-
Containing Cyclic Tripeptide Produced by the Biarylitide Cross-
linking Cytochrome P450 blt. Chem. - Eur. J. 2024, 30,
No. e202400988.
(96) Hansen, M. H.; Keto, A.; Treisman, M.; Sasi, V. M.; Coe, L.;
Zhao, Y.; Padva, L.; Hess, C.; Leichthammer, V.; Machell, D. L.;
Schittenhelm, R. B.; Jackson, C. J.; Tailhades, J.; Crüsemann, M.; De
Voss, J. J.; Krenske, E. H.; Cryle, M. J. Structural insights into a side
chain cross-linking biarylitide P450 from RiPP biosynthesis. ACS
Catal. 2024, 14, 812−826.
(97) Miller, R. D.; Iinishi, A.; Modaresi, S. M.; Yoo, B. K.; Curtis, T.
D.; Lariviere, P. J.; Liang, L.; Son, S.; Nicolau, S.; Bargabos, R.;
Morrissette, M.; Gates, M. F.; Pitt, N.; Jakob, R. P.; Rath, P.; Maier,
T.; Malyutin, A. G.; Kaiser, J. T.; Niles, S.; Karavas, B.; Ghiglieri, M.;
Bowman, S. E. J.; Rees, D. C.; Hiller, S.; Lewis, K. Computational
identification of a systemic antibiotic for gram-negative bacteria. Nat.
Microbiol 2022, 7, 1661−1672.
(98) Lewis, K.; Lee, R. E.; Brötz-Oesterhelt, H.; Hiller, S.; Rodnina,
M. V.; Schneider, T.; Weingarth, M.; Wohlgemuth, I. Sophisticated
natural products as antibiotics. Nature 2024, 632, 39−49.
(99) Liu, J.; Liu, R.; He, B. B.; Lin, X.; Guo, L.; Wu, G.; Li, Y. X.
Bacterial cytochrome P450 catalyzed macrocyclization of ribosomal
peptides. ACS Bio Med. Chem. Au. 2024, 4, 268−279.
(100) Hu, Y. L.; Yin, F. Z.; Shi, J.; Ma, S. Y.; Wang, Z. R.; Tan, R. X.;
Jiao, R. H.; Ge, H. M. P450-modified ribosomally synthesized
peptides with aromatic cross-links. J. Am. Chem. Soc 2023, 145,
27325−27335.
(101) Clark, K. A.; Bushin, L. B.; Seyedsayamdost, M. R. RaS-RiPPs
in streptococci and the human microbiome. ACS Bio Med. Chem. Au.
2022, 2, 328−339.
(102) Kaur, H.; Jakob, R. P.; Marzinek, J. K.; Green, R.; Imai, Y.;
Bolla, J. R.; Agustoni, E.; Robinson, C. V.; Bond, P. J.; Lewis, K.;
Maier, T.; Hiller, S. The antibiotic darobactin mimics a β-strand to
inhibit outer membrane insertase. Nature 2021, 593, 125−129.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06044
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 23781−23796
23796
