Molecular Plant                                                                                                                                                                                                                llll
Spotlight

The genomes of Taxus species unveil novel
candidates in the biosynthesis of taxoids





Taxaceae is the yew family of conifers and includes evergreen    Taxaceae, or even predating their divergence from Cupressa-
trees and small shrubs mainly distributed in Eurasia and North   ceae (the cypress family), however, remains controversial, at
America. The genus of Taxus has attracted considerable atten-    least in T. wallichiana, as most paralogs can be ascribed to
tion since Monroe E. Wall and Mansukh C. Wani ﬁrstly isolated    segmental duplications rather than to an ancient WGD event
and characterized an unusual cyclic diterpenoid from the bark    (Cheng et al., 2021). In any case, the formation of the super-
of the Paciﬁc yew tree (Wani et  al., 1971). This compound,    large genomes of yews may have been caused by the continuous
subsequently called paclitaxel, was shown to promote tubulin    insertion of repetitive sequences  in their genomes. Tandem
assembly  into  microtubules,  preventing  their  disassembly.    duplication in T. wallichiana works as the driving force of gene
Subsequently, paclitaxel was approved for medical use against    family  evolution,  resulting  in more and more enzymes by
ovarian cancer in 1992 (Fischer and Ganellin, 2010). The natural    nature  to  modify  taxoids  and  ﬁnally  produce  paclitaxel
sources of paclitaxel are the twigs, bark, or needles of Taxus    (Cheng et  al., 2021). Both species have large proportions of
species; however, in these tissues, even at full tree maturity,     repetitive sequences (around 80%), with long terminal repeat
the level of this metabolite remains extremely low  (it ranges    retrotransposons (LTR-RTs) accounting for well over 50% (52%
from 0.0012% [twigs] to 0.015% [bark] of the dry weight). This     in T. chinensis var. mairei and 77% in T. wallichiana). A large
low  yield, combined  with  the amount  required  for a  full    part of these LTR-RTs inserted in the past 20 million years, and
therapeutic treatment (around 2–3 g paclitaxel/patient), and the   most are now remnants due to decay to incomplete forms or
slow growth of Taxus trees, have intensiﬁed the search for    even solo-LTRs. In both studies, the number, type, and abun-
alternative approaches to produce paclitaxel (Li et al., 2019).   dance of gene families were also compared between Taxus and
Due to the low efﬁciency and the inherent complexity of such a    other plant genomes. For example, from the analysis of the set
multi-step process, total chemical synthesis of Taxol, achieved    of around 2000 Taxus-speciﬁc genes  (i.e., those exclusive of
for the ﬁrst time in 1994, was never considered as a commercially    Taxus, with no clear orthologs across the analyzed gymnosperm,
viable alternative (Nicolaou et al., 1994). Therefore, nowadays,    angiosperm,  and  cryptogame  genomes),  several  potential
Taxol  is mainly produced through semi-synthesis from 10-    biosynthetic genes of phenylpropanoids, terpenes, and ﬂavones
deacetylbaccatin  III, a diterpenoid precursor that accumulates   were identiﬁed. Some of these genes, already characterized as
to reasonable amounts in yew needles (up to around 0.1% of    part of the paclitaxel biosynthesis (such as that encoding taxa-
dry weight), as well as Taxus cell cultures. However, given that    diene synthase [TS] the ﬁrst enzyme in the pathway, along with
the entire biosynthetic pathway for the production of paclitaxel    several cytochrome P450 family genes), were clustered on chro-
is not yet fully elucidated, the use of Taxol cell cultures cannot   mosome 10 (in T. wallichiana) or 9 (in T. chinensis var. mairei). In
be considered a fully rational strategy (Roberts, 2007; Nazhand     particular, an additional, previously unknown, taxadiene syn-
et  al., 2020; Mutanda  et  al., 2021). As such, the genome    thase (TS2) was found to be part of a metabolic cluster which
sequencing of Taxaceae, along with  its integration within a    also includes its paralog TS1, two taxane 5a-hydroxylase genes
wider multi-omic and synthetic biology dimension, may enable   (T5aOH-1 and T5aOH-2), and two uncharacterized CYP725A
a deeper understanding of taxoid biosynthesis and indicate    (Figure  1A). The  higher  catalytic  efﬁciency  of TS2  of  the
which steps are currently limiting and worthy of engineering-    ‘‘taxadiene gene  cluster’’ could be used to engineer Taxol
based improvements in cell-based Taxol production.               biosynthesis (Xiong  et  al., 2021). Moreover, given  that the
                                                             accumulation of paclitaxel is induced by methyl jasmonate (JA),
                                                                                             all the genes in this cluster also showed a highly coordinated
Two recent studies reporting the genomes of T. wallichiana                                                                      tissue  expression  pattern  and  expression  consistency  in
(Himalayan yew [Cheng et al., 2021]) and of T. chinensis var.                                                           response  to JA  (Xiong  et  al.,  2021). Thus,  several genes
mairei (Xiong et al., 2021), both assembled at the chromosome                                                           encoding enzymes active in different steps of the paclitaxel
level,  provide  important  insights  into  the  structure  and                                                                  synthesis pathway are located in deﬁned chromosomal regions,
regulation  of  paclitaxel biosynthesis, and also  unveil some                                                              suggesting  that  there  might be a  coordinated  regulatory
unexpected characteristics of the Taxus genomes in relation to                                                     mechanism for their gene expression.
other conifers. Both Taxus genomes were assembled in 12
chromosomes,  and  were  of  similar  size  (10.9 Gb  for
T. wallichiana and 10.23 Gb for T. chinensis var. mairei). More    Given that cytochrome P450 enzymes catalyze nine oxidative
than 40 000 protein-coding genes were mapped, using a combi-    steps in current models of paclitaxel biosynthesis, with four steps
nation of de novo and homology prediction from related species,      still in need of being fully elucidated, this gene family, and in
with the support of transcriptome data generated from leaves,
bark, root, and Taxus cell lines under elicitor treatment. The exis-     Published by the Molecular Plant Shanghai Editorial Ofﬁce in association with
tence of a WGD (whole genome duplication) event at the base of     Cell Press, an imprint of Elsevier Inc., on behalf of CSPB and CEMPS, CAS.

                                                          Molecular Plant 14, 1773–1775, November 1 2021 ª The Author 2021. 1773