Genetica (2009) 135:123–135                                                                                         127


molecular partitions and on the combined data. ML anal-    constrained to be B1 to a selection model where a class of
ysis and bootstrapping were performed using GARLI 0.951     sites has x [ 1 (Yang et al. 2000). As neutral models are
(Zwickl 2006). GARLI searches relied on the GTR + G,    nested within the corresponding selection models, a like-
HKY + G,  and GTR + I  models,  which  ModelTest    lihood ratio test (LRT) can be used to compare them. The
selected as the best ﬁtting models for unpartitioned TS     test statistic -2DlnL (DlnL = the difference in log likeli-
exons 1–4, DBAT, and ITS data, respectively. MP analysis    hoods of the 2 models) follows a x2 distribution with
was performed using PAUP* 4.0b10 (Swofford 2002).    degrees of freedom (df) equal to the difference in number
Heuristic searches were performed using tree bisection–    of parameters between models. In the speciﬁc models
reconnection (TBR)  branch-swapping  and 10 random    implemented, x varies between codons as a beta distribu-
sequence  addition  replicates.  All  sites  were  equally    tion (neutral: M7, M8a; selection: M8). We implemented
weighted and gaps were treated as missing characters.    models M7, M8a, and M8 with the codeml program in
Strong support for individual nodes is deﬁned as nodes   PAML4 (Yang 2007). Because Yang models are based on
with Bayesian posterior probabilities (PP) C 0.95 or non-    theoretical assumptions and ignore the empirical observa-
parametric  bootstrap  (BP) C 80.  Strongly  supported    tion that distinct amino acids differ in their replacement
conﬂicting  relationships were  recovered from TS and     rates, we also implemented MEC (Mechanistic Empirical
DBAT datasets, so they were not combined for phylo-    Combination) model (Doron-Faigenboim and Pupko 2007)
genetic analyses. The data sets were also analyzed with     that takes into account not only the transition–transversion
MrBayes 3.1.2 (Ronquist and Huelsenbeck 2003). The    bias and the nonsynonymous/synonymous ratio, but also
analyses of TS exons 1–4, DBAT, and ITS data utilized    the  different amino  acid  replacement  probabilities  as
one (with outgroup Abies grandis, abietadiene synthase    speciﬁed in empirical amino acid matrices. Because the
gene),  three  (partitioned by codon  position), and one   LRT is applicable only when two models are nested and
(with  outgroup  Austrotaxus  spicata) model  partitions,    thus is not suitable for comparing MEC and M8a models,
respectively. Two independent runs with one cold and    the second-order Akaike information criterion (AICc) was
three  heated Markov  chains  each  per  analysis  were    used  for  comparisons  (Doron-Faigenboim  and Pupko
performed  simultaneously  until  the  average  standard    2007). Those sites that are most likely to be in the positive
deviation  of  split  frequencies  between  the two  runs    selection class (x [ 1) are identiﬁed as likely targets of
dropped below 0.01. Analyses were run twice to check    selection.
for consistency of results. We ran two simultaneous runs      Although the Yang models allow for variation in the
for 1.8 9 106  generations and sampled trees every 500   nonsynonymous substitution rate, the synonymous rate is
generations.  Topology  and  branch-length  information   ﬁxed across the sequence. Recently, several methods for
were summarized in 50% majority rule consensus trees;    detecting  positive  selection  that allow  for  variation  in
samples obtained before  stationarity of –ln likelihoods   synonymous rate have been proposed. These methods are
against generations had been reached were discarded as   new implementations of the 3 general classes of previous
burn-in. For TS, the closely related abietadiene synthase    models, counting methods, ﬁxed  effects methods, and
of Abies grandis was used as the reference for the rooted   random effects methods. Counting methods map changes
tree  reconstruction. The ITS sequence  of  Austrotaxus    onto the phylogeny to estimate x on a site-by-site basis.
spicata was used as the reference, as A. spicata is basal   Kosakovsky Pond and Frost (2005a) propose a version
to the genus Taxus and  is a species within the family    called  the  single-likelihood  ancestor  counting (SLAC)
Taxaceae (Cheng et al. 2000).                            method, which calculates the number of nonsynonymous
                                                     and synonymous substitutions that have occurred at each
Detection of positive selection and purifying selection,         site  using ML  reconstructions  of  ancestral  sequences.
data analysis                                         Kosakovsky Pond and Frost additionally introduce a ver-
                                                             sion of a ﬁxed effect approach, which estimates x on a site-
We tested for evidence of positive selection by comparing    by-site basis. Their ﬁxed effect likelihood (FEL) method
the nonsynonymous substitution rate (dN) to the synony-    uses ML estimation and treats shared parameters (branch
mous substitution rate (dS). If a gene is evolving neutrally,    lengths, tree topology, and nucleotide substitution rates) as
x = dN/dS is expected to equal one, whereas x greater    ﬁxed. The random  effects likelihood (REL) method  is
than one is considered strong evidence that a gene expe-    similar to the Yang model M3; however, both nonsyn-
riences positive selection. We used several ML approaches   onymous  and  synonymous   rates  vary   as  gamma
to test for evidence of positive selection on these taxol    distributions with 3 rate classes (Kosakovsky Pond and
biosynthetic enzymes. The ﬁrst approach, developed by    Frost 2005a). The SLAC, REL, and FEL methods were
Yang et al. (hereafter referred to as Yang models), involves    implemented using the web interface DATAMONKEY
comparisons of a neutral codon substitution model with x    (Kosakovsky Pond and Frost 2005b).

                                  123