128                                                                                                    Genetica (2009) 135:123–135


  HYPHY models that allow dN/dS to vary among lin-     tree and found that three North American species form a
eages were used to investigate whether selective pressure    well-supported clade, which was also present in our ITS
on TS and DBAT genes varies among lineages. The genetic     tree (Fig. 2a). However, a few other clades of Li et al.’s
algorithm in HYPHY assigns four classes of dN/dS to lin-   ITS tree were only weakly supported. Among them, the
eages in a search for ‘‘the best model’’ of lineage-speciﬁc    clade consisting of T. cuspidata and two hybrids was also
evolution  (Kosakovsky  Pond  and  Frost  2005c),   i.e.,    recovered in our ITS tree, with high PP support. For the
dN/dS = 10000, 1.681, 0.464, and 0, respectively (Fig. 4).    grouping of T. mairei and T. chinensis, there is no conﬂict
This approach can identify lineages under positive selec-    between Li et al.’s ITS tree and ours. In Li et al.’s Taxus
tion without an a priori hypothesis for lineage-speciﬁc    study, the controversial T. sumatrana, T. wallichiana var.
evolution.                                                yunnanensis and T. wallichiana were not included. Due to
                                                               limited sampling and the MP method used in Li et al.’s
Parallel amino acid substitutions, codon usage bias            study, their results might be less reliable.
                                                               Similar to the ITS phylogeny, the TS and DBAT gene
Parallel and convergent evolution refers to independent     trees generated by different methods did not differ signif-
acquisitions of the same character state on more than one    icantly  in topology  (Fig. 2b,  c). On  the TS  tree,  the
occasion during evolution. The distinction between paral-    outgroup and three Taxus clades formed a polytomy; on the
lelism and convergence is that the former refers to the    unrooted DBAT  tree, the polytomy was also observed.
situation in which the ancestral states were identical among   Gene trees of TS and DBAT were not consistent with each
independent lineages, whereas the latter requires different    other or with the ITS tree. The topology of these gene trees
ancestral states (Zhang 2003). In order to identify parallel   may reﬂect, (1) cases where the same amino acid substi-
amino acid substitutions, ML reconstructions of ancestral    tution occurred independently in more than one lineage, (2)
sequences and individual mutation events were performed    cases of the retention of plesiomorphic characters, and (3)
by PAML4 (baseml and pamp). The marginal reconstruc-    the possibility of incomplete lineage sorting. To minimize
tion approach (Yang et al. 1995) compares the probabilities    the effects of selection, two datasets, one based upon the
of different character assignments to an interior node at a    complete coding sequences and another based upon only
site and  select  the character  that has  the highest PP.     third codon positions, were used to generate phylogenetic
Number  of independent  changes, Grantham’s  distance     trees. The DBAT tree based on the third codon position was
(Grantham 1974) between starting and ending amino acid,    consistent  with  that  based  on  the  complete  coding
and the possible alternative amino acid substitutions were    sequence. In contrast, the TS tree based on the third codon
determined   for  the  identiﬁed   parallel  amino  acid    position was quite different from that based on the com-
substitutions.                                                    plete coding sequence (data not shown), suggesting the
   Variation in the rate of synonymous substitution among    strong effect of selection.
genes may be related to codon use (Sharp 1991). Therefore,     TS  experienced numerous amino  acid  substitutions
several parameters related to codon usage bias for each    during the evolution of the Taxus genus. Sixty-six of 343
gene region, such as the codon bias index (CBI; Morton   amino acid sites (19.2%) in exons 1–4 of TS (Fig. 3a) were
1993), G + C content at second and third positions as well    variable, with six sites, 147, 193, 276, 295, 298, and 332
as overall, and the effective number of codons (ENC;    having three or four substitutions. For comparison, only
Wright 1990) were estimated using DnaSP version 4.10.4   9.8% (43/440) of sites in DBAT were variable and four
(Rozas et al. 2003).                                                    sites, 216, 219, 352, and 422 having three substitutions
                                                                   (Fig. 3b). However, overall estimates of x for TS (0.468)
                                                     and DBAT (0.349) were less than one, indicating that if
Results                                                       these genes experienced positive selection, selection acted
                                                   on a subset of amino acid sites.
Phylogenetic reconstruction
                                              Amino acid sites under selection
Species formed monophyletic  clades on  the ITS  tree,
whose topology (Fig. 2a) is compared to the published ITS    Results from all ﬁve ML approaches for detecting selection
tree based on 10 Taxus species (Li et al. 2001). The new    indicated that a proportion of amino acid sites of TS have
ﬁndings of the present study are: (1) T. contorta was basal    evolved adaptively (Table 2). Model MEC was best-ﬁtting,
to the other species in the genus. (2) T. wallichiana var.    as the log likelihood value was highest (-2247.64). The
yunnanensis and T. wallichiana formed a well-supported   LRTs comparing Yang selection model M8 with neutral
group that was sister to the group formed by T. chinensis,    models (M7 and M8a) were signiﬁcant (Table 3). Com-
T. sumatrana, and T. mairei. Li et al. constructed an MP    pared to M8a, MEC model had much higher log-likelihood

123