Genetica (2009) 135:123–135
DOI 10.1007/s10709-008-9257-7



Molecular evolution of paclitaxel biosynthetic genes TS and DBAT
of Taxus species


Da Cheng Hao  Æ Ling Yang  Æ Beili Huang





Received: 14 October 2007 / Accepted: 27 February 2008 / Published online: 8 March 2008
   Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2008


Abstract  Evolutionary patterns of sequence divergence    algorithm. These ﬁndings demonstrate that the pattern of
were analyzed in genes from the conifer genus Taxus    adaptive paclitaxel biosynthetic enzyme evolution can be
(yew), encoding paclitaxel biosynthetic enzymes taxadiene   documented between closely related Taxus species, where
synthase (TS) and 10-deacetylbaccatin III-10b-O-acetyl-    species-speciﬁc taxane metabolism has evolved recently.
transferase (DBAT). N-terminal fragments of TS,  full-
length DBAT and internal transcribed spacer (ITS) were   Keywords  Adaptive evolution
ampliﬁed from 15  closely  related Taxus  species and    10-Deacetylbaccatin III-10b-O-acetyltransferase
sequenced. Premature stop codons were not found in TS    Paclitaxel  Positive selection  Taxadiene synthase
and DBAT sequences. Codon usage bias was not found,    Taxus
suggesting  that synonymous  mutations  are  selectively
neutral. TS and DBAT gene trees are not consistent with the
ITS tree, where species formed monophyletic clades. In    Introduction
fact, for both genes, alleles were sometimes shared across
species and parallel amino acid substitutions were identi-    Plants synthesize an enormous number of secondary com-
ﬁed. While both TS and DBAT are, overall, under purifying    pounds that provide an increasingly exploited reservoir for
selection, we identiﬁed a number of amino acids of TS    the generation of pharmaceutically active agents (Hartmann
under positive selection based on inference using maxi-     et al. 2005), and many more await discovery. In the conifer
mum likelihood models. Positively selected amino acids in    genus Taxus, paclitaxel (Taxol), a well-known anti-cancer
the N-terminal region of TS suggest that this region might    agent, and related taxane compounds are major components
be more important for enzyme function than previously    in the mixture of secondary metabolites, which play an
thought. Moreover, we identify lineages with signiﬁcantly    important ecological role in plant defense. There is a large
elevated rates of amino acid substitution using a genetic    variation in taxane content among the different species and
                                                                   cultivars (van Rozendaal et al. 2000). Over the past few
                                                                 years, major advances have been made in the identiﬁcation of
D. C. Hao
                                                        genes responsible for paclitaxel biosynthesis, a process
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Resource Discovery, Dalian
Institute of Chemical Physics, Dalian 116023, China                  requiring an estimated dozen enzymatic reactions involving
e-mail: haodc@126.com                                          the construction of the tetracyclic skeleton and the addition
                                                             of the various oxygen and acyl functional groupings. Among
L. Yang (&)
                                                               the intermediate steps, the cyclization of geranylgeranyl
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Resource Discovery, Dalian
Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,         diphosphate to taxadiene is catalyzed by taxadiene synthase
Dalian, China                                               (TS; Koepp et al. 1995), and the acetylation of 10-deacetyl
e-mail: yling@dicp.ac.cn                                        baccatin  III to baccatin  III  is catalyzed by 10-deacetyl
                                                             baccatin III-10-O-acetyltransferase (DBAT).
B. Huang
Lushan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences,             The cDNA sequence of Taxus brevifolia TS speciﬁes an
Jiangxi, China                                          open reading frame of 2586 nucleotides, 13 exons, and the

                                  123