124                                                                                                    Genetica (2009) 135:123–135


deduced full-length preprotein (862 residues, 98.3 kDa)    selection and  parallel  substitution.  Finally, we  identify
includes an N-terminal plastid targeting sequence, a conifer    lineages with signiﬁcantly elevated rates of amino acid
diterpene internal sequence domain (CDIS) encoded by    substitution of TS. Together, these  results suggest  that
exons 2–4, an internal glycosyl hydrolase-like domain, an    positive selection is driving divergence of TS in closely
active site domain encoded by exons 10–13, and the typical    related Taxus species and allow us to nominate candidate
terpene synthase DDXXD  divalent metal  ion-substrate   amino acid sites that may contribute to the differential
complex binding motif (Trapp and Croteau 2001). Deletion    taxane metabolism between sister taxa.
of up to 79 N-terminal residues yielded functional protein;
however, deletion of 93 or more amino acids resulted in
complete elimination of activity, implying a structural or    Materials and methods
catalytic  role  for  the amino terminus (Williams  et al.
2000). Comparison of the translated TS sequence to other    Sampling, ampliﬁcation, and sequencing
terpene synthase sequences shows signiﬁcant homology to
abietadiene synthase (46% identity, 67% similarity) from    Species, geographic origin of the sequenced material, their
grand ﬁr (Wildung and Croteau 1996).                     voucher numbers, and GenBank accession numbers of the
  The full-length cDNA of Taxus cuspidata DBAT has an    sequences generated in this study, as well as those retrieved
open reading frame of 1320 base pairs corresponding to a    from GenBank, are given in Table 1; 12 TS, 14 DBAT, and
deduced protein of 440 residues with a calculated molec-   16 ITS sequences were newly generated for this study.
ular weight of 49,052, consistent with the size of the      Samples of Taxus were identiﬁed by taxonomic char-
operationally soluble, monomeric native acetyltransferase    acters  in Spjut (2007a; http://www.worldbotanical.com/
demonstrated in Taxus cell extracts (Walker and Croteau    Nomenclature.htm#nomenclature); however, most samples
2000). DBATs  contain a highly conserved HXXXDG    of species and varieties are from geographical areas where
sequence motif found in other transacylases. The recom-    there is not likely to be a problem with sympatric taxa as
binant DBAT has a pH optimum at 7.5, Km values of 10    determined from data in Spjut (2007a, b). These include the
and 8 lM for 10-deacetylbaccatin III and acetyl coenzyme    North American T.  brevifolia, T. globosa Schltdl.  var.
A, respectively, and  is seemingly regiospeciﬁc towards    globosa, T. globosa var. ﬂoridana (Nutt. ex Chapm.) Spjut,
the 10b-hydroxyl group of the taxane ring (Walker and    and T. canadensis, the Northwest Himalayan T. contorta
Croteau 2000).                                        from Jilong, Tibet, the East Himalayan T. wallichiana from
   Positive, diversifying selection is an important evolu-   ChaYu, Tibet, and T. chinensis from Hubei. Taxus walli-
tionary   force   that   accelerates  divergence  between    chiana  var.  yunnanensis was  distinguished from  var.
homologous proteins (Swanson et al. 2001). Among the    wallichiana by the relatively thinner leaves with revolute
proteins  identiﬁed  to be  under  positive  selection  are    margins;  its  identiﬁcations were  further conﬁrmed by
immune-response and defense-related genes (Bishop 2005;    anatomical character features in Spjut (2007b). We also
Nielsen et al. 2005), and toxin protein genes (Liu et al.    included cultivars T. 9 hunnewelliana Rehder, T. 9 media
2005). Since paclitaxel biosynthetic enzymes catalyze the    Rehder and  species from  Eurasia  that  are  cultivated,
formation of an important defense molecule paclitaxel and    T. baccata, T. recurvata, and T. cuspidata Siebold & Zucc.,
other related taxanes, it is reasonable to expect that most    the identiﬁcations of which are all based on the name at the
amino acid residues are highly conserved. However, whe-    source where the plant is grown. The origin for the sample
ther adaptive evolution affects a few sites of some enzymes    of T. sumatrana (Miq.) de Laub. is unknown.
is unknown. As  far  as we know,  there  is no  study     Genomic DNA was  extracted  by  using  Universal
addressing patterns of evolution of the paclitaxel biosyn-   Genomic DNA Extraction  kit (Takara, Dalian, China),
thetic  enzymes  within  the  genus  Taxus,  although    following the manufacturer’s protocol. A 0.9% agarose gel
knowledge about codons that are under positive selection   was run to assess the presence and integrity of the DNA.
and purifying selection is important for studies of plant    Quantiﬁcation was done spectrophotometrically and the
secondary metabolism and phylogenetics and could facili-    concentration of DNA ranged from 50–77 ng per ll.
tate the development of more broadly applicable enzymes    A  50 ll PCR  reaction mix  consisted  of  5 ll  of
for biotransformation of taxanes. The goal of this study was   10 9 reaction buffer, 4 ll each of 2.5 mM dNTPs stock,
to determine patterns of evolution of TS and DBAT in    2.5 ll of 10 lM forward and reverse primers (synthesized
Taxus. We identify differences in tree topologies between   by Takara, Dalian, China), 0.5 ll bovine serum albumin
these biosynthetic enzymes and a commonly used phylo-    (10 mg/ml), and 1.5 units of Ex Taq polymerase (Takara,
genetic marker, nuclear internal transcribed spacer (ITS).    Dalian, China). The exons 1–4 of TS gene (Fig. 1) were
We document positive selection acting on TS but not on    ampliﬁed using  50-atggctcagctctcatttaatgc (forward) and
DBAT and determine the identity of amino acid sites under    50-cgcagccgccgaatttgtcca (reverse). The exons 5–9 of TS

123