132                                                                                                    Genetica (2009) 135:123–135


                                                         charge or by Grantham’s distance. Such nonconservative
                                                       changes have been found to occur much less frequently
                                                           than expected under neutrality (Li et al. 1984). Thus, the
                                                          nonconservative changes we observed seem more likely to
                                                      have consequences for enzyme structure and/or function.
                                                                   Parallel evolution at the amino acid sequence level can be
                                                                 interpreted  as  evidence  of  adaptive  evolution (Zhang
                                                           2003); consequently, sites that have changed in parallel are
                                                                   likely targets of selection in addition to those identiﬁed
                                                          with the ML approach. These results also suggest that the
                                                  number of available pathways of adaptive evolution may
                                                      be constrained.
                                                              Several parameters related to codon usage bias were
                                                            estimated to check whether synonymous mutations are
                                                                 selectively neutral. CBI is a measure for the deviation from
                                                               the equal use of synonymous codons. CBI values range
                                                     from 0 (uniform use of synonymous codons) to 1 (maxi-
                                     mum codon bias). CBI values (TS 0.215–0.285, DBAT
                                                          0.236–0.258) were intermediate between uniform use of
                                                   synonymous codons and maximum codon bias for both
                                                      gene regions. Additionally, the ENCs were  calculated,
                                                    which may range from 20 (only one codon is used for each
Fig. 4 Results from the genetic algorithm approach to detecting   amino acid;  i.e., the codon bias is maximum) to 61 (all
lineage-speciﬁc  variation  of TS  in  selection. The implemented
                                                   synonymous codons for each amino acid are equally used;HKY85 model was selected by HYPHY. Four unrestricted classes
of dN/dS are assigned to branches (dN/dS values shown at the top      i.e., no codon bias). ENC values (TS 55.527–60.642, DBAT
left corner). Branch labels represent model averaged probabilities of    55.146–56.68) were intermediate. C + G content at the
dN/dS [ 1 for the branch. Percentages for branch classes in the legend                                                       second and third codon position was comparable to the
reﬂect the proportion of  total tree length (measured in expected
                                                                overall C + G content of the total gene region (TS 0.47–substitutions per site per unit time) evolving under the corresponding
value of dN/dS. Branches in this tree are unscaled                    0.479, DBAT 0.43–0.436), and ranged between 37.4 and
                                                      47.4%.

shown),  they  failed  to  receive  high  model-averaged
support for dN[ dS.                                      Discussion and conclusion

Parallel amino acid substitutions, codon usage bias           Species  level polytomies may confound  inferences  of
                                                                positive selection, due to the presence of recombination
The pattern of amino acid change based on ML ancestral    within loci (or between loci for concatenated datasets).
sequence reconstruction provides further evidence that TS   Maximum likelihood methods implemented in PAML are
(and possibly DBAT) evolved under positive selection.    often used to detect the action of positive selection on
Seven amino acid sites in TS and nine sites in DBAT    coding sequences. These methods are known to be sensi-
changed independently to the same amino acid in 2 or more     tive  to  recombination;  moderate  to  high  levels  of
Taxus species (Table 4). For example,  site 193  in TS    recombination can lead  to an unacceptably high  false
changed from neutral and small residue threonine (T) to    positive rate (Anisimova et al. 2003). The increased false
nonpolar isoleucine (I) in four different species. In DBAT,    positive  rate associated with recombination may  result
site 228 changed from neutral and small serine (S) to    from the assumption that the rate of synonymous substi-
nonpolar and large phenylalanine (F) in two species. This    tution is homogeneous across all sites (non-synonymous
change was classiﬁed as  radical based on Grantham’s    substitution rates are allowed to vary between codons), or
distance, which  takes  into  account amino  acid  size,    from the use of an incorrect tree for some sites (Anisimova
hydrophobicity,  charge, and  polarity. Changes from a     et al. 2003). Although lineage sorting in a deep ancestor
noncharged to a charged residue were also found in both    has not been explicitly investigated as a source of error in
enzymes. Changes of G55R and Y261S of TS, and G225V,  PAML and related analyses,  it may have confounding
S228F, A245E, and S294L of DBAT were not conservative     effects. We therefore combined several approaches, PAML
or moderately  conservative,  as deﬁned by changes  in    models, MEC  model,  and  codon-based  maximum

123