
[PDF physical page 1]
Review
Sophisticated natural products as antibiotics


https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07530-w  Kim Lewis1 ✉, Richard E. Lee2 ✉, Heike Brötz-Oesterhelt3,4, Sebastian Hiller5,
                                         Marina V. Rodnina6, Tanja Schneider7,8, Markus Weingarth9 & Ingo Wohlgemuth6Received: 28 December 2022
Accepted: 7 May 2024
                                            In this Review, we explore natural product antibiotics that do more than simplyPublished online: 31 July 2024
                                              inhibit an active site of an essential enzyme. We review these compounds to provide
   Check for updates                                            inspiration for the design of much-needed new antibacterial agents, and examine
                                        the complex mechanisms that have evolved to effectively target bacteria, including
                                         covalent binders, inhibitors of resistance, compounds that utilize self-promoted entry,
                                       those that evade resistance, prodrugs, target corrupters, inhibitors of ‘undruggable’
                                              targets, compounds that form supramolecular complexes, and selective membrane-
                                         acting agents. These are exemplified by β-lactams that bind covalently to inhibit
                                        transpeptidases and β-lactamases, siderophore chimeras that hijack import
                                  mechanisms to smuggle antibiotics into the cell, compounds that are activated
                                   by bacterial enzymes to produce reactive molecules, and antibiotics such as
                                      aminoglycosides that corrupt, rather than merely inhibit, their targets. Some of
                                       these mechanisms are highly sophisticated, such as the preformed β-strands of
                                       darobactins that target the undruggable β-barrel chaperone BamA, or teixobactin,
                                    which binds to a precursor of peptidoglycan and then forms a supramolecular
                                         structure that damages the membrane, impeding the emergence of resistance.
                               Many of the compounds exhibit more than one notable feature, such as resistance
                                       evasion and target corruption. Understanding the surprising complexity of the
                                        best antimicrobial compounds provides a roadmap for developing novel compounds
                                         to address the antimicrobial resistance crisis by mining for new natural products and
                                            inspiring us to design similarly sophisticated antibiotics.



Antibiotics are nature’s oldest toxins. These small molecules, which     Currently, there is a pressing need for novel compounds that act
have evolved as weapons of bacterial warfare, perform multiple, often   against multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria such as K. pneu-
opposing tasks. They need to hit homologous targets of different micro-   moniae, Escherichia coli, Acinetobacter baumannii and Pseudomonas
organisms, be hydrophilic to reach neighbouring cells and penetrate   aeruginosa3. The last class of synthetic antibiotics against Gram-
the outer membrane of Gram-negative species, be hydrophobic to cross   negative bacteria to make it to the clinic, the fluoroquinolones, was
the cytoplasmic membrane, evade resistance mechanisms and survive   discovered in the 1960s, and tetracyclines, the last class of natural prod-
a harsh external environment. Compounds that become drugs must   uct antibiotics against this group of bacteria, were discovered in 1949
possess two additional properties: good pharmacokinetics (an ability    (ref. 1). Gram-negative bacteria have an additional outer membrane
to move through tissues without being rapidly destroyed or seques-   that restricts penetration of large and hydrophobic compounds, and
tered), and a lack of toxicity to the host. Natural products satisfying all  compounds that do enter these bacteria are extruded by multidrug
of these criteria are rare, and making synthetic antibiotics is arguably   efflux pumps6. It is relatively easier to find compounds that act against
the most challenging task of medicinal chemistry.                    Gram-positive species, but nevertheless, no such compound has been
  Antibiotics commonly present in Actinomycetes, prolific produc-   developed into a drug for more than 40 years—the last, daptomycin, was
ers of secondary metabolites, had been mostly discovered by the   discovered in 1978. There is also a need for novel compounds against
1960s1. Since then, the introduction of novel compounds has been   Gram-positive species such as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
infrequent, resulting in the current antimicrobial resistance crisis.   aureus (MRSA)—a major cause of death in the hospital setting. A lack
This is a slow-moving global pandemic2, and bacterial antimicrobial   of economic incentives has led to the exodus of pharmaceutical com-
resistance is associated with an annual burden of five million deaths   panies from the field, and very few companies maintain programmes
world-wide3. The death rate from multidrug-resistant Klebsiella pneu-   devoted to antibiotic discovery, contributing to the paucity of novel
moniae, for example, is 40%, similar to the death rates of pathogens of  compounds. However, it is clear from the above analysis that the main
the pre-industrial era4,5. Antibiotics are also an essential prophylactic   bottleneck for bringing new drugs into clinical use is in discovery, not
in many medical procedures, including surgery and chemotherapy.     in development7. Indeed, once a good lead compound is discovered

1Antimicrobial Discovery Center, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. 2Department of Chemical Biology and Therapeutics, St Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.
3Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine, Tubingen, Germany. 4Controlling Microbes to Fight Infection—Cluster of Excellence, Tubingen, Germany. 5Biozentrum, University
of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. 6Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Goettingen, Germany. 7Institute for Pharmaceutical Microbiology, University of Bonn, University Hospital
Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 8German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Cologne–Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 9Chemistry Department, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
✉e-mail: k.lewis@northeastern.edu; richard.lee@stjude.org

                                                                                                   Nature  |  Vol 632  |  1 August 2024  |  39


[PDF physical page 2]
Review

and preclinical evaluation is completed, development through clinical   a         D-Ala  O
trials takes about five years.
                                                                                 OH
  In the realm of natural products, progress is being made by search-
                                                                              NH                                                                                                                               D-Ala                  O-PBP
ing for novel compounds outside of actinomycetes. About 99% of the     Lys                                      Lys                           Peptidoglycan
total diversity of bacteria are ‘uncultured’7. Some of these bacteria         NH   O                       NH   O               strandcross-linking
depend on growth factors such as siderophores or quinones produced     O                           O
                                                                          HO
by neighbouring species8–10. Cultivation in their natural environment                    PBP             Acyl-enzyme intermediate
has led to the discovery of teixobactin11 and clovibactin12 from Eleftheria,
a type of β-proteobacteria, which we discuss in this Review. Interest-                                                                        D-Ala mimicry
ing cultivable species, such as the γ-proteobacteria Xenorhabdus and   b
Photorhabdus, symbionts of Steinernema and Heterorhabditis nema-                      O                               O
todes, respectively, make several target-specific compounds13–17, which                S        OH                       S        OH
we also discuss here. Another vast untapped source of novel antibiotics             H    N                         H    NH O
is  concealed             in ‘silent’                    biosynthetic                            gene clusters18                                             (BGCs).                                            Metagenom-                                                                                 O                                                                         N                                                                                                       N                                                                                                                                         O-PBP                                                                         H                                                                                                       Hics,   and the direct                 cloning                         of environmental                             DNA                                                into heterologous                                                                        O                                                                                                        O
hosts, holds the promise of providing access to this hidden chemical                 HO    PBP                   Ternary acyl-inhibitor complex
diversity18. There are estimated to be around one million BGCs in the
genomes sequenced so far19.                                                 Fig. 1 | β-Lactams are molecular mimics of the d-Ala–d-Ala terminal
  Meanwhile, there has also been encouraging progress in the dis-   peptidoglycan motif. a, Penicillin-binding proteins normally recognize the
                                                                            terminal d-Ala–d-Ala motif and form an acyl-enzyme intermediate by insertioncovery of synthetic antibiotics. Analysis of penetration of chemically
                                                                              of a bond into d-Ala–d-Ala that eliminates the terminal d-Ala. The acyl-enzyme
unrelated compounds into E. coli produced the first ‘rules of permea-
                                                                          intermediate subsequently reacts with a second strand of peptidoglycan to
tion’20–25, which have recently been extended to P. aeruginosa25. One                                                                  form a cross-link, completing the catalytic cycle. b, Penicillin-binding proteins
simple rule is that charged amino groups favour diffusion through   mistake penicillin for their natural substrate d-Ala–d-Ala, owing to molecular
porins. This rule was applied to synthesize fabimycin—an aminated   mimicry reacting with the lactam ring, and are thus unable to eliminate the
version of a Gram-positive synthetic inhibitor of FabI, a key enzyme   terminal d-Ala (thiazole) motif, irreversibly blocking subsequent deacylation
in the synthesis of fatty acids—which is now in development for use   and catalytic turnover.
against Gram-negative bacteria26. A simultaneous optimization of
binding to targets and penetration through porins led to the rational
design of ETX0462 (ref. 27), a novel broad-spectrum inhibitor of  compound to act despite differences among the catalytic centres of
penicillin-binding proteins. It shares a reactive carbonyl with penicil-   transpeptidases33. Multitargeting of transpeptidases, covalent inhibi-
lin, which enables covalent binding to the target. Two compounds   tion and substrate mimicry are the keys to the success of the β-lactam
based on a synthetic analogue of a cyclic antimicrobial peptide inhibit   class, which substantially limits the rise of resistance by target muta-
essential targets in the outer membrane. Murepavadin28 inhibits   tion, and enables selective killing of the target pathogen. Acting at
LptD, a translocase of lipopolysaccharide, and POL7306 (ref. 29) is   the surface of Gram-positive bacteria, penicillin also avoids the other
a peptide-polymyxin chimera that acts against BamA, the insertase  most common mechanism of resistance—efflux by multidrug resist-
of outer membrane proteins. Both compounds are active against   ance (MDR) pumps. Target organisms have to resort to committing
Gram-negative bacteria, but share nephrotoxicity, a common liabil-   resources to producing β-lactamases that destroy β-lactams. There are
ity of polycations. Screening of a library of synthetic cyclic peptides   few targets in bacteria that are both essential and highly homologous.
that emulate natural products led to the development of zosurabalpin,   Penicillin is the first example of this multitargeting paradigm34, which
which targets the transporter of lipopolysaccharide30,31.              occurs in other classes of successful antibiotics, as described below.
  Thus, of the five recently discovered novel synthetic compounds
with activity against Gram-negative bacteria that were successful in
animal studies, four are loosely based on natural products. This trend is  Anti-resistance and selective compounds
likely to continue. In choosing compounds to review here, we focus on   Anti-resistance compounds that inhibit β-lactamases have been closely
natural products that are already in the clinic or have shown systemic   linked to β-lactams in both nature and in clinical practice. For instance,
efficacy in animal models. Our emphasis is on more recently discov-   Streptomyces clavurigerus produces the β-lactamase inhibitor cla-
ered compounds, or on recent findings that illuminate the fascinat-   vulanic acid and the β-lactam antibiotic cephamycin C35. Similarly,
ing properties of antibiotics that were discovered a long time ago. By   augmentin, the first combination antibiotic, combines the β-lactam
exploring natural compounds, we are essentially reading a recipe on   amoxicillin with the β-lactamase inhibitor clavulanic acid. The spread
how to make antibiotics. Although this recipe is not easy to follow, it   of additional classes of β-lactamases in pathogens stimulated the devel-
points us in the right direction.                             opment of more effective inhibitors covering many types of these
                                                            enzymes, including diazabicyclooctane inhibitors such as avibactam
                                                                    that share a reactive carbonyl containing ring with penicillin and are
Covalent inhibitors                                               also structural mimics of β-lactams36. The boron-containing vaborbac-
Penicillin was the first successful antibiotic to be developed for medi-  tam is a novel synthetic β-lactamase inhibitor that does not mimic a
cal use. It was discovered by Alexander Fleming in 1928 (ref. 32), is still   β-lactam ring37, but it is otherwise remarkably similar in structure to
in use in clinical practice, and has served as the basis for the develop-   penicillin.
ment of several generations of analogues that expand its spectrum     β-lactamase inhibitors remain the only example of specialized
to cover Gram-negative bacteria, such as ampicillin, amoxicillin and   anti-resistance compounds used in the clinic. Several natural inhibi-
carbenicillin (see Supplementary Table 1 for structures). The targets   tors of MDR pumps have been described38,39, but it remains unknown
of β-lactams are the essential penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs)—the  whether this is their natural function. So far, no compound in this
transpeptidases that link lipid II pentapeptides into a growing pepti-   class has emerged as a clinical candidate with a good safety profile.
doglycan polymer (Fig. 1).                          MDR pump inhibitors are likely to be the next important class of
  The promiscuity of penicillin derives not only from the homology of   anti-resistance compounds, since they would increase the potency
its targets, but also from its reactive β-lactam ring, which enables the  and spectrum of many antibiotics40.

40  |  Nature  |  Vol 632  |  1 August 2024


[PDF physical page 3]
                                                                 that was discovered in 1953. Hygromycin A was never developed
Selective compounds                                         because of its poor activity against conventional pathogens, but was
Historically, the quest for new antibiotics has been synonymous with   recently rediscovered in a selective screen of soil bacteria against
the discovery of broad-spectrum compounds. β-lactams, fluoroqui-   Borreliella burgdorferi, the causal agent of Lyme disease52. Hygromy­
nolones and aminoglycosides have enabled physicians to treat infec-   cin A is highly potent against B. burgdorferi and other spirochetes. It
tious diseases without necessarily identifying the causative agents.   binds to the conserved site of the 23S ribosomal RNA53. This suggests
This has led to overuse, including the prescription of antibiotics for   that its selectivity must lie elsewhere, and further analysis has indicated
viral infections, and has contributed to the spread of resistance. There   that the compound is taken up by an essential spirochetal transporter
is an increased appreciation for the role of the microbiome in human   of nucleotides to which it bears some resemblance52.
health, particularly early in life, when it helps to develop the immune    These cases suggest that compound selectivity may be imparted in a
system, and harm from broad-spectrum antibiotics can be consider-   variety of ways: acting against a unique target; acting against a unique
able41. Such harm can lead to life-threatening Clostridioides difficile   site of a conserved target; or taking a selective route into the cell.
infection. C. difficile is a minor constituent of the human microbiome
that is kept in check by the commensal bacteria in the gut42, but it can
form spores that survive environmental threats. Systemic adminis-  Resistance-evasive compounds
tration of broad-spectrum antibiotics has been shown to disrupt the  Some antibiotics have a low propensity to select for resistance develop-
microbiota42,43, which in turn enables germinating spores of C. difficile to  ment in the bacteria that they target. The evasion of resistance takes
propagate and produce toxins, leading to enterocolitis. This is treated  many forms, providing useful examples that can be emulated when
with oral vancomycin or fidaxomicin, narrow-spectrum compounds   designing synthetic compounds. Resistance to β-lactams was spread-
that kill C. difficile. However, vancomycin and fidaxomicin also kill   ing in the 1950s. The novel antibiotic vancomycin was discovered in
Gram-positive symbiotic commensals, which leads to relapse, and   1958 and was fast-tracked to treat penicillin-resistant staphylococci.
often incurable infection. The current effective therapy for untreat-  Vancomycin targets lipid II54, the central precursor of peptidogly­
able enterocolitis is faecal matter transplantation—oral administration  can biosynthesis, which is localized in the cytoplasmic membrane. It
of VOWST, a product containing spores of symbiotic Clostridia44 has   ferries the N-acetylglucosamine–N-acetylmuramic (MurNAc) acid–
recently been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration. A   pentapeptide building block, attached to a pyrophosphate and a bac-
compound that is selective against C. difficile would be highly desirable,   toprenol lipid tail, across the membrane for incorporation into the
but it is unclear how it could be used without harming other Clostridia,   growing peptidoglycan network55. Vancomycin binds the acyl-d-Ala–
which constitute a major group of gut symbionts45.                    d-Ala pentapeptide terminus of lipid II (Fig. 2a,b).
  The only selective antibiotics currently in use in the clinic are com-     This finding explained the surprising ability of vancomycin to with-
pounds that act against Mycobacterium tuberculosis. These are syn-   stand resistance development. Unlike protein targets, lipid II is not
thetic compounds that have been identified by screening against this   directly encoded by genes, and mutations do not lead to changes in
pathogen; selectivity was not sought as a feature at the time, but was   the pentapeptide. Thirty years after the introduction of vancomycin
an accident of discovery and the consequence of the unique myco-   into the clinic, high-level resistance emerged in enterococci, traveling
bacterial physiology. For example, ethambutol inhibits mycobacterial  on a plasmid. The plasmid carries a van locus encoding a synthetic
arabinogalactan synthesis46, isoniazid is a prodrug that is activated by   bypass that replaces the d-alanine residue of the pentapeptide with
the tuberculosis catalase–peroxidase KatG, and bedaquiline binds   d-lactate or d-serine56. The van locus probably originated from Amy-
to the C-subunit of the H+-ATPsynthase, which is sufficiently differ-   colatopsis orientalis, in which it serves to protect the producer from
ent from its non-mycobacterial homologues for the compound to   vancomycin57.
be selective47. Current treatment regimens for tuberculosis include    A screen of uncultured bacteria grown in situ led to the discovery of
broader-spectrum antibiotics such as rifampicin, moxifloxacin and lin-   teixobactin, which is produced by a β-proteobacterium Eleftheria terrae11.
ezolid, and the potential benefit of a completely tuberculosis-selective   Teixobactin is an undecapeptide with a linear N-terminal seven-residue
regimen remains unrealized. Given the long duration of tuberculosis  segment and a C-terminal four-residue depsi-cycle, and represents a
treatment, damage to the microbiome is especially pronounced48.     novel class of antibiotics. Teixobactin contains several non-canonical
  Are species- or group-selective compounds present in nature? An   residues, including d-amino acids and the rare cationic residue endura-
answer to this question was provided by a screen against M. tuberculosis   cididine. Teixobactin is highly potent against Gram-positive pathogens,
with a counterscreen against the unrelated S. aureus. This differential   including S. aureus, S. pneumoniae, Enterococcus faecalis, C. difficile,
screen of a small collection of actinomycetes identified several novel   Bacillus anthracis and M. tuberculosis. Teixobactin shows favour-
compounds, including the lassopeptides lassomycin and kitamyco-   able pharmacokinetics, good safety and promising efficacy in mouse
bactin, which target the ClpC1 chaperone of the unique mycobacte-   infection models, and is currently in preclinical development.
rial ClpP1P2C1 protease; and amicobactin, an unusual macrocyclic     Attempts to obtain mutants that are resistant to teixobactin have not
polyketide lactone that inhibits SecY in the protein export machinery49.   suceeded. In an evolutionary experiment to maximize the chances of
Several conventional screens against M. tuberculosis have uncovered   developing resistance, teixobactin was first added at a sub-inhibitory
additional inhibitors of ClpP1P2C1 (ref. 50), suggesting that natural   level, and its concentration was increased daily in small steps for 25
compounds that act selectively against mycobacteria are fairly com-   days. No resistance emerged, suggesting that teixobactin may bind
mon. A differential screen of Photorhabdus noenieputensis against   to lipid II, which was confirmed to be the case11,58. Teixobactin uses
M. tuberculosis led to the identification of evybactin15. Evybactin has  backbone amino protons of the depsi-cycle to tightly coordinate the
an unusual mechanism of selectivity—it targets the well-conserved  pyrophosphate moiety of lipid II, whereas the enduracididine spe-
DNA gyrase. Analysis of resistance mutants showed that evybactin is   cifically interacts with the conserved MurNAc sugar58 (Fig. 2c). The
transported into M. tuberculosis by BacA51, an unusual transporter of   pyrophosphate-sugar-binding motif is also present in lipid IIIWTA (wall
hydrophilic compounds with broad specificity. In this way, BacA resem-   teichoic acid), the precursor of wall teichoic acid biosynthesis, which
bles an inverted MDR pump for polar compounds. BacA apparently    is also targeted by teixobactin.
functions as a transporter of vitamin B12, and the similarly hydrophilic     Teixobactin binding to lipid II results in the formation of a large
evybactin takes advantage of this entry point.                      supramolecular structure (Fig. 2e). Teixobactin is anchored to the
  A somewhat similar mechanism of selectivity has been described for  membrane by hydrophobic isoleucine and d-allo-isoleucine residues,
hygromycin A, an antibiotic produced by Streptomyces hygroscopicus   which help the compound establish contact with its target. Intermittent

                                                                                                    Nature  |  Vol 632  |  1 August 2024  |  41


[PDF physical page 4]
Review

  a  Vancomycin     Teixobactin      Clovibactin      b                     c                      d   Leu8
               E K A A          E K A A           E K A A                                                                                    Leu7
              A               A                A                                                8                                                                                  1111    G  M      G  M      G  M                                                                                   9
                                                                                1010            1
        P           P           P
                                                                                                N-Me–D-Phe1               PPi        P           P           P                                                      PPi
                                                                           D-Ala–D-Ala                                    MurNAc
        C55         C55          C55
                                                                           End10

                                                                          MurNAc

  e          Teixobactin

                                                                                                                                    Peptidoglycan
                                                                                                                                            synthesis





               LipidLipid IIII

                   Plasma membrane                                                                                                            Lipid II cycle




   f                 Clovibactin
                                                                                                                      Peptidoglycan
                                                                                                                             synthesis




                                                                Small oligomers



                                                                                                                                     Fibrils



                    LipidLipid IIII


                                                                                                                                                     LipidLipid IIII cyclecycle

Fig. 2 | Resistance-evasive compounds. a, Antibiotic interaction sites (pink)     pyrophosphate group, and hydrophobic sidechains (Ala6, Leu7 and Leu8)
in lipid II. Vancomycin interacts with the C terminus of the pentapeptide,         seamlessly wrap around pyrophosphate, but do not specifically interact with
teixobactin interacts with the pyrophosphate group and the MurNAc sugar       the sugars. e, Model of the mode of action of teixobactin. Teixobactin first
(M), and clovibactin interacts with the pyrophosphate group. b, Vancomycin     forms small β-sheets after binding to lipid II, then elongates into fibrils that
binds the C-terminal d-Ala–d-Ala of the lipid II pentapeptide with five hydrogen    eventually associate into lateral fibrillar sheets, obstructing biosynthesis of
bonds. c, The teixobactin–lipid II complex interface. The backbone amino        peptidoglycan and causing membrane defects. f, Model of the mode of action
protons of the depsi-cycle of teixobactin, the l-allo-enduracididine (End10)       of clovibactin. At the membrane surface, clovibactin binds lipid II and forms
side chain and the N terminus of an adjacent teixobactin coordinate the lipid II     small oligomers that serve as nuclei for the formation of fibrils. Fibril formation
pyrophosphate (PPi) group. In addition, End10 interacts with the MurNAc sugar   enables stable binding of lipid II and other cell wall precursors, blocking cell
via hydrogen bonds. Blue spheres represent backbone nitrogen atoms; numbers   wall biosynthesis. Panels c,e are reproduced from ref. 58, CC BY 4.0 (https://
indicate residue numbers. d, Clovibactin–lipid II complex interface. The        creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
backbone amino protons of the depsi-cycle of clovibactin tightly bind the



localization of l- and d-amino acids favours the formation of a β-sheet     Considerable effort has been expended over several decades to
between adjacent teixobactin molecules. The amino end of teixobactin   develop useful membrane-targeting antibiotics, but so far these have
coordinates the pyrophosphate of lipid II, contributing to target cap-   not led to lead compounds with an acceptable therapeutic window1.
ture. The β-sheet of teixobactins bound to lipid II grows into a supra-  On the basis of the example of teixobactin, one possible solution to this
molecular fibrillar structure. Formation of this structure is likely to be  problem is to start with a compound that is not membrane-targeting.
irreversible, acting as a sink that further concentrates teixobactin at   Teixobactin only damages membranes that contain an accessible
its site of action. As well as efficiently and potently sequestering lipid   lipid-pyrophosphate sugar (which are absent in eukaryotes) once it
II, the supramolecular structure displaces phospholipids, thinning  forms a supramolecular structure, elegantly resolving the toxicity
the membrane and compromising its integrity, leading to a decrease   problem. Teixobactin binds to a single moiety—pyrophosphate sugar,
in proton motive force and leakage.                               but in doing so, it attacks multiple targets and has at least four modes

42  |  Nature  |  Vol 632  |  1 August 2024


[PDF physical page 5]
of action. These are inhibition of peptidoglycan synthesis, inhibition   bacteria to acquire resistance. By contrast, vancomycin is produced
of wall teichoic acid synthesis, release of autolysins and lysis, and cyto-  by a Gram-positive bacterium and as we mentioned above, protects
plasmic membrane disruption. This multi-pronged attack on the entire    itself by substituting d-Ala residue of the pentapeptide with d-Lac or
cell envelope contributes to the effective killing by teixobactin and to   d-Ser56. The pathway coding for this modification can then be adopted
its reduced propensity to select for resistance.                    by other pathogens.
  Another isolate of Eleftheria produces clovibactin59, which bears     Antibiotics can be chemically modified or degraded, which is a
some resemblance to teixobactin, but is considerably smaller: 903 Da,  major drawback for common compounds such as β-lactams, which
compared with 1,400 Da for teixobactin. The BGCs of the two com-   are hydrolysed by β-lactamases. This however does not occur with
pounds are related, suggesting a common ancestry. Clovibactin has  vancomycin—no deactivating enzyme has emerged in more than 60
potent antibacterial activity against Gram-positive pathogens, and is   years since its introduction into the clinic. Teixobactin and clovibactin
efficacious in animal models of infection. It has a C-terminal depsi-cycle   are even rarer than vancomycin. With lipid II binders, nature provides
warhead that binds directly to lipid II, along with a linear N-terminal   us with a recipe for making antibiotics that evade resistance. These
segment. Besides the unusual residue d-3-hydroxyasparagine that   considerations do not mean that resistance to such compounds will not
connects the N-terminal and C-terminal segments, the depsi-cycle   arise; rather, the probability is lower than for antibiotics with targets
of clovibactin contains only hydrophobic residues, and lacks the  encoded by a single gene.
enduracididine that teixobactin deploys to bind to MurNAc of lipid II.
Clovibactin binds to the pyrophosphate moiety of multiple essential
cell wall precursors, such as undecaprenyl-pyrophosphate (C55PP),  Target corruption
lipid II and lipid IIIWTA, which are synthesized via different cell wall bio-  Some of the best antibiotics corrupt their targets, transforming a useful
synthetic pathways. Backbone amino protons in the depsi-cycle of   molecular machine into a killing device. Effective killing is especially
clovibactin directly coordinate the pyrophosphate, and the hydro-   useful for treating chronic infections.
phobic depsi-cycle sidechains (Ala6, Leu7 and Leu8) surround the     Aminoglycoside antibiotics (AGAs) are produced by actinomycetes
pyrophosphate group like an adjustable glove, an unusual interac-  and were discovered by Selman Waksman and colleagues in 1944
tion that is presumably entropically favourable by replacing bound-    (ref. 61), but only recently have we gained a proper understanding of
ary water (Fig. 2e). Attacking a highly polar target (pyrophosphate)   their complex mechanism of killing. AGAs are positively charged oligo-
with a hydrophobic warhead is indeed a striking, counter-intuitive   saccharides that target bacterial ribosomes by binding to the ribosomal
mode of action. Pyrophosphate, however, seems to be an unsuitable  RNA close to the decoding centre on the small ribosomal subunit. They
target for an antibiotic, as it is released from dead cells together with   induce the misreading of mRNA, resulting in the incorporation of incor-
pyrophosphate-containing nucleoside phosphates, and is commonly   rect amino acids into the growing peptide. In contrast to other groups
present in the environment. Adding to this puzzle is the lack of detect-   of antibiotics that target the ribosome, such as tetracyclines, lincosa-
able binding of clovibactin to pyrophosphate in solution. Solid-state  mides and most macrolides, which usually stop translation and are
NMR and atomic force microscopy experiments show that potent and   bacteriostatic62, AGAs only slow down translation, but are bactericidal63.
selective binding is apparently achieved not through the initial interac-   However, error-prone ribosomal mutations also cause mistranslation64,
tion with pyrophosphate, but by subsequent formation of an irrevers-   but are not lethal. This conundrum was recently resolved—a mass spec-
ible supramolecular structure. This fibrillar assembly is enabled by a   trometry study revealed that AGAs induce strings of consecutive errors,
β-sheet arrangement of clovibactin molecules, in which the short N   with up to four incorrect amino acids incorporated along a stretch of
terminus acts as an oligomerization domain (Fig. 2f).                seven amino acids in a protein65. At low intracellular concentrations,
  The fibrils of clovibactin do not damage the membrane, and seem  AGAs target only a limited number of ribosomes, leading to few errors.
to float just above it. A surprising feature of clovibactin is its superior   However, once AGA is bound, it tends to stay attached through sev-
ability to induce cell lysis. The lytic potency of cell wall-acting inhibitors   eral translation cycles, inducing consecutive misreading events that
ranks in the order: clovibactin>teixobactin>β-lactams>vancomycin. An   result in the accumulation of errors in the synthesized protein. The
intriguing possibility is that clovibactin fibrils have an additional func-   likelihood of these later errors is independent of the AGA concentra-
tion of displacing autolysins from wall teichoic acids, resulting in lysis.   tion in the cell and is much higher (up to 10,000 times) than the likeli-
  The three antibiotics that attack lipid II-type precursors present  hood of the first error. Proteins with clusters of translation errors are
fascinating examples of compounds that seem to circumvent the typi-   enriched in aggregates65, indicating increased protein misfolding.
cal mechanisms of resistance selection. Vancomycin binds to a target  Although the quality control machinery that refolds defective pro-
that is not directly mutable, but the pentapeptide moiety of lipid II is   teins can buffer misfolding caused by single amino acid substitutions,
modifiable. Teixobactin binds to a simpler pyrophosphate-sugar moi-   the accumulation of errors may reduce protein stability beyond the
ety that is shared with lipid IIIWTA, adding a target that induces lysis60.    level66 that can be corrected by the quality control machinery, leading to
The formation of a supramolecular structure by teixobactin–lipid II   cell death.
damages the membrane, adding yet another target that is not directly     Synthetic fluoroquinolones, which were introduced for clinical
mutable. Although the MurNAc sugar of lipid II is conserved, it is con-   use in the 1960s, comprise another successful class of corrupting
ceivably modifiable. Clovibactin appears to be the end of the road for   broad-spectrum antibiotics. Fluoroquinolones inhibit double-stranded
the evolution of resistance evasion: pyrophosphate is present in all lipid   breaks in DNA and cell death. A different antibiotic that causes
II-type compounds, and is a completely immutable target.             double-stranded breaks, evybactin, described in ‘Selective compounds’
  As well as attacking immutable targets, teixobactin and clovibactin   above, is produced by Photorhabdus and acts selectively against gyrase
have additional features that limit resistance development. Target   in M. tuberculosis15. It is possible that a natural counterpart to fluo-
overproduction is a simple mode of resistance, but formation of a   roquinolones that is broad-spectrum or acts against Gram-negative
supramolecular structure by teixobactin damages the membrane.   bacteria will be discovered.
This means that overproduction of lipid II would only facilitate this     Double-strand breaks in DNA can be achieved by an entirely differ-
damage. Eleftheria are Gram-negative bacteria that protect themselves   ent mechanism, according to a recent publication on griselimycin, an
from these compounds by exporting them across the outer membrane.   antibiotic produced by streptomycetes67. Griselimycin cyclic peptides
The targets are exposed on the surface of the cytoplasmic membrane   act against the DNA replication complex of mycobacteria by binding to
of Gram-positive bacteria. Borrowing an outer membrane from the   the sliding DNA clamp DnaN and blocking protein–protein interactions
producer does not appear to be a realistic strategy for Gram-positive   within the complex, leading to double-strand breaks.

                                                                                                   Nature  |  Vol 632  |  1 August 2024  |  43


[PDF physical page 6]
Review

            a   Side view           Top view       b

                                                               O      F        F
                                                             N
                                                              O     O                                                            O
                                                      O  NH O
                                                          O      N
                                                                 N   H  HN                                                            N

                                                                        O
                                                         ADEP4

                                                    Unfolded
            c                                       protein
                          Regulated                             Chaperone
                           degradation                                                                                           Cell survival

                                     + ATP



                       ClpP
                                                                                    Essential
                                                                                    protein
                                     ADEP


                          Dysregulated                                                                                          Cell death
                          degradation



Fig. 3 | ADEP as an anti-persister compound. a, The closed conformation of     mechanism of bacterial ClpP proteases. In regulated degradation in the
S. aureus ClpP protease (Protein Data Bank (PDB): 6TTY) shows a tetradecamer    presence of ATP, Clp chaperones bind specific protein substrates and bring
of stacked heptameric rings. The individual protomers are rendered as protein   them to ClpP for complex formation. Protein substrates unfold and translocate
surfaces and coloured in shades of pink. b, The chemical structure of ADEP4     into the proteolytic chamber for controlled proteolysis. In dysregulated
(left) and its respective binding pose on the open comformation of S. aureus     degradation, ADEPs bind to ClpP and compete out the chaperones resulting in
ClpP (PDB: 6PMD) (middle). ADEP4 is shown in blue, and ClpP is rendered as     an unregulated, activated proteolytic state, leading to the proteolysis of
pink surfaces with cartoon ribbons in the binding site (right). c, The molecular     essential proteins and causing cell death.



                                                                   acetate that have low levels of acetate catabolism enzymes have low
Anti-persister compounds and chronic infections       ATP and high tolerance of antibiotics74. Bactericidal antibiotics, as
It is more difficult to treat chronic infections even though they are  we have described in the preceding sections, require active targets
mainly caused by pathogens that are susceptible to antibiotics. This   in order to corrupt them. Shutting down energy-dependent targets
susceptibility is based on the standard in vitro minimum inhibitory con-   appears to be an ingenious mechanism to avoid killing by all anti-
centration test that measures the minimal concentration of antibiotic   biotics. A theoretical solution to this challenging problem could
required to stop the growth of cells. However, the minimum inhibi-  be to identify compounds that do not require energy to kill. The
tory concentration test misses the main culprit of chronic infections,  prodrug metronidazole comes close to fulfilling this requirement75
dormant persister cells68.                                            (see ‘Prodrugs’).
  The burden of chronic infections is significant, and includes com-     Acyldepsipeptide (ADEP) is a natural product antibiotic that perfectly
mon middle ear infections in children and urinary tract infections in    fits the requirements for an anti-persister compound. It is produced
women, as well as complex infections of the lung in cystic fibrosis, to  by Streptomyces hawaiiensis76,77, and was initially overlooked because
which patients ultimately succumb. Many chronic infections are associ-    it only kills Gram-positive bacteria, and is unstable. In response to the
ated with biofilms that harbour dormant antibiotic-tolerant persister   developing MRSA epidemic, Bayer undertook a medicinal chemistry
cells that are produced stochastically in bacterial populations. Once  programme to optimize the compound, resulting in ADEP4, which has
the antibiotic concentration drops, persisters resuscitate and restore  improved activity against a broad range of Gram-positive bacteria78.
the population, causing a relapsing chronic infection. At least two spe-  The same team also determined that the target of ADEP is ClpP, an
cialized toxin-mediated mechanisms of persister formation have been   important protease that is conserved among bacteria. ClpP proteases
described in E. coli. After DNA damage, the endogenous toxin TisB is   digest defective misfolded proteins and also have an important role
expressed, which decreases the proton motive force and ATP synthesis,   in regulating cellular functions by degrading transcriptional regula-
and causes antibiotic target shutdown, producing persisters69–71. The   tors. ClpP proteases both structurally and functionally resemble the
HipA toxin is a protein synthesis inhibitor, and an active allele hipA7,   eukaryotic proteasome, even though these two molecular machines
present in clinical isolates from patients with chronic urinary tract   are not homologous.
infection, causes a sharp increase in persister levels and drug toler-    ClpP is assembled from 14 protomers to form a barrel, in which the
ance72. As well as these specialized mechanisms, a stochastic variation   14 canonical catalytic triads of the serine proteases are shielded from
in the expression of ‘persister’ genes is an apparent general mechanism   the cytoplasm (Fig. 3a). Narrow entrance pores at the apical sides of
of persister formation in bacteria73. One main type of persister gene,   the barrel prevent access of proteins to the proteolytic compartment.
and possibly the predominant one, perturbs energy homeostasis. Rare  The specialized ClpP-associated chaperones ClpC and ClpX are ATPases
E. coli cells with low levels of Krebs cycle enzymes have low ATP con-   that recognize defective proteins, unfold them and thread the peptide
centrations and are tolerant of killing by antibiotics73. Similarly, a   chains through the entrance pores of the protease into the proteolytic
subpopulation of M. tuberculosis cells growing in a medium with   chamber79. ClpP–chaperone complex therefore requires ATP for its

44  |  Nature  |  Vol 632  |  1 August 2024


[PDF physical page 7]
                                                                                   c a                                               b                  Membrane bilayer
                                                                                                    BamA
                                                             H2N
                                                        O         F7
             HO               HO
      O               O                O                O
            H                H                  H                             +                 W3                  BamEBamE
            N                N                  N                   NH3
  HO F7          S6 NH K5         S4 NH  W3         N2 NH W1                 β3                      BamC          DarobactinDarobactin AA
              O                              O                 O                                    W1
                                                       HN
                                             O                      β2

                                 N                                 H                                                        BamD
                                                                   β3                    NH2                                                                                    BamB

 d




         Darobactins                                                       Dynobactins                      Xenorceptides                    FxsB                                                                                                   anSME


        darABCDE                                         dynAB             xncABCDE

 e                                                                                             f
     H2N    HN
                                                                                         Darobactin A                    Dynobactin A
       HN

                                                  OHOH
                      OH
    O           O           O           O           O   N
       F10 HN           Y8  NH          H6 HN      H   N4 HN          N2 NH            +           W810W810                   W1W1
 OH          R9 NH           S7  HN           V5 N           S3 NH     H  W1 NH3
          O           O           O  H2N            H2N       O
                           N
                              N            O           O           OH

Fig. 4 | Darobactin and dynobactin. a, Chemical structure of darobactin A.       e, The chemical structure of dynobactin A. f, Comparison of darobactin A and
b, Close-up of the darobactin A binding site at the BamA lateral gate. c, Cryo-     dynobactin A binding to BamA. Panels b,c reproduced from ref. 96, Springer
electron microscopy structure of BAM complex with bound darobactin A.       Nature Ltd. Panels d,f reproduced from ref. 16, Springer Nature Ltd.
d, Schematic representing the evolution of darobactin and dynobactin.


function, and in this context, is similar to other targets of bactericidal     Pharmacologically advanced analogues of ADEP are being devel-
antibiotics. However, proteolysis per se is an energy-releasing reaction.   oped89, and ADEP and its urea derivatives show good efficacy in ani-
ADEP exploits this intrinsic property by replacing the ATP-dependent  mal models with a number of pathogens78,90,91. Whether pairing with
chaperones, resulting in a non-specific protease. Co-crystal structures   another antibiotic is required is not obvious, since ClpP mutants lose
of ADEP bound to ClpP from S. aureus80–82 show ADEP embedded in a   virulence92,93 and may not contribute to infection. The ADEP scaffold
hydrophobic pocket at the apical face of the ClpP barrel (Fig. 3b). A ClpP  may indeed lead to a useful anti-persister compound.
tetradecamer consists of two heptameric rings stacked back-to-back    ADEP provides a general paradigm—dysregulation of hydrolysis, for
and the hydrophobic pockets are located at the apical interface of the   developing anti-persister compounds. Aside from proteases, there
protomers, offering 14 ADEP binding sites in total. The same hydro-   are other important and tightly regulated hydrolases in the cell, such
phobic pockets serve as the primary interaction sites for the hexameric   as lipases, phosphatases and nucleases. Many of these are potential
Clp-ATPases, which dock here via flexible loops terminating in the con-   targets for an anti-persister compounds.
served tripeptide motif V/IGF/L83–85. The sidechain and phenylalanine
linker of ADEP mimic the IGF loop perfectly, and the ADEP macrolactone
core engages in additional interactions with ClpP (Fig. 3b). The affinity  Undruggable targets
of ADEP surpasses that of the IGF loops, enabling ADEP to efficiently  The outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria is a formidable barrier
compete with the Clp-ATPases and prevent their association with ClpP.   to penetration by antibiotics, and a particularly attractive approach is
The result is an uncontrolled protease inside the cell (Fig. 3c). In grow-   to attack the barrier itself rather than try to bypass it. There are only two
ing bacteria, the central cell division protein FtsZ is particularly prone   essential proteins in the outer membrane, the lipopolysaccharide trans-
to degradation in the presence of ADEP86,87. In non-growing, stationary   porter LptD, and the chaperone/insertase BamA. As mentioned above,
cells of S. aureus, ADEP induces the degradation of more than 400   the synthetic polycation murepavadin targets LptD, but the develop-
proteins88. Stationary cultures of S. aureus are dominated by persister  ment of the compound was paused owing to nephrotoxicity. Other
cells. Remarkably, ADEP eradicates both growing and stationary cells,  components of the Lpt transporter have also been targeted. Thanatin7,
including persisters88, in contrast to conventional antibiotics such as   a derivative of the antimicrobial peptide thanatin, disrupts the LptA
rifampicin or ciprofloxacin, which have little effect on stationary popu-   bridge connecting the inner membrane proteins LptBFG to LptD in E. coli
lations of S. aureus. The ClpP protease is not essential, at least in vitro,  and K. pneumoniae (peptidomimetic antibiotics disrupt the lipopoly-
and this presents a liability for ADEP. Combining ADEP with rifampicin   saccharide transport bridge of drug-resistant Enterobacteriaceae)94,
to prevent the rise of resistant mutants eradicates an untreatable S.  and zosurabalpin binds to LptBF, trapping lipopolysaccharide, in
aureus biofilm infection in a mouse thigh model88.                      A. baumannii30,31. Both compounds are in development.

                                                                                                   Nature  |  Vol 632  |  1 August 2024  |  45


[PDF physical page 8]
Review

 BamA folds and inserts β-barrel proteins such as porins and LptD   ten residues overlap with darobactin, and the remaining three are
into the outer membrane. It is the core unit of the BAM complex that   kinked into the BamA lumen, where they displace the C terminus of
contains additional chaperone proteins. BamA is itself a β-barrel  BamA C. Importantly, the two aromatic ring fusions are at different
protein, and lacks the typical active site of an enzyme that can be   spatial positions compared to darobactin, providing information
engaged by a small-molecule inhibitor. Indeed, efforts to find syn-  on the structure–activity relationship and thereby aiding efforts for
thetic compounds that act against BamA have not been particu-   the rational design of synthetic compounds that target BamA. In a
larly successful. The chimeric polymyxin-cyclic polycation OMPTA   striking case of convergence, nature and chemists arrived at a simi-
(outer-membrane-protein-targeting antibiotic) binds BamA only mod-   lar design for stabilizing linear peptides that are flexible by creating
erately, but anchoring of the polymyxin moiety to lipopolysaccharide   ‘stapled peptides’—inserting a staple that rigidifies and maintains the
results in potent action against bacteria29.                           three-dimensional structure that would otherwise be rapidly lost in
  Screening of a small library of Photorhabdus led to the discovery of   a short peptide101. The darobactin–BamA interaction is based almost
darobactin A, which binds to BamA and kills a number of Gram-negative   entirely on peptide backbone contacts at the BamA lateral gate, mak-
bacteria, such as E. coli and K. pneumoniae14. Darobactin A is a 7-mer pep-   ing the acquisition of resistance by point mutations difficult96. Indeed,
tide made from a translationally produced precursor and has an unusual   replacing amino acids in the BamA binding site does not change its
structure. Two fused rings are formed through an unactivated C–C   peptide backbone. Resistance mutations outside of the lateral gate of
bond and an ether linkage (Fig. 4a). Making these bonds is not trivial,  BamA have been detected, but these mutants have diminished fitness
either enzymatically or synthetically. The C–C linkage requires a free  and are avirulent. The BamA lateral gate thus represents a true bacterial
radical reaction, which is catalysed by the radical S-adenosylmethionine   Achilles heel that nature has exploited by producing the bicyclic rings
(rSAM) enzyme DarE, part of the BGC that encodes darobactin. rSAM   of darobactin and dynobactin.
enzymes use an iron–sulfur cluster to produce a 5′-deoxyadenosyl
radical, which in turn activates the substrate, resulting in the forma-
tion of novel bonds. The Fe–S cluster that serves as an electron donor  Prodrugs
is sensitive to oxygen, and this is probably why rSAM enzymes acquire   Prodrugs are compounds that have no activity on their own, but become
oxygen from water. Surprisingly, DarE incorporates oxygen from O2 into   active once they enter the cell and are metabolized. The first natural
the ether bond of darobactin95. This unusual feature perhaps explains   product prodrug was azomycin, a simple 2-nitroimidazole produced
another mystery—Photorhabdus are the only terrestrial bacteria that are  by some species of Nocardia, Streptomyces and Pseudomonas102–104. The
luminescent. The bacterial luciferase uses oxygen to oxidize luciferin,   derivative metronidazole was synthesized soon after the discovery of
acting as an antioxidant.                                       azomycin and was introduced into clinical practice105. As a result, most
  The two intricate fused rings of darobactin seeem an obvious war-   of what is known about this series comes from studies of metronida-
head, but the co-crystal structure with the target shows that the pep-   zole. Azomycin and metronidazole appear to share the same mode of
tide backbone is, surprisingly, the main warhead. The peptide forms   action106. Metronidazole is reduced by bacteria-specific nitroreductases
a canonical anti-parallel β–β contact with the lateral gate of BamA   to a reactive nitroso radical that damages DNA and probably other
(Fig. 4b,c). The same site is used by incoming polypeptides to bind   targets. The activating reaction requires a low-oxygen environment,
BamA, enter into the lumen of the barrel, and become folded. Remark-  and metronidazole is therefore active against anaerobic bacteria such
ably, the fused rings of darobactin force its peptide backbone into a   as C. difficile and microaerophilic Helicobacter pylori. Metronidazole
rigid, preformed β-strand conformation that linear peptides do not   has several attractive features that are worth considering for designing
adopt in solution. The fused rings have the additional function to ori-   prodrug antibiotics. Covalent attachment to targets provides an irre-
ent aromatic side chains into direct contacts with lipid headgroups   versible sink by binding covalently to DNA that helps with penetration
at the lateral gate. As a result, darobactin binds to the lateral gate of   of the compound. Indeed, metronidazole is broad-spectrum and small,
BamA 1,000 times better than a typical substrate, jamming insertion  and penetrates well into Gram-negative bacteria. The reactive species
and disrupting formation of the outer membrane96.                         is produced specifically inside the bacterial cell, minimizing damage to
  Bioinformatic analysis identified a whole family of darobactin-related   the host, as human reductases lack the potential to reduce these nitro-
compounds, with a total of 12 different members so far14,16. The two   imidazoles. There is typically more than one activating nitroreductase
tryptophan rings appear to be conserved in most analogues, whereas   in pathogens, limiting resistance development. Finally, targeting DNA
other residues on the 7-mer peptide are variable10. So far, darobactin A   provides for excellent killing of both growing cells and non-growing
appears to be the most active of these compounds, but not all of them   cells such as persisters75.
have been examined. In addition to the natural variants, nucleotide    Although covalent binding to a target improves potency—as once
replacement in the propeptide gene darA resulted in a compound with  bound the antibiotics permanently inactivate the target and cannot
a simple C-terminal Phe>Trp substitution, which extends the activity  be effluxed out of the cell—there is a class of prodrugs that evolved
of the compound to P. aeruginosa97. Other substitutions produced   specifically to transport a warhead across bacterial membranes. In
analogues with good activity against A. baumannii98, but these have   sideromycins, an antibiotic moiety is linked to a sideophore107. In
an added positive charge, a problematic feature for nephrotoxicity.    the well-studied albomycin produced by Actinomyces subtropicus, a
  Two groups have recently reported total chemical synthesis of daro-   ferrichrome-type siderophore is linked to a nucleotide analogue that is
bactin using Larock macrocyclization for indole synthesis as the key  an inhibitor of the Ser-tRNA synthetase. The ferrichrome moiety actu-
step of the non-canonical ring closures99,100. Chemical synthesis and the   ally binds Fe3+, as would a proper siderophore, and iron is required for
production of novel variants by nucleotide reshuffling97 open attrac-   albomycin activity. In Gram-negative bacteria, the ferrichrome moiety
tive possibilities for producing analogues with improved potency and   binds to TonB-dependent transporters of the outer membrane, and the
pharmacological properties to combat Gram-negative pathogens.    compound is translocated into the cell. The peptide bond that links
  A bioinformatic approach aimed at uncovering very distant homo-   the chimera is cleaved in the cytoplasm, releasing the active Ser-tRNA
logues of the dar operon led to the discovery of dynobactins (Fig. 4d,e).   synthetase inhibitor that blocks protein synthesis. This concept was
These compounds also bind to BamA (Fig. 4f). So far, there are 16 recog-  emulated in cefiderocol, a ceftazidime (a β-lactam antibiotic) and a
nized members of the dynobactin family, with the 10-mer dynobactin   siderophore chimera108. Cefiderocol, however is not a prodrug, as it is
A being the prototype for this class. Similar to darobactin, dynobac-   transported into the periplasm of Gram-negative bacteria by sidero-
tin A96 has two rings, but these are located at different positions and   phore transporters, enabling the ceftazidime moiety to target PBPs in
include a histidine residue. When binding to the target, seven of the   the periplasm. Serendipitously, linking the ceftazidime β-lactam to a

46  |  Nature  |  Vol 632  |  1 August 2024


[PDF physical page 9]
 Box 1
 Manifold features of individual antibiotics
 Many of the antibiotics discussed in this article have more than one   BamA, resulting in an aberrant outer membrane and death.
  attractive feature linked to their mechanism of action. This does       Darobactin binds to the peptide backbone of its target, which by
 not necessarily result from chemical complexity. The simplest          definition cannot be changed through mutations, contributing
 molecules that we consider, the prodrug azomycin and its analogue    to resistance evasion. Resistance mutations occur elsewhere in
 metronidazole, exhibit an impressive array of features102–106.           the protein, but at the price of diminished fitness. Teixobactin
  Activation of the prodrug by several nitroreductases and binding to     is complex, with hydrophobic side groups that anchor it to the
 DNA and other targets contribute to resistance evasion. Small size    membrane, interchanging l- and d-amino acids, a 13-member
 favours penetration, as does covalent binding to DNA, creating an      ring and a rare enduracididine at the C terminus58. Binding to the
  irreversible sink for accumulation on the target in the cell. Action      target—the pyrophosphate-sugar moiety of lipid II, a precursor
 against DNA helps kill dormant cells, thus providing anti-persister      of peptidoglycan—seems unremarkable, but once engaged,
  activity75. Aminated sugars are more complex aminoglycosides that    teixobactins form a β–β sheet supramolecular structure. The β–β
 bind to ribosomal RNA, interfering with the proper hybridization        interaction is accomplished by the strategically placed l- and
 between aminoacyl-tRNA anticodons and codons of the mRNA.       d-amino acids. The supramolecular structure thins the membrane,
 Aminoglycosides engage their target for long enough to produce      aided by hydrophobic tails of its amino acids, producing leakage
 a string of errors—mistranslation that results in aberrant, toxic          that contributes to cell death. The large structure that forms has
 peptides, leading to cell death65. Acyldepsipeptide binds to and       high stability in the membrane, equivalent to covalent binding.
  activates the ClpP protease, replacing native chaperones and their    Engaging non-protein targets that are not directly coded by genes
 substrates with undesirable substrates for proteolysis78–88. The result   results in resistance evasion. The teixobactin-related compound
  is a dysregulated protease that digests essential proteins, killing       clovibactin also binds to lipid II, but its target is pyrophosphate12.
 both regular cells and persisters. The 7-mer peptide Darobactin is      Surprisingly, the target is enclosed by a hydrophobic ‘glove’ of
 a rigid β-strand that forms when four of its amino acids are linked      the antibiotic, displacing water. This entropic interaction is weak,
  into two fused rings14,96. This peptide backbone is the warhead        but becomes irreversible when the interacting clovibactins form a
  that forms a β–β interaction with the lateral gate of BamA, thus        supramolecular structure. Binding to an immutable pyrophosphate
 preventing entry of incoming peptides that require folding on             is probably the ultimate feat in resistance evasion.



siderophore improved resistance to β-lactamases. Cefiderocol is the   protease that destroys tight junctions of epithelial cells, becoming a
first ‘Trojan horse’ antibiotic to be approved for clinical use.             ‘toxigenic B. fragilis’, a risk factor for colon cancer111. Similarly, Morganella
  These examples illustrate that the general prodrug design enables a   morganii, a common commensal, produces DNA-damaging indolimines
variety of strategies to target bacteria. An interesting case is the recent   that can be causal to colon cancer112. A bloom of pro-inflammatory
discovery of 3′-amino 3′-deoxyguanosine (ADG), a prodrug produced   Enterobacteriacea exacerbates inflammatory bowel disease and is a
by Photorhabdus luminescens17. ADG is a close analogue of guanosine,   general hallmark of dysbiosis113.
in which an amino group at the 3′ position of ribose replaces OH. This    These varied needs demand an increasingly sophisticated arsenal of
small change has a marked effect on the properties of the molecule.   antimicrobial measures. Such measures include traditional vaccines
The 3′ OH serves to connect nucleotides in the growing chain of nucleic  and antibiotics, as well as new approaches in development—including
acids. Once inside the cell, ADG is phosphorylated by E. coli, forming   therapeutic antibodies, modulation of the immune system, phage ther-
ADG-Pi, and subsequently converted to ADG-PPPi, an analogue of GTP.   apy, CRISPR-based targeting of pathogen DNA114 and microbiota-based
When ADG-PPPi is miss-incorporated into a growing chain of RNA, it   therapies that are designed to prevent or block pathogen colonization,
terminates transcription, because the next nucleotide triphosphate   as we described for curing C. difficile infection. It is difficult to predict
cannot link to NH2. This is similar to the mechanism of action of AZT  which of these new approaches will be generally successful, but for
(azidothymidine), which interrupts the synthesis of HIV DNA109, and the  now, vaccines and small-molecule antibiotics are our best defence
chain-termination DNA sequencing method developed by Sanger110.   against bacterial pathogens.
However, it appears that this ingenious approach was used by bacteria     In this Review, we have considered antibiotics with sophisticated
long before Sanger and AZT.                               modes of action that would be difficult, and in most cases unrealistic,
                                                                   to anticipate and rationally design. It is encouraging that some of these
                                                     compounds—such as teixobactin, darobactin and dynobactin—were
Outlook                                                     discovered very recently, and from small collections of producers.
Our need for new antibiotics has evolved over time. Staying ahead   This suggests that useful natural product antibiotics will continue to
by introducing new compounds to combat resistant pathogens is  be discovered, and advances in computational genomics and chemin-
the main goal of discovery, but other needs have become apparent   formatics are likely to contribute to this effort by identifying attractive
over the past decades. Chronic infections in immunocompromised   BGCs16,19.
patients, or those associated with indwelling devices that produce a    Many of the compounds considered here have more than one prop-
favourable environment for biofilms, require antibiotics capable of   erty of particular interest (Box 1). Natural products show us that nearly
killing drug-tolerant persisters. In addition, the positive role of the   every desired property for an antibiotic is possible, from a low propen-
microbiome in maintaining human health calls for selective com-   sity for resistance selection to the potential to eradicate dormant cells
pounds that specifically target pathogens. The nature of a ‘pathogen’   or selective activity against a particular pathogen. Notably, most natural
has also expanded. Multidrug-resistant A. baumannii is a major con-   products have been introduced into clinical practice in their original
cern in the hospital setting, a fairly recent phenomenon. Bacteroides   form. Although this trend is likely to continue, increasing demands for
fragilis, an important symbiont, can acquire a plasmid that encodes a   safety and the urgency of the antimicrobial resistance crisis compel us

                                                                                                   Nature  |  Vol 632  |  1 August 2024  |  47


[PDF physical page 10]
Review
to deploy the knowledge of natural products to a rational discovery    23.  Zhao, S. et al. Defining new chemical space for drug penetration into Gram-negative
                                                                                                         bacteria. Nat. Chem. Biol. 16, 1293–1302 (2020).
platform for synthetic compounds, and for making advanced analogues    24.  Mansbach, R. A. et al. Machine learning algorithm identifies an antibiotic vocabulary for
of natural antibiotics. Development of ETX0462 was probably the first        permeating Gram-negative bacteria. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 60, 2838–2847 (2020).
successful rational design of an antibiotic27. ETX0462 was designed    25.  Geddes, E. J. et al. Porin-independent accumulation in Pseudomonas enables antibiotic
                                                                                                      discovery. Nature 624, 145–153 (2023).
to target penicillin-binding proteins, to penetrate through porins    26.  Parker, E. N. et al. Implementation of permeation rules leads to a FabI inhibitor with activity
of Gram-negative bacteria, and to avoid hydrolysis by β-lactamases.         against Gram-negative pathogens. Nat. Microbiol. 5, 67–75 (2020).
ETX0462 is based on avibactam, a β-lactamase inhibitor, which in turn     27.  Durand-Reville, T. F. et al. Rational design of a new antibiotic class for drug-resistant
                                                                                                             infections. Nature 597, 698–702 (2021).
was based on penicillin. There are other examples of surpassing nature,    28.  Srinivas, N. et al. Peptidomimetic antibiotics target outer-membrane biogenesis in
including the recent development of the anti-Gram-negative agent       Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Science 327, 1010–1013 (2010).
G0775, a bacterial type I signal peptidase inhibitor derived from the    29.  Luther, A. et al. Chimeric peptidomimetic antibiotics against Gram-negative bacteria.
                                                                                             Nature 576, 452–458 (2019).
antibiotic arylomycin115.                                                            30.  Pahil, K. S. et al. A new antibiotic traps lipopolysaccharide in its intermembrane transporter.
  Of the targets considered here, some would not have made it onto        Nature 625, 572–577 (2024).
the list of a typical drug discovery programme. BamA is a β-barrel pro-     31.  Zampaloni, C. et al. A novel antibiotic class targeting the lipopolysaccharide transporter.
                                                                                             Nature 625, 566–571 (2024).
tein that lacks a catalytic centre, but it is nonetheless an unexpected    32.  Fleming, A. On the antibacterial action of cultures of a penicillium, with special reference
and powerful target of darobactin and dynobactin. Pyrophosphate         to their use in the isolation of B. influenzae. Br. J. Exp. Pathol. 10, 226 (1929).
appears to be particularly unsuitable as a target, being present in the    33.  Mora-Ochomogo, M. & Lohans, C. T. β-Lactam antibiotic targets and resistance mechanisms:
                                                                                      from covalent inhibitors to substrates. RSC Med. Chem. 12, 1623–1639 (2021).
environment as polyphosphate and in many cellular metabolites, but    34.  Silver, L. L. Multi-targeting by monotherapeutic antibacterials. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 6,
it is nonetheless a target of clovibactin. Nature seems oblivious to our        41–55 (2007).
notions of undruggable or unsuitable targets, broadening our appre-    35.  Reading, C. & Cole, M. Clavulanic acid: a beta-lactamase-inhibiting beta-lactam from
                                                                                          Streptomyces clavuligerus. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 11, 852–857 (1977).
ciation for what is possible and pointing us in directions that we would    36.  Levasseur, P. et al. Efficacy of a ceftazidime–avibactam combination in a murine model of
not have contemplated on our own.                                                  septicemia caused by Enterobacteriaceae species producing ampc or extended-spectrum
                                                                                                β-lactamases. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 58, 6490–6495 (2014).
                                                                                                           37.  Wunderink, R. G. et al. Effect and safety of meropenem-vaborbactam versus best-available
1.    Lewis, K. The science of antibiotic discovery. Cell 181, 29–45 (2020).                            therapy in patients with carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae infections: The TANGO
2.    Tacconelli, E. et al. Discovery, research, and development of new antibiotics: the WHO priority                II randomized clinical trial. Infect. Dis. Ther. 7, 439–455 (2018).
       list of antibiotic-resistant bacteria and tuberculosis. Lancet Infect. Dis. 18, 318–327 (2018).     38.  Lewis, K. & Ausubel, F. M. Prospects for plant-derived antibacterials. Nat. Biotechnol. 24,
3.   Antimicrobial Resistance Collaborators. Global burden of bacterial antimicrobial resistance        1504–1507 (2006).
      in 2019: a systematic analysis. Lancet 399, 629–655 (2022).                                 39.  Stermitz, F. R., Lorenz, P., Tawara, J. N., Zenewicz, L. A. & Lewis, K. Synergy in a medicinal
4.   Ramos-Castaneda, J. A. et al. Mortality due to KPC carbapenemase-producing Klebsiella            plant: antimicrobial action of berberine potentiated by 5′-methoxyhydnocarpin, a multidrug
    pneumoniae infections: systematic review and meta-analysis: mortality due to KPC           pump inhibitor. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97, 1433–1437 (2000).
     Klebsiella pneumoniae infections. J. Infect. 76, 438–448 (2018).                            40.  Moniruzzaman, M. et al. Analysis of orthogonal efflux and permeation properties of
5.   Xu, L., Sun, X. & Ma, X. Systematic review and meta-analysis of mortality of patients            compounds leads to the discovery of new efflux pump inhibitors. ACS Infect. Dis. 8,
     infected with carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae. Ann. Clin. Microbiol.                2149–2160 (2022).
     Antimicrob. 16, 18 (2017).                                                                            41.  Dominguez-Bello, M. G., Godoy-Vitorino, F., Knight, R. & Blaser, M. J. Role of the microbiome
6.   Zgurskaya, H. I., Rybenkov, V. V., Krishnamoorthy, G. & Leus, I. V. Trans-envelope multidrug          in human development. Gut 68, 1108–1114 (2019).
     efflux pumps of Gram-negative bacteria and their synergism with the outer membrane       42.  Schnizlein, M. K. & Young, V. B. Capturing the environment of the Clostridioides difficile
      barrier. Res. Microbiol. 169, 351–356 (2018).                                                        infection cycle. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 19, 508–520 (2022).
7.    Staley, J. T. & Konopka, A. Measurement of in situ activities of nonphotosynthetic             43.  Anthony, W. E. et al. Acute and persistent effects of commonly used antibiotics on the gut
    microorganisms in aquatic and terrestrial habitats. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 39, 321–346            microbiome and resistome in healthy adults. Cell Rep. 39, 110649 (2022).
      (1985).                                                                               44.  Feuerstadt, P. et al. SER-109, an oral microbiome therapy for recurrent Clostridioides
8.   D’Onofrio, A. et al. Siderophores from neighboring organisms promote the growth of                  difficile infection. N. Engl. J. Med. 386, 220–229 (2022).
     uncultured bacteria. Chem. Biol. 17, 254–264 (2010).                                           This paper describes the introduction of a new type of ‘drug’—an assemblage of
9.   Fenn, K. et al. Quinones are growth factors for the human gut microbiota. Microbiome 5,            clostridial spores for the treatment of C. difficile infection.
     161 (2017).                                                                               45.  Lopetuso, L. R., Scaldaferri, F., Petito, V. & Gasbarrini, A. Commensal clostridia: leading
10.  Strandwitz, P. et al. GABA-modulating bacteria of the human gut microbiota. Nat. Microbiol.         players in the maintenance of gut homeostasis. Gut Pathog. 5, 23 (2013).
     4, 396–403 (2019).                                                                     46.  Mikusova, K., Slayden, R. A., Besra, G. S. & Brennan, P. J. Biogenesis of the mycobacterial
11.   Ling, L. L. et al. A new antibiotic kills pathogens without detectable resistance. Nature               cell wall and the site of action of ethambutol. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 39,
     517, 455–459 (2015).                                                              2484–2489 (1995).
     This paper describes the discovery of teixobactin from an uncultured bacterium.            47.  Chahine, E. B., Karaoui, L. R. & Mansour, H. Bedaquiline: a novel diarylquinoline for
12.  Shukla, R. et al. An antibiotic from an uncultured bacterium binds to an immutable target.          multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. Ann. Pharmacother. 48, 107–115 (2014).
     Cell 186, 4059–4073.e4027 (2023).                                                      48.  Diallo, D. et al. Antituberculosis therapy and gut microbiota: review of potential host
13.   Pantel, L. et al. Odilorhabdins, antibacterial agents that cause miscoding by binding at a          microbiota directed-therapies. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 11, 673100 (2021).
    new ribosomal site. Mol. Cell 70, 83–94 e87 (2018).                                         49.  Quigley, J. et al. Novel antimicrobials from uncultured bacteria acting against Mycobacterium
14.   Imai, Y. et al. A new antibiotic selectively kills Gram-negative pathogens. Nature 576,               tuberculosis. mBio 11, e01516–e01520 (2020).
    459–464 (2019).                                                                       50.  Motiwala, T., Mthethwa, Q., Achilonu, I. & Khoza, T. ESKAPE pathogens: looking at Clp
15.   Imai, Y. et al. Evybactin is a DNA gyrase inhibitor that selectively kills Mycobacterium             ATPases as potential drug targets. Antibiotics 11, 1218 (2022).
     tuberculosis. Nat. Chem. Biol. 18, 1236–1244 (2022).                                               51.  Rempel, S. et al. A mycobacterial ABC transporter mediates the uptake of hydrophilic
     This paper describes the discovery of darobactins that target BamA in the outer              compounds. Nature 580, 409–412 (2020).
    membrane of Gram-negative bacteria.                                                     52.  Leimer, N. et al. A selective antibiotic for Lyme disease. Cell 184, 5405–5418.e5416 (2021).
16.   Miller, R. D. et al. Computational identification of a systemic antibiotic for gram-negative          This paper describes the identification of an antibiotic for selective action against
     bacteria. Nat. Microbiol. 7, 1661–1672 (2022).                                                    B. burgdorferi.
17.   Shahsavari, N. et al. A silent operon of Photorhabdus luminescens encodes a prodrug        53.  Polikanov, Y. S., Melnikov, S. V., Soll, D. & Steitz, T. A. Structural insights into the role of
    mimic of GTP. mBio 13, e0070022 (2022).                                            rRNA modifications in protein synthesis and ribosome assembly. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 22,
18.   Libis, V. et al. Multiplexed mobilization and expression of biosynthetic gene clusters. Nat.        342–344 (2015).
    Commun. 13, 5256 (2022).                                                               54.  Chatterjee, A. N. & Perkins, H. R. Compounds formed between nucleotides related to the
     This paper describes an approach for efficient cloning of environmental DNA for the            biosynthesis of bacterial cell wall and vancomycin. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 24,
     expression of BGCs.                                                            489–494 (1966).
19.   Gavriilidou, A. et al. Compendium of specialized metabolite biosynthetic diversity encoded    55.  Munch, D. & Sahl, H. G. Structural variations of the cell wall precursor lipid II in Gram-
      in bacterial genomes. Nat. Microbiol. 7, 726–735 (2022).                                             positive bacteria - Impact on binding and efficacy of antimicrobial peptides. Biochim.
     This study catalogues BGCs from sequenced genomes and links them to taxonomy and         Biophys. Acta 1848, 3062–3071 (2015).
     biogeography.                                                                           56.  Leclercq, R., Derlot, E., Duval, J. & Courvalin, P. Plasmid-mediated resistance to vancomycin
20.  O’Shea, R. & Moser, H. E. Physicochemical properties of antibacterial compounds:             and teicoplanin in Enterococcus faecium. N. Engl. J. Med. 319, 157–161 (1988).
     Implications for drug discovery. J. Med. Chem. 51, 2871–2878 (2008).                            57.  Marshall, C. G., Broadhead, G., Leskiw, B. K. & Wright, G. D. d-Ala–d-Ala ligases from
21.   Richter, M. F. et al. Predictive compound accumulation rules yield a broad-spectrum             glycopeptide antibiotic-producing organisms are highly homologous to the enterococcal
      antibiotic. Nature 545, 299–304 (2017).                                                      vancomycin-resistance ligases VanA and VanB. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 6480–6483
     This study provides rules for compound penetration into Gram-negative bacteria.                (1997).
22.  Mehla, J. et al. Predictive rules of efflux inhibition and avoidance in Pseudomonas            58.  Shukla, R. et al. Teixobactin kills bacteria by a two-pronged attack on the cell envelope.
     aeruginosa. mBio 12, e02785–20 (2021).                                                     Nature 608, 390–396 (2022).
     This study analyses physico-chemical properties of compounds that enable               59.  Shukla, R. et al. An antibiotic from an uncultured bacterium binds to an immutable target.
     penetration into P. aeruginosa, and synthesis of MDR inhibitors.                                  Cell 186, 4059–4073 (2023).

48  |  Nature  |  Vol 632  |  1 August 2024


[PDF physical page 11]
60. Homma, T. et al. Dual targeting of cell wall precursors by teixobactin leads to cell lysis.       95.  Nguyen, H. et al. Characterization of a radical SAM oxygenase for the ether crosslinking in
     Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 60, 6510–6517 (2016).                                         darobactin biosynthesis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144, 18876–18886 (2022).
61.  Schatz, A., Bugie, E. & Waksman, S. A. Streptomycin, a substance exhibiting antibiotic        96.  Kaur, H. et al. The antibiotic darobactin mimics a β-strand to inhibit outer membrane
      activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 55,           insertase. Nature 593, 125–129 (2021).
    66–69 (1944).                                                                                     97.  Groß, S. et al. Improved broad-spectrum antibiotics against Gram-negative pathogens via
62.  Wilson, D. N. Ribosome-targeting antibiotics and mechanisms of bacterial resistance.             darobactin biosynthetic pathway engineering. Chem. Sci. 12, 11882–11893 (2021).
     Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 35–48 (2014).                                                     98.  Seyfert, C. E. et al. Darobactins exhibiting superior antibiotic activity by Cryo-EM structure
63.  Aguirre Rivera, J. et al. Real-time measurements of aminoglycoside effects on protein            guided biosynthetic engineering. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 62, e202214094 (2022).
     synthesis in live cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2013315118 (2021).                     99.  Lin, Y. C. et al. Atroposelective total synthesis of darobactin A. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144,
64.  Andersson, D. I., Bohman, K., Isaksson, L. A. & Kurland, C. G. Translation rates and               14458–14462 (2022).
     misreading characteristics of rpsD mutants in Escherichia coli. Mol. Genetics Genomics      100. Nesic, M. et al. Total synthesis of darobactin A. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144, 14026–14030 (2022).
     187, 467–472 (1982).                                                                              101. Tan, Y. S., Lane, D. P. & Verma, C. S. Stapled peptide design: principles and roles of
65.  Wohlgemuth, I. et al. Translation error clusters induced by aminoglycoside antibiotics.           computation. Drug Discov. Today 21, 1642–1653 (2016).
     Nat. Commun. 12, 1830 (2021).                                                             102. Maeda, K., Osato, T. & Umezawa, H. A new antibiotic, azomycin. J. Antibiot. 6, 182 (1953).
     This study reveals the basis of killing by aminoglycosides—the introduction of strings      103. Nakamura, S. Structure of azomycin, a new antibiotic. Pharm. Bull. 3, 379–383 (1955).
     of errors into nascent proteins.                                                           104. Shoji, J. H. et al. Isolation of azomycin from Pseudomonas fluorescens. J. Antibiot. 42,
66.  Tokuriki, N. & Tawfik, D. S. Stability effects of mutations and protein evolvability. Curr. Opin.         1513–1514 (1989).
     Struct. Biol. 19, 596–604 (2009).                                                            105. Gupta, R. et al. Functionalized nitroimidazole scaffold construction and their pharmaceutical
67.   Kling, A. et al. Targeting DnaN for tuberculosis therapy using novel griselimycins. Science          applications: a 1950–2021 comprehensive overview. Pharmaceuticals 15, 561 (2022).
    348, 1106–1112 (2015).                                                                   106. Goldstein, B. P. et al. The mechanism of action of nitro-heterocyclic antimicrobial drugs.
68.  Lewis, K. (ed.) Persister Cells and Infectious Disease (Springer Nature, 2019).                     Metabolic activation by micro-organisms. J. Gen. Microbiol. 100, 283–298 (1977).
69.  Dorr, T., Vulic, M. & Lewis, K. Ciprofloxacin causes persister formation by inducing the TisB    107.  Miller, M. J. & Liu, R. Design and syntheses of new antibiotics inspired by nature’s quest for
     toxin in Escherichia coli. PLoS Biol. 8, e1000317 (2010).                                             iron in an oxidative climate. Acc. Chem. Res. 54, 1646–1661 (2021).
70.  Berghoff, B. A., Hoekzema, M., Aulbach, L. & Wagner, E. G. Two regulatory RNA elements      108. Sato, T. & Yamawaki, K. Cefiderocol: discovery, chemistry, and in vivo profiles of a novel
     affect TisB-dependent depolarization and persister formation. Mol. Microbiol. 103,               siderophore cephalosporin. Clin. Infect. Dis. 69, S538–S543 (2019).
    1020–1033 (2017).                                                                          This paper describes the creation of an approved chimeric antibiotic utilizing a
71.   Romilly, C., Deindl, S. & Wagner, E. G. H. The ribosomal protein S1-dependent standby site        siderophore moiety for penetration into the cell.
      in tisB mRNA consists of a single-stranded region and a 5′ structure element. Proc. Natl       109. Broder, S. The development of antiretroviral therapy and its impact on the HIV-1/AIDS
     Acad. Sci. USA 116, 15901–15906 (2019).                                                 pandemic. Antiviral Res. 85, 1–18 (2010).
72.  Schumacher, M. A. et al. HipBA–promoter structures reveal the basis of heritable multidrug     110. Sanger, F., Nicklen, S. & Coulson, A. R. DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors.
     tolerance. Nature 524, 59–64 (2015).                                                            Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 74, 5463–5467 (1977).
73.  Manuse, S. et al. Bacterial persisters are a stochastically formed subpopulation of low-          111.  Wu, S. et al. A human colonic commensal promotes colon tumorigenesis via activation of
    energy cells. PLoS Biol. 19, e3001194 (2021).                                            T helper type 17 T cell responses. Nat. Med. 15, 1016–1022 (2009).
74.  Quigley, J. & Lewis, K. Noise in a metabolic pathway leads to persister formation in              112. Cao, Y. et al. Commensal microbiota from patients with inflammatory bowel disease
    Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Microbiol. Spectr. 10, e0294822 (2022).                        produce genotoxic metabolites. Science 378, eabm3233 (2022).
75.  Fleck, L. E. et al. A screen for and validation of prodrug antimicrobials. Antimicrob. Agents     113.  Lee, J. Y., Tsolis, R. M. & Baumler, A. J. The microbiome and gut homeostasis. Science 377,
    Chemother. 58, 1410–1419 (2014).                                                 eabp9960 (2022).
76.  Goodreid, J. D. et al. Total synthesis and antibacterial testing of the A54556 cyclic              114. Cook, M. A. & Wright, G. D. The past, present, and future of antibiotics. Sci. Transl. Med.
     acyldepsipeptides isolated from Streptomyces hawaiiensis. J. Nat. Prod. 77, 2170–2181              14, eabo7793 (2022).
     (2014).                                                                                                   115.  Smith, P. A. et al. Optimized arylomycins are a new class of Gram-negative antibiotics.
77.  Thomy, D. et al. The ADEP biosynthetic gene cluster in Streptomyces hawaiiensis NRRL            Nature 561, 189–194 (2018).
    15010 reveals an accessory clpP gene as a novel antibiotic resistance factor. Appl. Environ.
     Microbiol. 85, e01292–19 (2019).
78.  Brotz-Oesterhelt, H. et al. Dysregulation of bacterial proteolytic machinery by a new class   Acknowledgements K.L. is supported by US National Institutes of Health grants (RO1 AI170962
     of antibiotics. Nat. Med. 11, 1082–1087 (2005).                                     and R01 AI158388), The Schmidt Foundation and The Steven and Alexandra Cohen Foundation.
     This paper describes the discovery of the mechanism of killing by ADEP: dysregulation     R.E.L. is supported by US National Institutes of Health grants (AI141193, AI090810 and AI157312)
     of the bacterial protease ClpP.                                                 and ALSAC, St Jude’s Children Research Hospital. H.B.O. is grateful for funding by the Deutsche
79.  Olivares, A. O., Nager, A. R., Iosefson, O., Sauer, R. T. & Baker, T. A. Mechanochemical basis    Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research Foundation) TRR261 (project ID 398967434) and
     of protein degradation by a double-ring AAA+ machine. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 21, 871–875    CoE CMFI (390838134). This project was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation
     (2014).                                                                                          via the NCCR AntiResist (grant number 180541) to S.H. T.S. is supported by the German Center
80.  Vahidi, S. et al. Reversible inhibition of the ClpP protease via an N-terminal conformational    for Infection Research (DZIF), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research
     switch. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, E6447–E6456 (2018).                                Foundation) TRR261 (project ID 398967434) and GRK2873 (project ID 494832089). We
81.   Griffith, E. C. et al. Ureadepsipeptides as ClpP Activators. ACS Infect. Dis. 5, 1915–1925 (2019).   acknowledge funding by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s
82.  Malik, I. T. et al. Functional characterisation of ClpP mutations conferring resistance to       Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement no. 101045485 to M.W.).
     acyldepsipeptide antibiotics in firmicutes. ChemBioChem 21, 1997–2012 (2020).              This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research
83.  Gatsogiannis, C., Balogh, D., Merino, F., Sieber, S. A. & Raunser, S. Cryo-EM structure of       Foundation) grants SFB1565 (project ID 469281184) to M.V.R. and I.W., by the Leibniz Prize to
     the ClpXP protein degradation machinery. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 26, 946–954 (2019).          M.V.R. and by the Max Planck Society. The authors thank L. Wilt, S. Anderson and R. Tangallapally
84.  Ripstein, Z. A., Vahidi, S., Houry, W. A., Rubinstein, J. L. & Kay, L. E. A processive rotary          for their assistance in preparing this review.
    mechanism couples substrate unfolding and proteolysis in the ClpXP degradation
     machinery. eLife 9, e52158 (2020).                                                 Author contributions K.L., R.E.L., H.B.O., S.H., M.V.R., T.S., M.W. and I.W. conceived and wrote
85.  Fei, X. et al. Structures of the ATP-fueled ClpXP proteolytic machine bound to protein          this review.
     substrate. eLife 9, e52774 (2020).
86.  Sass, P. et al. Antibiotic acyldepsipeptides activate ClpP peptidase to degrade the cell      Competing interests K.L. is a consultant for NovoBiotic, Arietis, Odyssey Therapeutics,
     division protein FtsZ. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 17474–17479 (2011).                   Holobiome, Donum and Flightpath. R.E.L. is an advisor for Prokaryotics and is a co-inventor of
87.   Silber, N., Mayer, C., Matos de Opitz, C. L. & Sass, P. Progression of the late-stage divisome    relevant intellectual property licensed by Arietis and Microbiotix. H.B.O. S.H., M.V.R., T.S., M.W.
       is unaffected by the depletion of the cytoplasmic FtsZ pool. Commun. Biol. 4, 270 (2021).    and I.W. declare no competing interests
88.  Conlon, B. P. et al. Activated ClpP kills persisters and eradicates a chronic biofilm
      infection. Nature 503, 365–370 (2013).                                                                                          Additional information
     This paper describes the anti-persister activity of ADEP.                                                                               Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at
89.  Mroue, N. et al. Pharmacodynamics of ClpP-activating antibiotic combinations against                                                                                             https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07530-w.
     Gram-positive pathogens. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 64, e01554-19 (2019).                                                                                Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Kim Lewis or Richard E. Lee.
90. Brown Gandt, A. et al. In vivo and in vitro effects of a ClpP-activating antibiotic against                                                                                   Peer review information Nature thanks Ian Seiple, Gerard Wright and the other, anonymous,
     vancomycin-resistant enterococci. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 62, e00424-18 (2018).                                                                                                  reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
91.  Brotz-Oesterhelt, H. & Vorbach, A. Reprogramming of the caseinolytic protease by ADEP                                                                                          Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.      antibiotics: molecular mechanism, cellular consequences, therapeutic potential. Front.                                                                                               Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in     Mol. Biosci. 8, 690902 (2021).                                                                                        published maps and institutional affiliations.92.  Frees, D., Gerth, U. & Ingmer, H. Clp chaperones and proteases are central in stress
      survival, virulence and antibiotic resistance of Staphylococcus aureus. Int. J. Med.
     Microbiol. 304, 142–149 (2014).                                                         Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this
93.  Illigmann, A., Thoma, Y., Pan, S., Reinhardt, L. & Brotz-Oesterhelt, H. Contribution of the        article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-
    Clp protease to bacterial survival and mitochondrial homoeostasis. Microb. Physiol. 31,       archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of
    260–279 (2021).                                                                such publishing agreement and applicable law.
94.  Schuster, M. et al. Peptidomimetic antibiotics disrupt the lipopolysaccharide transport
     bridge of drug-resistant Enterobacteriaceae. Sci. Adv. 9, eadg3683 (2023).          © Springer Nature Limited 2024




                                                                                                   Nature  |  Vol 632  |  1 August 2024  |  49