
[PDF physical page 1]
   H


        OH    OH  metabolites



Article
Developing a Yeast Platform Strain for an Enhanced Taxadiene
Biosynthesis by CRISPR/Cas9

Joseph C. Utomo 1    , Fabio C. Chaves 2    , Philippe Bauchart 3,†    , Vincent J. J. Martin 3 and Dae-Kyun Ro 1,*


                                            1  Department of Biological Science, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N1N4, Canada;
                                     joseph.utomo1@ucalgary.ca
                                            2  Programa de Pós-graduação em Ciência e Tecnologia de Alimentos, Departamento de Ciência e Tecnologia
                                        Agroindustrial, Faculdade de Agronomia Eliseu Maciel, Universidade Federal de Pelotas, Caixa Postal 354,
                                        Pelotas CEP 96010-900, Brazil; fabio.chaves@ufpel.edu.br
                                            3  Department of Biology, Centre for Applied Synthetic Biology, Concordia University,
                                      Montréal, QC H4B1R6, Canada; pbauchart@lallemand.com (P.B.); vincent.martin@concordia.ca (V.J.J.M.)
                                     *   Correspondence: daekyun.ro@ucalgary.ca
                                 †  Current address: Lallemand Specialty Cultures, 77260 La Ferté-sous-Jouarre, France.


                                Abstract: Paclitaxel is an important diterpenoid commonly used as an anticancer drug. Although the
                                  paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway has been mostly revealed, some steps remain to be elucidated. The
                                   difﬁculties in plant transformations and the scarcity of the precursor of paclitaxel, (+)-taxa-4(5), 11(12)-
                               diene (taxadiene), have hindered the full comprehension of paclitaxel biochemistry and, therefore, its
                              production by biotechnological approaches. One solution is to use the budding yeast, Saccharomyces
                                       cerevisiae, as a platform to elucidate the paclitaxel biosynthesis. As taxadiene is a diterpenoid, its
                      common precursor, geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP), needs to be increased in yeast. In this
                                 study, we screened various GGPP synthases (GGPPS) to ﬁnd the most suitable GGPPS for taxadiene
                              production in yeast. We also optimized the taxadiene production by increasing the ﬂux toward theCitation: Utomo, J.C.; Chaves, F.C.;
Bauchart, P.; Martin, V.J.J.; Ro, D.-K.     terpenoid pathway. Finally, to remove selection markers, we integrated the required genes using
Developing a Yeast Platform Strain     a CRISPR/Cas9 system in the yeast genome. Our result showed that a titer of 2.02 ± 0.40 mg/L
for an Enhanced Taxadiene           (plasmid) and 0.41 ± 0.06 mg/L (integrated) can be achieved using these strategies. This platform
Biosynthesis by CRISPR/Cas9.          strain can be used to readily test the gene candidates for microbial paclitaxel biosynthesis in the future.

Metabolites 2021, 11, 147. https://

doi.org/10.3390/metabo11030147      Keywords: paclitaxel; taxadiene; S. cerevisiae; metabolic engineering; diterpenoids


Academic Editors: Edward Baidoo,

Aymerick Eudes and Bashar Amer

                                   1. Introduction
Received: 15 January 2021
                               Global cancer cases are increasing with an estimation of more than 18 million cases
Accepted: 1 March 2021
                       and almost 10 million deaths in 2018 [1]. The ever-increasing cases of cancer necessitate aPublished: 3 March 2021
                                 reliable and inexpensive supply of anticancer drugs. One of the most prescribed anticancer
                          drugs is paclitaxel or commonly known as its commercial brand, Taxol. It acts by stabilizingPublisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in   tubulin and inducing cytokines that cause mitosis prevention and cell growth inhibition in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-   cancer cells [2–4]. Due to its selective and potent mechanism of action, paclitaxel-based
iations.                     drugs have been used in chemotherapy to treat various cancers, including breast, lung,
                             ovarian, and sarcoma [2,5]. This potent compound is naturally produced in the bark of
                            the Paciﬁc yew tree in minute quantities [3]. Commercially, there are two approaches to
                            achieve the supply of paclitaxel, chemical (semi-) synthesis [6,7] and plant cell cultivation,
                               of which the latter is more popular due to the economic viability of cell culture [8]. Despite
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
                             these commercial advances, the tools to improve paclitaxel bio-production are limited. TheLicensee MDPI,  Basel,  Switzerland.
This article is an open access article   major hurdles limiting the improvement of paclitaxel yield are the unreliability of Taxus
distributed  under  the  terms  and   spp. transformation [9] and incomplete understandings of paclitaxel biosynthesis at the
conditions of the Creative Commons   molecular level. These limitations hamper the cost-effective supply of paclitaxel through a
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://   biotechnological means [10].
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          Paclitaxel is classiﬁed as a diterpene, 20-carbon molecule derived from acetyl-CoA via
4.0/).                         the terpenoid pathway (Figure 1). As all diterpenoids, paclitaxel is synthesized from the uni-





Metabolites 2021, 11, 147. https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo11030147                              https://www.mdpi.com/journal/metabolites


[PDF physical page 2]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         2 of 15



                              versal diterpene precursor, geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP), followed by decorations
                              of the backbones by cytochromes P450 monooxygenases (P450s) and transferases [11]. The
                              ﬁrst step in paclitaxel biosynthesis is the conversion of GGPP into its diterpene backbone,
                              (+)-taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene or taxadiene, by an enzyme called taxadiene synthase (TS) [12].
                            This step is followed by at least 18 enzymatic steps of P450s and transferases [11,12]. Most
                             steps in the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway have been described previously, the majority
                             of which was brilliantly conducted by the Croteau lab. However, several steps remain
                           missing and unclear [13]. For example, steps between taxadiene-5α,10β-diol 5-acetate and
                          2-debenzoyl taxane have not been determined, while the ones that had been proposed
                           could not be placed accurately between these two intermediates [13–15]. A similar question
                          can be raised for an enzyme called taxoid 13α-hydroxylase, which has been characterized
                          but cannot be precisely placed in the pathway [16]. Additionally, recent studies based on
                           heterologous expression data question the appointed ﬁrst enzymatic step after taxadiene,
                              originally discovered by the Croteau group, who characterized the enzyme involved in
                            the ﬁrst oxygenation of taxadiene [17–19]. To shed light on this divergence and to further
                             elucidate the paclitaxel biosynthesis pathway, a more comprehensive study needs to be
                           performed. Unfortunately, taxadiene is not available commercially and its synthesis is im-
                                 practical. One solution for this issue is utilizing a microbial platform to study the paclitaxel
                             biosynthetic pathway.





     Figure 1. A schematic diagram of the taxadiene-producing yeast construction in S. cerevisiae. The overexpressed genes are
    shown in blue. The heterologous taxadiene synthase is shown in red. The endogenous genes without any modiﬁcation are
    shown in grey.


[PDF physical page 3]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         3 of 15




                                Several microbial platforms have been developed to produce taxadiene. Expect-
                               edly, the ﬁrst attempt was in the prokaryote workhorse, E. coli [20,21]. Although the
                          production of taxadiene in E. coli is promising, it is not an ideal system for studying the
                                paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway because many steps in the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway
                             are catalyzed by P450s, which require endoplasmic reticulum anchoring, unavailable in
                           prokaryotes [13,20,21]. Nonetheless, some attempts to follow the ﬁrst step have been
                         conducted in E. coli with a great success, producing more than 500 mg/L of taxane. This
                      was achieved by swapping the N-terminus of P450 with an eight-residue peptide (8RP)
                        from bovine as demonstrated by Biggs et al. [21,22]. Despite this success, the manda-
                            tory modiﬁcations of the heterologous P450s enzymes for expression in E. coli will add
                           complications for studying the ambiguous paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway. Therefore,
                           using the budding yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) as a platform to investigate the paclitaxel
                             biosynthetic pathway might be more reliable and advantageous over E. coli.
                              Production of taxadiene in S. cerevisiae has been previously attempted [23–26]. The
                               ﬁrst attempt was performed by the Croteau lab and successfully yielded 1 mg/L taxadiene.
                             Currently, the highest reported titer of taxadiene production is ~57 mg/L, which was
                           achieved by optimizing TS expression and providing multi-copies of TS in the genome [26].
                             Since S. cerevisiae does not synthesize diterpenoid-derived metabolites, one essential modi-
                            ﬁcation is enhancing the production of GGPP [27]. Previous studies utilized characterized
                           geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase (GGPPS) from Taxus spp., archaea, and carotenoid-
                          producing bacteria (Escherichia vulneris) [24–26]. However, different GGPPSs have not been
                           comparatively examined to enhance taxadiene production in yeast.
                                 In this study, our goal was to build a taxadiene-producing yeast strain that can be
                         used as a microbial platform to elucidate the remaining steps of the paclitaxel biosynthetic
                           pathway. To achieve this, we screened various GGPPS overexpression impacts on taxadiene
                                    titer in yeast and integrated necessary genes to make an efﬁcient taxadiene-producing
                            yeast strain without plasmid transformations. By achieving this goal, the subsequent
                       enzymes in the paclitaxel biosynthesis pathway can be studied with greater efﬁciency
                          without involving selection markers for the yeast plasmids.

                                   2. Results and Discussion
                                   2.1. pIPP Construction to Increase the Flux towards Terpenoid Pathway

                             To build a taxadiene-producing yeast strain, the endogenous yeast mevalonate (MVA)
                       pathway needs to be enhanced (Figure 1).  It has been shown that the truncated and
                             soluble version of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (tHMGR) can improve the
                          production of terpenoid in yeast as it is a rate-limiting and a key regulatory enzyme in
                            the MVA pathway [28,29]. However, the overexpression of one rate-limiting enzyme
                         might not be sufﬁcient for the overall ﬂux increase in the MVA pathway as shown in the
                               glycolytic pathway [30,31]. To increase the overall ﬂux toward the terpenoid pathway, we
                          decided to ﬁrst overexpress the four-middle genes in the MVA pathway (ERG13, tHMGR,
                        ERG12, and ERG8) using a plasmid. We utilized the DNA assembler method [32] to
                             construct the pIPP plasmid that contains these genes under constitutive promoters with
                          a CEN6/ARS4 origin of replication (Figure 2). To test the expression of these genes in
                               yeast, the quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) was performed. The transcript
                         abundance of these genes in transgenic yeast, relative to those in wild-type yeast, showed
                              that the transformation of these genes into yeast indeed increased their transcript levels
                           ranging from 2- to 5-fold (Figure 2). This result indicated that pIPP can be used to increase
                       ﬂux towards taxadiene production.


[PDF physical page 4]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         4 of 15





                              Figure 2. (A) A schematic diagram of the in vivo construction of pIPP plasmid encoding four middle
                              genes in the MVA pathway. Abbreviations: p: promoter; t: terminator; PDC: pyruvate decarboxylase;
                      ADH: alcohol dehydrogenase; PYK: pyruvate kinase; PGI: phosphoglucose isomerase; TPI: triose
                             phosphate isomerise; FBA: fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase; CYC: cytochrome c; tHMGR: truncated
                             3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase. (B) The transcript abundance of the four genes were
                          measured in both non-transgenic yeast (control) and transgenic yeast by quantitative PCR. Fold
                                 increases in each transcript in transgenic yeast, relative to those from control yeast, were calculated
                                     after the transcript levels from the control yeast were set to one. In all transcripts, differences of gene
                               expression in transgenic and control yeasts were statistically signiﬁcant (p-value < 0.01).

                                   2.2. Various GGPPS Overexpression

                                 Yeast produces only a small amount of GGPP, which is endogenously used for pro-
                               tein prenylations, while no secondary diterpene metabolites are produced in yeast [27].
                             Therefore, overexpression of a GGPPS is essential to enhance GGPP (C20) production.
                             Generally, there are two types of substrate speciﬁcity in different GGPPSs. Some GGPPSs
                        have a higher afﬁnity towards one FPP (C15) and one IPP (C5) utilization to synthesize
                       GGPP, whereas others have a higher afﬁnity towards one DMAPP (C5) and three IPPs (C5)


[PDF physical page 5]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         5 of 15




                              to synthesize GGPP [33]. To get a clear conclusion on the most suitable GGPPS for the
                           production of taxadiene in yeast, we screened GGPPS from various sources: yeast (BTS1),
                             algae (CrGGPPS), pepper (CaGGPPS), modiﬁed yeast FPP synthase (mERG20) [34], and ar-
                           chaea (SaGGPPS). Two of those (mERG20 and SaGGPPS) were used to increase diterpenoid
                           production in yeast, but their impacts on diterpene production relative to each other have
                            not been reported [24,34], while the others have not been studied for diterpene production
                              in yeast. These genes were codon-optimized for yeast and overexpressed simultaneously
                         with TS in the same plasmid, together with pIPP, to assess the effect of these genes on
                           taxadiene production. Expression of all GGPPSs was checked by immunoblot analysis
                             (Figure S1).
                            Most of the previous studies on improving taxadiene production in yeast did not use
                       BTS1 overexpression since BTS1, like human GGPPS, is active only when FPP is present
                        and may compete with squalene synthase for the common substrate, FPP [24–27]. However,
                    we had overexpressed BTS1 to enhance diterpenes production in yeast and a signiﬁcant
                             increase in diterpene production was observed [35]. Therefore, we included BTS1 to
                            evaluate its impacts on taxadiene production in comparison to other GGPPSs. The second
                     GGPPS is from thermoacidophilic archaea, Sulfolobus acidocaldarius (SaGGPPS). This GGPPS
                          has been previously used to improve taxadiene production in yeast [24]. Different from
                         BTS1, it shows a higher activity when utilizing DMAPP, although some activity is still
                          observed when FPP is present [36]. The third GGPPS is from pepper, Capsicum annum
                         (CaGGPPS). There is no kinetic velocity data for CaGGPPS, but it has been shown that
                      CaGGPPS has a slightly higher afﬁnity towards DMAPP compared to FPP [37]. Meanwhile,
                            algae (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii) GGPPS activity has not been tested since its discovery,
                        which was identiﬁed solely based on comparative genomics in the studies of carotenoid
                             biosynthetic genes in C. reinhardtii [38]. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
                           study to examine CrGGPPS functionality to increase diterpene production in yeast. Finally,
                            the yeast FPPS (ERG20) with a single mutation (mERG20) was included as it had been
                            previously shown to improve GGPP production of diterpenoids in yeast [34].
                               Here, we compared the effects of various GGPPS expression toward the production
                              of taxadiene when they were transformed simultaneously with TS and pIPP. Our results
                      showed that overexpression of endogenous yeast GGPPS (BTS1) led to the highest taxa-
                          diene production with 782 ± 14 µg/L, almost an 80-fold increase compared to the yeast
                          without GGPPS overexpression (Figure 3). BTS1 overexpression also showed a four-fold
                             increase in taxadiene titer, compared to the yeast overexpressing SaGGPPS, which was
                         used in a previous study [24]. Taxadiene production using the BTS1 overexpression was
                             also 80-fold higher than using mERG20. These data are contradictory to the report that
                       showed overexpression of mERG20 in yeast resulted in an over 80-fold increase in diterpene
                          production compared to the BTS1 overexpression [34]. The difference between our study
                        and the previous one regarding BTS1 and mERG20 impacts on taxadiene titer could be due
                              to a difference in the expression strategy. In the Ignea et al. study, they used a constitutive
                          promoter for the diterpene synthase and a galactose inducible promoter for GGPPS in two
                                different plasmids [34]. Meanwhile, we used the galactose inducible promoters for both TS
                       and GGPPS in a single plasmid (pESC). The expression of both genes in a single plasmid,
                            as we employed in this study, should lead to a more synchronized gene expression of
                           diterpene synthase and GGPPS. Thus, additional factors such as differences in plasmid
                        copy numbers can be eliminated, and the taxadiene titer differences between BTS1 and
                    mERG20 overexpression are caused by their internal characteristics.
                            Another intriguing result is from the C. reinhardtii GGPPS (CrGGPPS). C. reinhardtii
                                    is a model organism to study microalgae and photosynthesis [38]. However, its GGPPS
                               activity has not been evaluated. There is an indication from the sequence alignment
                          with cyanobacteria GGPPS that C. reinhardtii may encode a preprotein (CrGGPPS), and a
                           mature, truncated version of GGPPS (Cr-trGGPPS) is produced from the preprotein [38].
                           Thus, both versions were tested to examine their effects on taxadiene production in yeast.
                            Figure 3 shows that indeed overexpression of the mature version (Cr-trGGPPS) resulted in


[PDF physical page 6]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         6 of 15




                          a higher level of taxadiene production by almost 80% compared to the preprotein version
                         (CrGGPPS). This result strongly suggested that C. reinhardtii GGPPS has a transit peptide
                              that enables plastid-targeting, similar to other GGPPS in terrestrial plants [38], but its
                            preprotein version still retains GGPPS activity. It is interesting to note that overexpression
                              of the preprotein version of CrGGPPS resulted in a similar level of taxadiene production
                          with both SaGGPPS and mERG20 in yeast.





                              Figure 3. Taxadiene production titer using S. cerevisiae transformed with Tm-TS and pIPP with
                               overexpression of different geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthases (GGPPSs) from various species.
                          The asterisks indicate no signiﬁcant differences between the data (p value > 0.05). The bars without
                                  asterisk have signiﬁcant different between them (p value < 0.01). Abbreviations: WT, Saccharomyces
                                     cerevisiae strain BY4742 without overexpression of GGPPS; BTS1, Saccharomyces cerevisiae GGPPS;
                                  Cr, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii GGPPS; Cr-tr, truncated Cr; Ca, Capsicum annuum GGPPS; mERG20,
                           mutant of yeast FPPS; Sa, Sulfolobus acidocaldarius GGPPS.

                           The second highest taxadiene production was achieved when CaGGPPS was over-
                          expressed (Figure 3). CaGGPPS is one of the ﬁrst plant GGPPS that was puriﬁed and
                           identiﬁed while investigating carotenoid biosynthesis [37,39].  It is localized in pepper
                               plastids and has a transit peptide [39]. We synthesized and overexpressed the mature form
                               of CaGGPPS. The difference between CaGGPPS and BTS1 impacts on taxadiene production
                    may be explained by the differences in substrate speciﬁcity of these two enzymes. While
                      CaGGPPS is more promiscuous with a slight preference towards DMAPP [37], BTS1 strictly
                              prefers FPP as the substrate [27]. Due to the strong activity exerted by yeast FPPS (ERG20),
                       more FPP is available in yeast than DMAPP [40]. Hence, the BTS1 can readily use FPP,
                          while DMAPP availability could be limited for CaGGPPS and other GGPPS that prefer
                  DMAPP as a priming molecule. As different GGPPSs have different substrate preference,
                       BTS1 might show the highest activity in yeast due to availability of the priming substrate
                              (FPP), rather than its superior catalytic activity over other GGPPSs which use DMAPP and
                          IPP as substrates. We presume that true activities of other GGPPSs need to be re-evaluated
                              in the yeast engineered to produce abundant DMAPP to draw a fair conclusion regarding
                               their catalytic activities. Nonetheless, our results here demonstrated that native BTS1
                          performs best with respect to in vivo production of taxadiene in yeast.


[PDF physical page 7]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         7 of 15




                                   2.3. Optimization of Taxadiene Production

                           Once we determined that BTS1 is the most suitable GGPPS to be used to produce taxa-
                              diene, we decided to use BTS1 to optimize the taxadiene production in yeast. The summary
                             of this optimization, respective chromatogram, and the strains created in this study are
                      shown in Figures 4 and 5, and Table 1, respectively. When wild-type yeast (BY4742) was
                          transformed with a plasmid containing a mature version (60 amino acids truncation [23])
                              of Taxus media TS (TXD1 strain), it produced 1.1 ± 0.1 µg/L of taxadiene. When TXD1 was
                          transformed with pIPP (TXD2 strain), the production of taxadiene increased about nine-
                             fold to 10.2 ± 0.7 µg/L. This result indicated that increasing the expression of metabolic
                          genes in the MVA pathway can increase taxadiene production in yeast by providing more
                             precursors, i.e., IPP and DMAPP. However, TXD2 strain is still limited by endogenous
                    GGPPS activity, as shown by TXD3 strain. In TXD3 strain, when overexpressing TS and
                       BTS1 only without pIPP plasmid, i.e., without increasing any ﬂux towards the MVA path-
                         way, the taxadiene production was increased by 47-fold to 50.2 ± 4.7 µg/L compared to
                             wild-type. This result conﬁrmed that endogenous GGPPS activity is a critically important
                              rate-limiting step for taxadiene production in yeast. By increasing the ﬂux towards the
                 MVA pathway and overexpressing BTS1, we created TXD4 strain which increased the
                          production of taxadiene to 782 ± 14 µg/L, representing a 726-fold increase. This result is
                            higher than that obtained with the strain created in a previous study when TS, GGPPS, and
                    tHMGR were overexpressed [24]. Few possible differences can affect these results. First, we
                         used TS from different species (T. media vs. T. chinensis) which may have different kinetic
                               properties. Second, our study used galactose inducible promoters for TS and GGPPS while
                             the previous study used constitutive promoters for all genes, which can lead to differences
                               in gene stability and expression. Third, as mentioned before we used BTS1 as GGPPS, while
                             others used SaGGPPS, and our study showed that overexpressing BTS1 has a larger impact
                       on taxadiene production than SaGGPPS. Lastly, we overexpressed four middle enzymes
                         (ERG8, ERG12, ERG13, and tHMGR) in the MVA pathway, while they only overexpressed
                     tHMGR. Although tHMGR is a rate-limiting enzyme in the MVA pathway [28], increasing
                             the expression of three other enzymes (ERG13, ERG12, and ERG8) in the MVA pathway in
                            addition to tHMGR, can have signiﬁcant effects on terpenoid production [41].





                              Figure 4. Taxadiene titers from the constructed yeast strains (Table 1). The asterisk shows signiﬁcant
                                 differences (p-value < 0.01) on taxadiene titer of TXD6 with other strains. The alphabet ‘a, b, and
                                        c’ show no signiﬁcant differences (p-value > 0.05) between the data with same alphabet (e.g., no
                                signiﬁcant differences between TXD4 and TXD7; and no signiﬁcant differences between TXD4 and
                           TXD8). Other data without symbol or alphabet have signiﬁcant differences with other data with
                                p-values at least less than 0.05 (most of them has p-values < 0.01).


[PDF physical page 8]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         8 of 15





                              Figure 5. GC-MS analysis: (A) selected ion chromatogram and (B) their respective mass spectra of
                               taxadiene standard and hexane extract from recombinant yeast (retention time 13.1 min).


                             Table 1. Yeast strains built in this study.

                                Yeast Strain                    Description 1

                        TXD1                      pESC-URA: Tm-TS
                        TXD2                      pESC-URA: Tm-TS; pIPP
                        TXD3                      pESC-URA: Tm-TS//Sc-BTS1
                        TXD4                      pESC-URA: Tm-TS//Sc-BTS1; pIPP
                        TXD5                      pESC-URA: Opt Tm-TS//Sc-BTS1; pIPP
                        TXD6                      pESC-URA: Opt Tm-TS~MBP//Sc-BTS1; pIPP
                                                     pESC-URA: Opt Tm-TS~MBP//Sc-BTS1
                                                                      Integrated:
                        TXD7
                                                      iADH1: pPYK1-ERG13; pPDC1-tHMGR
                                                           iPDC1: pTPI1-ERG8; pFBA1-ERG12
                                                     pESC-URA: Opt Tm-TS~MBP//Sc-BTS1
                                                                      Integrated:
                        TXD8                       iADH1: pPYK1-ERG13; pPDC1-tHMGR
                                                           iPDC1: pTPI1-ERG8; pFBA1-ERG12
                                                           iPGK1: pTDH3-ERG10; pTEF1-ERG19
                                                                    All integrated:
                                                      iADH1: pPYK1-ERG13; pPDC1-tHMGR
                        TXD9                         iPDC1: pTPI1-ERG8; pFBA1-ERG12
                                                           iPGK1: pTDH3-ERG10; pTEF1-ERG19
                                                                 iTEF2: pGAL1,10-Opt Tm-TS~MBP-ScBTS1
                                            1 Abbreviation: Tm-TS, mature Taxus media taxadiene synthase; Sc-BTS1, Saccharomyces cerevisiae geranylgeranyl

                                pyrophosphate synthase; Opt Tm-TS, codon-optimized taxadiene synthase for yeast; Opt Tm-TS~MBP, opt Tm-TS
                                 tagged in C terminus with maltose-binding protein; pGAL1,10, GAL1 and GAL10 bidirectional yeast promoters;

                              pPYK1, pPDC1, pTPI1, and pFBA1, constitutive promoters that were used for pIPP (Figure 2); pTEF1 and pTDH3,
                                promoter of yeast TEF1 and TDH3 genes (constitutive); iADH1, iPDC1, iPGK1, iTEF2, previously characterized
                                     intergenic loci of ADH1, PDC1, PGK1, and TEF2.


[PDF physical page 9]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         9 of 15




                             To further increase the efﬁciency of taxadiene production in yeast, we optimized the
                            expression of taxadiene synthase (TS) by codon-optimization for yeast expression, which
                                    is a common strategy that has been used in previous studies [24,42]. Unfortunately, this
                              strategy (TXD5 strain) only increased taxadiene production by 1.4-fold (1.07 ± 0.04 mg/L)
                       compared to native TS. We suspected that TS activity could be regulated not only by
                              translation efﬁciency but also by protein stability at the post-translational level. Indeed,
                        Apel et al. reported that TS enzyme in yeast has a low solubility, which can be increased
                       by tagging a maltose-binding protein (MBP) in the C-terminus of TS [25]. Combining
                                this strategy with our previous metabolic engineering resulted in TXD6 strain, in which
                            taxadiene production increased to 2.02 ± 0.40 mg/L, nearly twice more than TXD5 (without
                     MBP) and 1900-fold when compared to TXD1 (base strain).

                                   2.4. CRISPR-Mediated Gene Integration

                              Taxadiene is the ﬁrst committed precursor of the paclitaxel biosynthesis pathway
                       and subsequent steps are predominantly catalyzed by cytochrome P450 enzymes. Since
                           plasmid-based gene expression is limited by available selection markers and the stability of
                            plasmids, generating yeast strains with stable gene integration in the genome can beneﬁt
                             the studies of downstream candidate genes. Therefore, we sought to integrate the genes of
                               interest into the yeast genome. Recently, we have identiﬁed several loci for strong gene
                           expression and high integration rates by CRISPR-Cas9 [43]. We utilized four of these
                                 loci (iADH1, iPDC1, iPGK1, and iTEF2) to integrate genes in pIPP, BTS1, and optimized
                     TS-MBP into the yeast genome (Figure 6).





                              Figure 6. Schematic diagram of the MVA pathway genes, BTS1, and TS-MBP integration into yeast
                        genome to create TXD7, TXD8, and TXD9. The label on the left indicates the intergenic loci of
                                 respective genes, e.g., iTEF2 means intergenic locus ﬂanking the TEF2 gene. The location of the loci in
                                the genome was also indicated here. To produce taxadiene, a pESC-Ura plasmid containing TS-MBP
                         and BTS1 was transformed into TXD7 and TXD8. TXD9 is capable to produce taxadiene without
                              plasmid. The promoters that were used were listed in Table 1.


[PDF physical page 10]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                        10 of 15




                                          First, we integrated the genes expressed from the pIPP plasmid into the yeast genome
                       and transformed this strain with a plasmid containing TS-MBP and BTS1, creating the
                    TXD7 strain (Figure 6).  Taxadiene production in this strain was reduced by 57% to
                              1.18 ± 0.20 mg/L compared to TXD6. This observation can be in part explained by pIPP
                          plasmid copy number in TXD6. A previous study showed that CEN6/ARS4-based plasmid
                         copy number (used in pIPP) can be varied between 2–5 copies [44]. When genes in the pIPP
                             are integrated into the genome, the total additional copy for each gene to the endogenous
                           genes is only one. Therefore, a 57% decrease in taxadiene production by TXD7 compared to
                     TXD6 might have been caused by the reduced copies of the MVA pathway genes in TXD7.
                         One investigation on the MVA pathway genes showed that ERG19 (mevalonate diphos-
                              phate decarboxylase; see Figure 1) can be overexpressed to increase isoprenoid precursors
                           while reducing sterol accumulation in yeast [45]. Another study on ERG10 (acetoacetyl-CoA
                               synthase; see Figure 1) indicated that overexpressing ERG10 plays a role in increasing the
                      ﬂux towards IPP and DMAPP in yeast [46]. Therefore, we presumed that it might be
                            necessary to overexpress all six genes in the MVA pathway, including ERG10 and ERG19,
                              to improve taxadiene production in yeast. Strain TXD8 was created by integrating these
                             additional two genes into the yeast genome (Figure 6). However, no statistical differences
                              (p-value ≥0.05) in taxadiene production between TXD8 (1.12 ± 0.18 mg/L) and TXD7 were
                            observed. This result indicates that ERG10 and ERG19 overexpression has an insigniﬁcant
                          impact on the ﬂux through the MVA pathway.
                                     Lastly, we integrated TS-MBP and BTS1 into the yeast genome of the strain TXD8,
                              resulting in the strain TXD9 (Figure 6). This strain can be grown in rich media with a high
                                   cell density to produce taxadiene. However, taxadiene production in this strain was lower
                               (0.41 ± 0.06 mg/L) than the TXD6, which indicates that plasmid copy number, and thus
                         gene expression levels of TS-MBP and BTS1 in TXD6, play an important role in enhancing
                           taxadiene production in yeast. As TS-MBP and BTS1 were expressed from the high copy
                          2 µ plasmid, their single-copy genomic integration resulted in a more severe reduction
                              in taxadiene compared to the integration of the MVA, which were expressed from a low
                        copy CEN/ARS plasmid. The highest taxadiene-producing yeast reported so far used
                        ﬁve copies of GGPPS from bacteria (Escherichia vulneris) and three copies of TS fused with
                               different tags, which resulted in 57 mg/L taxadiene titers [26]. This strategy showed that
                             the main bottleneck for taxadiene production in yeast is the activity of TS and GGPPS. As
                    we integrated a single copy of TS and BTS in this work, we expect the titer of taxadiene can
                          be further increased in our strain as we optimize the proper levels of gene expressions.
                             To examine the stability of transgenes in TXD9 genome, we genotyped the TXD9 strain
                                 after successive subcultures. Four independent colonies of TXD9 were grown in YP media
                         with galactose. Then, 5% of the culture was taken and moved to fresh media every day
                              for four days. The doubling time of BY4742 in minimal media with galactose is around
                          2 h [47], and thus at least 48 generations of yeast were reached in four days. After four
                            days, genomic DNA from the four colonies were genotyped, which demonstrated that all
                            the integrated genes are still present in the genome (Figure S2A). The production titers of
                            taxadiene in the colonies were also measured on the ﬁrst and last (4th) day, and their titers
                        were compared (Figure S2B). The results showed that there are no signiﬁcant differences
                              (p-value > 0.05) in the titers between the culture from the fourth day and that from the ﬁrst
                             day, indicating that gene expressions are stable after 48 generations.
                         Our study shows a promising use of BTS1 overexpression in the yeast system for
                           taxadiene production. The TXD9 strain also provides a stable and invaluable host to
                             further investigate the downstream pathway of the paclitaxel biosynthesis. The TXD9
                               strain taxadiene titer can be enhanced further by providing more copy numbers in the
                      genome and optimizing the stability of TS and BTS1.


[PDF physical page 11]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                        11 of 15




                                   3. Materials and Methods
                                   3.1. Yeast and Bacterial Strains
                                Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain BY4742 (MATα; his3∆1; leu2∆0; lys2∆0; ura3∆0) was
                         used for transforming all taxadiene-related plasmids. Escherichia coli strains TOP10 were
                          purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA) and used for cloning procedures.

                                   3.2. Plasmid and Synthetic DNA Construction

                           The pIPP plasmid was constructed using the DNA assembler method [32]. The dif-
                              ferent DNA parts were ampliﬁed by PCR using Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase
                        (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA), resolved by gel electrophoresis, and in-
                            dividually puriﬁed using Qiagen Gel Puriﬁcation kit (Valencia, CA, USA). DNA parts
                             (promoter, gene, terminator) with overlapping homologous sequences were pooled with a
                              linearized plasmid and transformed into the appropriate auxotrophic yeast strain using the
                            Gietz method [47]. Assembled plasmids were selected by growth on minimal medium and
                            the resulting plasmids were recovered from yeast and transformed into E. coli for mainte-
                           nance. Sanger sequencing conﬁrmed the correct assembly of each construct. Promoters
                       and terminators required for assembly were ampliﬁed from S. cerevisiae CEN.PK genomic
                    DNA. Yeast mevalonate pathway genes ERG8, ERG12, ERG13, and a truncated HMGR
                       (tHMGR) were also ampliﬁed from S. cerevisiae CEN.PK genomic DNA and assembled into
                          a centromeric plasmid derived from pGREG505 [48].
                          TS and GGPPS expression plasmid were based on the pESC-URA plasmid (Agilent
                              Technologies). TS and its modiﬁcations were cloned into MCS1 using the Gibson assembly
                       method between NotI and SpeI sites (New England BioLabs, Ipswich, MA, USA). Mean-
                            while, all GGPPS were cloned into MCS2 using the Gibson assembly method between
                       XmaI and SalI sites. Tags (FLAG and c-Myc, respectively) in both MCS were retained
                               for detecting the gene expression. Synthetic genes were codon-optimized for S. cerevisiae
                           expression by GeneArt (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA). The linker and
                  MBP sequences from Apel et al. were used for tagging TS with MBP [25].

                                   3.3. RNA Isolation, cDNA Synthesis, and qPCR Analysis

                                 Yeast cells were lysed with 1 mL of Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Total
                 RNA was extracted based on the manufacturer’s protocol. First-strand synthesis of cDNA
                      was performed using 1 µg of extracted total RNA as templated mixed with the M-MulV
                            reverse transcriptase (New England BioLabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) and anchored oligo
                          dT22 (IDT, Coralville, IA, USA). The synthesis of cDNA was performed according to the
                           manufacturer’s protocol.
                              For qPCR analysis, the reaction mixture was as follows: 5 µL Power SYBR Green
                         Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA), 0.6 µL each of forward and
                            reverse primers (3.35 pmol/µL), 1 µL cDNA template (250 ng/µL), and 2.8 µL of sterile
                       H2O. ROX was used as a passive reference dye in our qPCR. qPCR was then performed
                          using a StepOne Real-Time PCR machine (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).
                         Thermocycling parameters used for qPCR were 95 ◦C for 10 min, 95 ◦C for 15 s, and a
                         combined extension and annealing step of 60 ◦C for 1 min with a total of 40 cycles. Relative
                               transcript abundance was calculated using the efﬁciency corrected 2−∆∆CT method based
                       on actin as the reference gene.

                                   3.4. Yeast Expression and Cultivation

                                 Yeast was transformed using the Gietz method [49] with selection on synthetic com-
                              plete (SC) medium (6.7 g/L yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 1.4 g/L appropriate
                              synthetic drop-out mix for SC-URA, and SC-URA-LEU, and 20 g/L glucose). For taxadiene
                            production, yeast colonies were cultivated overnight in an appropriate liquid medium at
                           30 ◦C, 200 rpm. Then, 0.6 mL of overnight culture were transferred into 30 mL medium (SC
                      medium same as above except with 0.2 g/L glucose, 1.8 g/L galactose, and 10 mM HEPES),
                        and were grown at 30◦C, 200 rpm for 3 days. For TXD9, the colonies were grown in YPDA


[PDF physical page 12]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                        12 of 15




                     medium (10 g/L yeast extract, 20 g/L peptone, 40 mg/L adenine hemisulfate, 20 g/L
                              dextrose, 0.2 g/L glucose, 1.8 g/L galactose, and 10 mM HEPES) at the same conditions as
                            the other strains.

                                   3.5. Immunoblot

                                  Yeast cells from 30 mL three-days grown culture were harvested. Yeast crude proteins
                        were extracted using glass beads in lysis buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl,
                          1 mM PMSF, protease inhibitor cocktail Complete Mini tablets (Roche Applied Science,
                        Mannheim, Germany), and 3 µg/mL pepstatin]. Total extract was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm
                                at 4 ◦C and the supernatant was collected. The concentration of total soluble protein was
                              tested using the Bradford assay. The total soluble protein was used to run 12% SDS-PAGE
                           followed by transfer to nitrocellulose membrane (Hybond ECL, GE Healthcare, Chicago,
                                 IL, USA) using a Tris-glycine-methanol buffer system (25 mM Tris-base, 192 mM glycine,
                      20% methanol). The membrane was blocked with 5% skim milk in TBST (50 mM Tris-base
                  pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.05% Tween 20) for one hour at room temperature before it
                      was incubated overnight at 4 ◦C with appropriate (monoclonal anti-cMyc and anti-PGK1)
                          primary antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA), which was diluted at 1:2000
                         with 5% skim milk in TBST. Subsequently, the membrane was incubated for one hour at
                      room temperature with HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG secondary antibody (Santa Cruz
                             Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA), which was diluted at 1:10,000 with 5% skim milk in TBST.
                        The membrane was washed with TBST three times before it was visualized with Amersham
                         Imager 600 (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA).

                                   3.6. Yeast Metabolites Extraction and Analysis

                                  Yeast grown in an appropriate liquid medium for three days was harvested by centrifu-
                             gation at 3000 rpm for 5 min. Five milliliters of hexane were used to extract the metabolites
                        from the yeast cells. One milliliter of the extract was obtained and analyzed using the
                     GC-MS system with an Agilent 6890N gas chromatograph and an Agilent 5975B mass spec-
                              trometer. One microliter of the extract was injected into a DB-5MS column (30 m × 0.25 µm
                            inner diameter × 0.25 µm ﬁlm thickness) using helium as the gas carrier. Metabolites
                             separation was programmed with an injector temperature of 280 ◦C and initial temperature
                               at 100 ◦C, followed by increasing temperature to 300 ◦C at 10 ◦C/min and 20 ◦C/min to
                           320 ◦C, and the ﬁnal temperature was held for 2 min. Mass detection was programmed as
                            previously described by Engels [24]. Taxadiene standard was kindly provided by Dr. Phil
                         Baran from the Scripps Research Institute.

                                   3.7. Genes Integration

                                 Characterized intergenic sites and the CRISPR-Cas9 platform were chosen as described
                           previously [42]. The genes of interest were ampliﬁed and cloned into the donor DNA
                            plasmid. Four characterized intergenic sites (iADH1, iPDC1, iTEF2, and iPGK1) were used
                            as genome integration targets. The appropriate plasmid (with URA3 marker) containing
                        Cas9 genes and guide RNA (gRNA) that was speciﬁc to those sites was transformed
                            concurrently with 1-µg linear donor DNA into yeast cells. The successful integration was
                       conﬁrmed with PCR from genomic DNA and the Cas9-containing plasmid was removed
                           using 5-FOA counter-selection. The appropriate medium was used to measure taxadiene
                           production from the genome-edited yeast strain.

                                   4. Conclusions

                                 In this study, we screened various GGPPS to enhance the production of taxadiene in
                               yeast, including GGPPS from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Our results showed that overex-
                             pression of endogenous yeast GGPPS (BTS1) showed the highest impact on the production
                              of taxadiene in yeast. The production of taxadiene was also optimized by boosting the ﬂux
                         towards the MVA pathway and by enhancing the stability and solubility of TS through
                   MBP fusion, which resulted in up to 2.05 mg/L taxadiene. Finally, we constructed plasmid-


[PDF physical page 13]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                        13 of 15




                               free taxadiene-producing yeast strains by integrating the required taxadiene-producing
                          genes in the yeast genome. Further optimizations, such as increasing copy numbers of TS
                       and BTS1, fusing the GGPPS and FPPS [26,50], and reducing the ﬂux towards squalene
                               (ergosterol pathway) to increase the FPP pool [24] could be further carried out to enhance
                            taxadiene production. The strain developed here can be used as a platform to elucidate the
                        downstream genes in the paclitaxel biosynthesis pathway.


                           Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/2218-198
                             9/11/3/147/s1, Figure S1: immunoblot data, Table S1: primers list.

                           Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.C.U., P.B. and D.-K.R.; methodology, J.C.U., F.C.C., P.B.,
                                    V.J.J.M. and D.-K.R.; validation, J.C.U. and D.-K.R.; formal analysis, J.C.U. and P.B.; investigation,
                                    J.C.U.; resources, D.-K.R.; writing—original draft preparation, J.C.U. and D.-K.R.; writing—review
                          and editing, J.C.U. and D.-K.R.; visualization, J.C.U. and D.-K.R.; supervision, D.-K.R.; project admin-
                                     istration, D.-K.R.; funding acquisition, D.-K.R. All authors have read and agreed to the published
                               version of the manuscript.

                            Funding: This research was funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
                          Canada (NSERC), Genome Canada, Genome Quebec, and Genome Alberta to D.-K.R. and V.J.J.M.,
                                 F.C.C. received funding from CAPES (programa Pós-doutorado no Exterior-99999.005831/2015-06).

                                 Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

                           Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

                           Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available in article and supple-
                            mentary material.

                          Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Phil Baran (Scripps Institute, San Diego, CA, USA) for
                              providing the authentic taxadiene standard.

                             Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.    Bray, F.; Ferlay, J.; Soerjomataram, I.; Siegel, R.L.; Torre, L.A.; Jemal, A. Global cancer statistics 2018: GLOBOCAN estimates of
     incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA Cancer J. Clin. 2018, 68, 394–424. [CrossRef]
2.   Khanna, C.; Rosenberg, M.; Vail, D.M. A Review of Paclitaxel and Novel Formulations Including Those Suitable for Use in Dogs.
        J. Vet. Intern. Med. 2015, 29, 1006–1012. [CrossRef]
3.   Weaver, B.A. How Taxol/paclitaxel kills cancer cells. Mol. Biol. Cell 2014, 25, 2677–2681. [CrossRef]
4.   Bernabeu, E.; Cagel, M.; Lagomarsino, E.; Moretton, M.; Chiappetta, D.A. Paclitaxel: What has been done and the challenges
     remain ahead. Int. J. Pharm. 2017, 526, 474–495. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.   Kampan, N.C.; Madondo, M.T.; McNally, O.M.; Quinn, M.; Plebanski, M. Paclitaxel and Its Evolving Role in the Management of
     Ovarian Cancer. Biomed. Res. Int. 2015, 2015, 413076. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.    Li, Y.; Zhang, G.; Pfeifer, B.A. Current and Emerging Options for Taxol Production. In Biotechnology of Isoprenoids; Schrader, J.,
    Bohlmann, J., Eds.; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2015; pp. 405–425.
7.   Yuzuru, K.; Hugh, N.; Shigenobu, U.; Ravi Kumar, P.; Venkata Ramana Murthy, A.; Gopi Krishna, G.; Bheema Rao, P.; Phil, B.
    Two-Phase Synthesis of Taxol. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2020, 142, 10526–10533.
8.   Wilson, S.A.; Roberts, S.C. Recent advances towards development and commercialization of plant cell culture processes for
     synthesis of biomolecules. Plant. Biotechnol. J. 2012, 10, 249–268. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.   Cusido, R.M.; Onrubia, M.; Sabater-Jara, A.B.; Moyano, E.; Bonﬁll, M.; Goossens, A.; Angeles Pedreno, M.; Palazon, J. A rational
     approach to improving the biotechnological production of taxanes in plant cell cultures of Taxus spp. Biotechnol. Adv. 2014, 32,
     1157–1167. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.  Schwab, C.L.; English, D.P.; Roque, D.M.; Santin, A.D. Taxanes: Their Impact on Gynecologic Malignancy. Anticancer Drugs 2014,
      25, 522–535. [CrossRef]
11.  Jennewein, S.; Wildung, M.R.; Chau, M.; Walker, K.; Croteau, R. Random sequencing of an induced Taxus cell cDNA library for
     identiﬁcation of clones involved in Taxol biosynthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2004, 101, 9149–9154. [CrossRef]
12.  Wildung, M.R.; Croteau, R. A cDNA clone for taxadiene synthase, the diterpene cyclase that catalyzes the committed step of taxol
     biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 1996, 271, 9201–9204. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.  Jennewein, S.; Croteau, R. Taxol: Biosynthesis, molecular genetics, and biotechnological applications. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
     2001, 57, 13–19. [PubMed]
14.  Chau, M.; Croteau, R. Molecular cloning and characterization of a cytochrome P450 taxoid 2alpha-hydroxylase involved in Taxol
     biosynthesis. Arch. BioChem. Biophys. 2004, 427, 48–57. [CrossRef] [PubMed]


[PDF physical page 14]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                        14 of 15




15.  Chau, M.; Jennewein, S.; Walker, K.; Croteau, R. Taxol biosynthesis: Molecular cloning and characterization of a cytochrome P450
     taxoid 7 beta-hydroxylase. Chem. Biol. 2004, 11, 663–672. [PubMed]
16.  Jennewein, S.; Rithner, C.D.; Williams, R.M.; Croteau, R.B. Taxol biosynthesis: Taxane 13 alpha-hydroxylase is a cytochrome
     P450-dependent monooxygenase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2001, 98, 13595–13600. [CrossRef]
17.  Hefner, J.; Rubenstein, S.M.; Ketchum, R.E.; Gibson, D.M.; Williams, R.M.; Croteau, R. Cytochrome P450-catalyzed hydroxylation
     of taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene to taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5alpha-ol: The ﬁrst oxygenation step in taxol biosynthesis. Chem. Biol. 1996, 3,
     479–489. [CrossRef]
18.  Rontein, D.; Onillon, S.; Herbette, G.; Lesot, A.; Werck-Reichhart, D.; Sallaud, C.; Tissier, A. CYP725A4 from yew catalyzes
    complex structural rearrangement of taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene into the cyclic ether 5(12)-oxa-3(11)-cyclotaxane. J. Biol. Chem. 2008,
     283, 6067–6075. [CrossRef]
19.  Edgar, S.; Zhou, K.; Qiao, K.; King, J.R.; Simpson, J.H.; Stephanopoulos, G. Mechanistic Insights into Taxadiene Epoxidation by
     Taxadiene-5alpha-Hydroxylase. ACS Chem. Biol. 2016, 11, 460–469. [CrossRef]
20.  Huang, Q.; Roessner, C.A.; Croteau, R.; Scott, A.I. Engineering Escherichia coli for the synthesis of taxadiene, a key intermediate
     in the biosynthesis of taxol. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 2001, 9, 2237–2242. [CrossRef]
21.  Ajikumar, P.K.; Xiao, W.H.; Tyo, K.E.; Wang, Y.; Simeon, F.; Leonard, E.; Mucha, O.; Phon, T.H.; Pfeifer, B.; Stephanopoulos, G.
     Isoprenoid pathway optimization for Taxol precursor overproduction in Escherichia coli. Science 2010, 330, 70–74. [CrossRef]
22.   Biggs, B.W.; Lim, C.G.; Sagliani, K.; Shankar, S.; Stephanopoulos, G.; De Mey, M.; Ajikumar, P.K. Overcoming heterologous
     protein interdependency to optimize P450-mediated Taxol precursor synthesis in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016,
     113, 3209–3214. [CrossRef]
23.  Dejong, J.M.; Liu, Y.; Bollon, A.P.; Long, R.M.; Jennewein, S.; Williams, D.; Croteau, R.B. Genetic engineering of taxol biosynthetic
     genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2006, 93, 212–224. [CrossRef]
24.  Engels, B.; Dahm, P.; Jennewein, S. Metabolic engineering of taxadiene biosynthesis in yeast as a ﬁrst step towards Taxol
      (Paclitaxel) production. Metab. Eng. 2008, 10, 201–206. [CrossRef]
25.  Apel, A.R.; d’Espaux, L.; Wehrs, M.; Sachs, D.; Li, R.A.; Tong, G.J.; Garber, M.; Nnadi, O.; Zhuang, W.; Hillson, N.J.; et al. A
     Cas9-based toolkit to program gene expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017, 45, 496–508.
26.  Nowrouzi, B.; Li, R.A.; Walls, L.E.; d’Espaux, L.; Malci, K.; Liang, L.; Jonguitud-Borrego, N.; Lerma-Escalera, A.I.; Morones-
     Ramirez, J.R.; Keasling, J.D.; et al. Enhanced production of taxadiene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microb. Cell Fact. 2020, 19, 200.
     [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.   Jiang, Y.; Proteau, P.; Poulter, D.; Ferro-Novick, S. BTS1 Encodes a Geranylgeranyl Diphosphate Synthase in Saccharomyces
      cerevisiae. J. Biol. Chem. 1995, 270, 21793–21799. [CrossRef]
28.  Ro, D.K.; Paradise, E.M.; Ouellet, M.; Fisher, K.J.; Newman, K.L.; Ndungu, J.M.; Ho, K.A.; Eachus, R.A.; Ham, T.S.; Kirby, J.;
      et al. Production of the antimalarial drug precursor artemisinic acid in engineered yeast. Nature 2006, 440, 940–943. [CrossRef]
    [PubMed]
29.  Donald, K.A.; Hampton, R.Y.; Fritz, I.B. Effects of overproduction of the catalytic domain of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme
   A reductase on squalene synthesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1997, 63, 3341–3344. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.  Moreno-Sánchez, R.; Saavedra, E.; Rodríguez-Enríquez, S.; Olín-Sandoval, V. Metabolic Control Analysis: A Tool for Designing
      Strategies to Manipulate Metabolic Pathways. J. Biomed. Biotechnol. 2008, 2008, 597913. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.  Tanner, L.B.; Goglia, A.G.; Wei, M.H.; Sehgal, T.; Parsons, L.R.; Park, J.O.; White, E.; Toettcher, J.E.; Rabinowitz, J.D. Four Key
     Steps Control Glycolytic Flux in Mammalian Cells. Cell Syst. 2018, 7, 49–62.e48. [CrossRef]
32.  Shao, Z.; Zhao, H. DNA assembler, an in vivo genetic method for rapid construction of biochemical pathways. Nucleic Acids Res.
     2009, 37, e16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.  Hefner, J.; Ketchum, R.E.; Croteau, R. Cloning and functional expression of a cDNA encoding geranylgeranyl diphosphate
     synthase from Taxus canadensis and assessment of the role of this prenyltransferase in cells induced for taxol production. Arch.
     BioChem. Biophys. 1998, 360, 62–74. [CrossRef]
34.   Ignea, C.; Trikka, F.A.; Nikolaidis, A.K.; Georgantea, P.; Ioannou, E.; Loupassaki, S.; Kefalas, P.; Kanellis, A.K.; Roussis, V.;
     Makris, A.M.; et al. Efﬁcient diterpene production in yeast by engineering Erg20p into a geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase.
     Metab. Eng. 2015, 27, 65–75. [CrossRef]
35.   Pelot, K.A.; Mitchell, R.; Kwon, M.; Hagelthorn, D.M.; Wardman, J.F.; Chiang, A.; Bohlmann, J.; Ro, D.K.; Zerbe, P. Biosynthesis of
     the psychotropic plant diterpene salvinorin A: Discovery and characterization of the Salvia divinorum clerodienyl diphosphate
     synthase. Plant. J. 2017, 89, 885–897. [CrossRef]
36.  Ohnuma, S.; Suzuki, M.; Nishino, T. Archaebacterial ether-linked lipid biosynthetic gene. Expression cloning, sequencing, and
     characterization of geranylgeranyl-diphosphate synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 1994, 269, 14792–14797. [CrossRef]
37.  Dogbo, O.; Camara, B. Puriﬁcation of isopentenyl pyrophosphate isomerase and geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase from
    Capsicum chromoplasts by afﬁnity chromatography. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Lipids Lipid Metab. 1987, 920, 140–148. [CrossRef]
38.  Lohr, M.; Im, C.S.; Grossman, A.R. Genome-based examination of chlorophyll and carotenoid biosynthesis in Chlamydomonas
      reinhardtii. Plant. Physiol. 2005, 138, 490–515. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.  Kuntz, M.; Romer, S.; Suire, C.; Hugueney, P.; Weil, J.H.; Schantz, R.; Camara, B. Identiﬁcation of a cDNA for the plastid-located
     geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase from Capsicum annuum: Correlative increase in enzyme activity and transcript level
     during fruit ripening. Plant. J. 1992, 2, 25–34.


[PDF physical page 15]
Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                        15 of 15




40.   Grabi´nska, K.; Palamarczyk, G. Dolichol biosynthesis in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae: An insight into the regulatory role of
     farnesyl diphosphate synthase. FEMS Yeast Res. 2002, 2, 259–265.
41.  Yuan, J.; Ching, C.B. Combinatorial engineering of mevalonate pathway for improved amorpha-4,11-diene production in budding
      yeast. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2014, 111, 608–617. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.   Siddiqui, M.S.; Thodey, K.; Trenchard, I.; Smolke, C.D. Advancing secondary metabolite biosynthesis in yeast with synthetic
     biology tools. FEMS Yeast Res. 2012, 12, 144–170. [CrossRef]
43.  Baek, S.; Utomo, J.; Lee, J.Y.; Dalal, K.; Yoon, Y.J.; Ro, D.K. The yeast platform engineered for synthetic gRNA-landing pads
     enables multiple gene integrations by a single gRNA/Cas9 system. Metab. Eng. 2021, 64, 111–121. [CrossRef]
44.  Karim, A.S.; Curran, K.A.; Alper, H.S. Characterization of plasmid burden and copy number in Saccharomyces cerevisiae for
     optimization of metabolic engineering applications. FEMS Yeast Res. 2013, 13, 107–116. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.  Berges, T.; Guyonnet, D.; Karst, F. The Saccharomyces cerevisiae mevalonate diphosphate decarboxylase is essential for viability,
    and a single Leu-to-Pro mutation in a conserved sequence leads to thermosensitivity. J. Bacteriol. 1997, 179, 4664–4670. [CrossRef]
46.  Dimster-Denk, D.; Rine, J. Transcriptional regulation of a sterol-biosynthetic enzyme by sterol levels in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
     Mol. Cell Biol. 1996, 16, 3981–3989. [CrossRef]
47.  Paulo, J.A.; O’Connell, J.D.; Gaun, A.; Gygi, S.P. Proteome-wide quantitative multiplexed proﬁling of protein expression:
     Carbon-source dependency in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol. Biol. Cell 2015, 26, 4063–4074. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.   Jansen, G.; Wu, C.; Schade, B.; Thomas, D.Y.; Whiteway, M. Drag & Drop cloning in yeast. Gene 2005, 344, 43–51. [PubMed]
49.   Gietz, R.D.; Schiestl, R.H. High-efﬁciency yeast transformation using the LiAc/SS carrier DNA/PEG method. Nat. Protoc. 2007, 2,
     31–34. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.  Dong, H.; Chen, S.; Zhu, J.; Gao, K.; Zha, W.; Lin, P.; Zi, J. Enhance production of diterpenoids in yeast by overexpression of the
     fused enzyme of ERG20 and its mutant mERG20. J. Biotechnol. 2020, 307, 29–34. [CrossRef]