Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         4 of 15





                              Figure 2. (A) A schematic diagram of the in vivo construction of pIPP plasmid encoding four middle
                              genes in the MVA pathway. Abbreviations: p: promoter; t: terminator; PDC: pyruvate decarboxylase;
                      ADH: alcohol dehydrogenase; PYK: pyruvate kinase; PGI: phosphoglucose isomerase; TPI: triose
                             phosphate isomerise; FBA: fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase; CYC: cytochrome c; tHMGR: truncated
                             3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase. (B) The transcript abundance of the four genes were
                          measured in both non-transgenic yeast (control) and transgenic yeast by quantitative PCR. Fold
                                 increases in each transcript in transgenic yeast, relative to those from control yeast, were calculated
                                     after the transcript levels from the control yeast were set to one. In all transcripts, differences of gene
                               expression in transgenic and control yeasts were statistically signiﬁcant (p-value < 0.01).

                                   2.2. Various GGPPS Overexpression

                                 Yeast produces only a small amount of GGPP, which is endogenously used for pro-
                               tein prenylations, while no secondary diterpene metabolites are produced in yeast [27].
                             Therefore, overexpression of a GGPPS is essential to enhance GGPP (C20) production.
                             Generally, there are two types of substrate speciﬁcity in different GGPPSs. Some GGPPSs
                        have a higher afﬁnity towards one FPP (C15) and one IPP (C5) utilization to synthesize
                       GGPP, whereas others have a higher afﬁnity towards one DMAPP (C5) and three IPPs (C5)