Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         6 of 15




                          a higher level of taxadiene production by almost 80% compared to the preprotein version
                         (CrGGPPS). This result strongly suggested that C. reinhardtii GGPPS has a transit peptide
                              that enables plastid-targeting, similar to other GGPPS in terrestrial plants [38], but its
                            preprotein version still retains GGPPS activity. It is interesting to note that overexpression
                              of the preprotein version of CrGGPPS resulted in a similar level of taxadiene production
                          with both SaGGPPS and mERG20 in yeast.





                              Figure 3. Taxadiene production titer using S. cerevisiae transformed with Tm-TS and pIPP with
                               overexpression of different geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthases (GGPPSs) from various species.
                          The asterisks indicate no signiﬁcant differences between the data (p value > 0.05). The bars without
                                  asterisk have signiﬁcant different between them (p value < 0.01). Abbreviations: WT, Saccharomyces
                                     cerevisiae strain BY4742 without overexpression of GGPPS; BTS1, Saccharomyces cerevisiae GGPPS;
                                  Cr, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii GGPPS; Cr-tr, truncated Cr; Ca, Capsicum annuum GGPPS; mERG20,
                           mutant of yeast FPPS; Sa, Sulfolobus acidocaldarius GGPPS.

                           The second highest taxadiene production was achieved when CaGGPPS was over-
                          expressed (Figure 3). CaGGPPS is one of the ﬁrst plant GGPPS that was puriﬁed and
                           identiﬁed while investigating carotenoid biosynthesis [37,39].  It is localized in pepper
                               plastids and has a transit peptide [39]. We synthesized and overexpressed the mature form
                               of CaGGPPS. The difference between CaGGPPS and BTS1 impacts on taxadiene production
                    may be explained by the differences in substrate speciﬁcity of these two enzymes. While
                      CaGGPPS is more promiscuous with a slight preference towards DMAPP [37], BTS1 strictly
                              prefers FPP as the substrate [27]. Due to the strong activity exerted by yeast FPPS (ERG20),
                       more FPP is available in yeast than DMAPP [40]. Hence, the BTS1 can readily use FPP,
                          while DMAPP availability could be limited for CaGGPPS and other GGPPS that prefer
                  DMAPP as a priming molecule. As different GGPPSs have different substrate preference,
                       BTS1 might show the highest activity in yeast due to availability of the priming substrate
                              (FPP), rather than its superior catalytic activity over other GGPPSs which use DMAPP and
                          IPP as substrates. We presume that true activities of other GGPPSs need to be re-evaluated
                              in the yeast engineered to produce abundant DMAPP to draw a fair conclusion regarding
                               their catalytic activities. Nonetheless, our results here demonstrated that native BTS1
                          performs best with respect to in vivo production of taxadiene in yeast.