   H


        OH    OH  metabolites



Article
Developing a Yeast Platform Strain for an Enhanced Taxadiene
Biosynthesis by CRISPR/Cas9

Joseph C. Utomo 1    , Fabio C. Chaves 2    , Philippe Bauchart 3,†    , Vincent J. J. Martin 3 and Dae-Kyun Ro 1,*


                                            1  Department of Biological Science, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N1N4, Canada;
                                     joseph.utomo1@ucalgary.ca
                                            2  Programa de Pós-graduação em Ciência e Tecnologia de Alimentos, Departamento de Ciência e Tecnologia
                                        Agroindustrial, Faculdade de Agronomia Eliseu Maciel, Universidade Federal de Pelotas, Caixa Postal 354,
                                        Pelotas CEP 96010-900, Brazil; fabio.chaves@ufpel.edu.br
                                            3  Department of Biology, Centre for Applied Synthetic Biology, Concordia University,
                                      Montréal, QC H4B1R6, Canada; pbauchart@lallemand.com (P.B.); vincent.martin@concordia.ca (V.J.J.M.)
                                     *   Correspondence: daekyun.ro@ucalgary.ca
                                 †  Current address: Lallemand Specialty Cultures, 77260 La Ferté-sous-Jouarre, France.


                                Abstract: Paclitaxel is an important diterpenoid commonly used as an anticancer drug. Although the
                                  paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway has been mostly revealed, some steps remain to be elucidated. The
                                   difﬁculties in plant transformations and the scarcity of the precursor of paclitaxel, (+)-taxa-4(5), 11(12)-
                               diene (taxadiene), have hindered the full comprehension of paclitaxel biochemistry and, therefore, its
                              production by biotechnological approaches. One solution is to use the budding yeast, Saccharomyces
                                       cerevisiae, as a platform to elucidate the paclitaxel biosynthesis. As taxadiene is a diterpenoid, its
                      common precursor, geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP), needs to be increased in yeast. In this
                                 study, we screened various GGPP synthases (GGPPS) to ﬁnd the most suitable GGPPS for taxadiene
                              production in yeast. We also optimized the taxadiene production by increasing the ﬂux toward theCitation: Utomo, J.C.; Chaves, F.C.;
Bauchart, P.; Martin, V.J.J.; Ro, D.-K.     terpenoid pathway. Finally, to remove selection markers, we integrated the required genes using
Developing a Yeast Platform Strain     a CRISPR/Cas9 system in the yeast genome. Our result showed that a titer of 2.02 ± 0.40 mg/L
for an Enhanced Taxadiene           (plasmid) and 0.41 ± 0.06 mg/L (integrated) can be achieved using these strategies. This platform
Biosynthesis by CRISPR/Cas9.          strain can be used to readily test the gene candidates for microbial paclitaxel biosynthesis in the future.

Metabolites 2021, 11, 147. https://

doi.org/10.3390/metabo11030147      Keywords: paclitaxel; taxadiene; S. cerevisiae; metabolic engineering; diterpenoids


Academic Editors: Edward Baidoo,

Aymerick Eudes and Bashar Amer

                                   1. Introduction
Received: 15 January 2021
                               Global cancer cases are increasing with an estimation of more than 18 million cases
Accepted: 1 March 2021
                       and almost 10 million deaths in 2018 [1]. The ever-increasing cases of cancer necessitate aPublished: 3 March 2021
                                 reliable and inexpensive supply of anticancer drugs. One of the most prescribed anticancer
                          drugs is paclitaxel or commonly known as its commercial brand, Taxol. It acts by stabilizingPublisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in   tubulin and inducing cytokines that cause mitosis prevention and cell growth inhibition in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-   cancer cells [2–4]. Due to its selective and potent mechanism of action, paclitaxel-based
iations.                     drugs have been used in chemotherapy to treat various cancers, including breast, lung,
                             ovarian, and sarcoma [2,5]. This potent compound is naturally produced in the bark of
                            the Paciﬁc yew tree in minute quantities [3]. Commercially, there are two approaches to
                            achieve the supply of paclitaxel, chemical (semi-) synthesis [6,7] and plant cell cultivation,
                               of which the latter is more popular due to the economic viability of cell culture [8]. Despite
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
                             these commercial advances, the tools to improve paclitaxel bio-production are limited. TheLicensee MDPI,  Basel,  Switzerland.
This article is an open access article   major hurdles limiting the improvement of paclitaxel yield are the unreliability of Taxus
distributed  under  the  terms  and   spp. transformation [9] and incomplete understandings of paclitaxel biosynthesis at the
conditions of the Creative Commons   molecular level. These limitations hamper the cost-effective supply of paclitaxel through a
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://   biotechnological means [10].
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          Paclitaxel is classiﬁed as a diterpene, 20-carbon molecule derived from acetyl-CoA via
4.0/).                         the terpenoid pathway (Figure 1). As all diterpenoids, paclitaxel is synthesized from the uni-





Metabolites 2021, 11, 147. https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo11030147                              https://www.mdpi.com/journal/metabolites