Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                        10 of 15




                                          First, we integrated the genes expressed from the pIPP plasmid into the yeast genome
                       and transformed this strain with a plasmid containing TS-MBP and BTS1, creating the
                    TXD7 strain (Figure 6).  Taxadiene production in this strain was reduced by 57% to
                              1.18 ± 0.20 mg/L compared to TXD6. This observation can be in part explained by pIPP
                          plasmid copy number in TXD6. A previous study showed that CEN6/ARS4-based plasmid
                         copy number (used in pIPP) can be varied between 2–5 copies [44]. When genes in the pIPP
                             are integrated into the genome, the total additional copy for each gene to the endogenous
                           genes is only one. Therefore, a 57% decrease in taxadiene production by TXD7 compared to
                     TXD6 might have been caused by the reduced copies of the MVA pathway genes in TXD7.
                         One investigation on the MVA pathway genes showed that ERG19 (mevalonate diphos-
                              phate decarboxylase; see Figure 1) can be overexpressed to increase isoprenoid precursors
                           while reducing sterol accumulation in yeast [45]. Another study on ERG10 (acetoacetyl-CoA
                               synthase; see Figure 1) indicated that overexpressing ERG10 plays a role in increasing the
                      ﬂux towards IPP and DMAPP in yeast [46]. Therefore, we presumed that it might be
                            necessary to overexpress all six genes in the MVA pathway, including ERG10 and ERG19,
                              to improve taxadiene production in yeast. Strain TXD8 was created by integrating these
                             additional two genes into the yeast genome (Figure 6). However, no statistical differences
                              (p-value ≥0.05) in taxadiene production between TXD8 (1.12 ± 0.18 mg/L) and TXD7 were
                            observed. This result indicates that ERG10 and ERG19 overexpression has an insigniﬁcant
                          impact on the ﬂux through the MVA pathway.
                                     Lastly, we integrated TS-MBP and BTS1 into the yeast genome of the strain TXD8,
                              resulting in the strain TXD9 (Figure 6). This strain can be grown in rich media with a high
                                   cell density to produce taxadiene. However, taxadiene production in this strain was lower
                               (0.41 ± 0.06 mg/L) than the TXD6, which indicates that plasmid copy number, and thus
                         gene expression levels of TS-MBP and BTS1 in TXD6, play an important role in enhancing
                           taxadiene production in yeast. As TS-MBP and BTS1 were expressed from the high copy
                          2 µ plasmid, their single-copy genomic integration resulted in a more severe reduction
                              in taxadiene compared to the integration of the MVA, which were expressed from a low
                        copy CEN/ARS plasmid. The highest taxadiene-producing yeast reported so far used
                        ﬁve copies of GGPPS from bacteria (Escherichia vulneris) and three copies of TS fused with
                               different tags, which resulted in 57 mg/L taxadiene titers [26]. This strategy showed that
                             the main bottleneck for taxadiene production in yeast is the activity of TS and GGPPS. As
                    we integrated a single copy of TS and BTS in this work, we expect the titer of taxadiene can
                          be further increased in our strain as we optimize the proper levels of gene expressions.
                             To examine the stability of transgenes in TXD9 genome, we genotyped the TXD9 strain
                                 after successive subcultures. Four independent colonies of TXD9 were grown in YP media
                         with galactose. Then, 5% of the culture was taken and moved to fresh media every day
                              for four days. The doubling time of BY4742 in minimal media with galactose is around
                          2 h [47], and thus at least 48 generations of yeast were reached in four days. After four
                            days, genomic DNA from the four colonies were genotyped, which demonstrated that all
                            the integrated genes are still present in the genome (Figure S2A). The production titers of
                            taxadiene in the colonies were also measured on the ﬁrst and last (4th) day, and their titers
                        were compared (Figure S2B). The results showed that there are no signiﬁcant differences
                              (p-value > 0.05) in the titers between the culture from the fourth day and that from the ﬁrst
                             day, indicating that gene expressions are stable after 48 generations.
                         Our study shows a promising use of BTS1 overexpression in the yeast system for
                           taxadiene production. The TXD9 strain also provides a stable and invaluable host to
                             further investigate the downstream pathway of the paclitaxel biosynthesis. The TXD9
                               strain taxadiene titer can be enhanced further by providing more copy numbers in the
                      genome and optimizing the stability of TS and BTS1.