Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         7 of 15




                                   2.3. Optimization of Taxadiene Production

                           Once we determined that BTS1 is the most suitable GGPPS to be used to produce taxa-
                              diene, we decided to use BTS1 to optimize the taxadiene production in yeast. The summary
                             of this optimization, respective chromatogram, and the strains created in this study are
                      shown in Figures 4 and 5, and Table 1, respectively. When wild-type yeast (BY4742) was
                          transformed with a plasmid containing a mature version (60 amino acids truncation [23])
                              of Taxus media TS (TXD1 strain), it produced 1.1 ± 0.1 µg/L of taxadiene. When TXD1 was
                          transformed with pIPP (TXD2 strain), the production of taxadiene increased about nine-
                             fold to 10.2 ± 0.7 µg/L. This result indicated that increasing the expression of metabolic
                          genes in the MVA pathway can increase taxadiene production in yeast by providing more
                             precursors, i.e., IPP and DMAPP. However, TXD2 strain is still limited by endogenous
                    GGPPS activity, as shown by TXD3 strain. In TXD3 strain, when overexpressing TS and
                       BTS1 only without pIPP plasmid, i.e., without increasing any ﬂux towards the MVA path-
                         way, the taxadiene production was increased by 47-fold to 50.2 ± 4.7 µg/L compared to
                             wild-type. This result conﬁrmed that endogenous GGPPS activity is a critically important
                              rate-limiting step for taxadiene production in yeast. By increasing the ﬂux towards the
                 MVA pathway and overexpressing BTS1, we created TXD4 strain which increased the
                          production of taxadiene to 782 ± 14 µg/L, representing a 726-fold increase. This result is
                            higher than that obtained with the strain created in a previous study when TS, GGPPS, and
                    tHMGR were overexpressed [24]. Few possible differences can affect these results. First, we
                         used TS from different species (T. media vs. T. chinensis) which may have different kinetic
                               properties. Second, our study used galactose inducible promoters for TS and GGPPS while
                             the previous study used constitutive promoters for all genes, which can lead to differences
                               in gene stability and expression. Third, as mentioned before we used BTS1 as GGPPS, while
                             others used SaGGPPS, and our study showed that overexpressing BTS1 has a larger impact
                       on taxadiene production than SaGGPPS. Lastly, we overexpressed four middle enzymes
                         (ERG8, ERG12, ERG13, and tHMGR) in the MVA pathway, while they only overexpressed
                     tHMGR. Although tHMGR is a rate-limiting enzyme in the MVA pathway [28], increasing
                             the expression of three other enzymes (ERG13, ERG12, and ERG8) in the MVA pathway in
                            addition to tHMGR, can have signiﬁcant effects on terpenoid production [41].





                              Figure 4. Taxadiene titers from the constructed yeast strains (Table 1). The asterisk shows signiﬁcant
                                 differences (p-value < 0.01) on taxadiene titer of TXD6 with other strains. The alphabet ‘a, b, and
                                        c’ show no signiﬁcant differences (p-value > 0.05) between the data with same alphabet (e.g., no
                                signiﬁcant differences between TXD4 and TXD7; and no signiﬁcant differences between TXD4 and
                           TXD8). Other data without symbol or alphabet have signiﬁcant differences with other data with
                                p-values at least less than 0.05 (most of them has p-values < 0.01).