Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         2 of 15



                              versal diterpene precursor, geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP), followed by decorations
                              of the backbones by cytochromes P450 monooxygenases (P450s) and transferases [11]. The
                              ﬁrst step in paclitaxel biosynthesis is the conversion of GGPP into its diterpene backbone,
                              (+)-taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene or taxadiene, by an enzyme called taxadiene synthase (TS) [12].
                            This step is followed by at least 18 enzymatic steps of P450s and transferases [11,12]. Most
                             steps in the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway have been described previously, the majority
                             of which was brilliantly conducted by the Croteau lab. However, several steps remain
                           missing and unclear [13]. For example, steps between taxadiene-5α,10β-diol 5-acetate and
                          2-debenzoyl taxane have not been determined, while the ones that had been proposed
                           could not be placed accurately between these two intermediates [13–15]. A similar question
                          can be raised for an enzyme called taxoid 13α-hydroxylase, which has been characterized
                          but cannot be precisely placed in the pathway [16]. Additionally, recent studies based on
                           heterologous expression data question the appointed ﬁrst enzymatic step after taxadiene,
                              originally discovered by the Croteau group, who characterized the enzyme involved in
                            the ﬁrst oxygenation of taxadiene [17–19]. To shed light on this divergence and to further
                             elucidate the paclitaxel biosynthesis pathway, a more comprehensive study needs to be
                           performed. Unfortunately, taxadiene is not available commercially and its synthesis is im-
                                 practical. One solution for this issue is utilizing a microbial platform to study the paclitaxel
                             biosynthetic pathway.





     Figure 1. A schematic diagram of the taxadiene-producing yeast construction in S. cerevisiae. The overexpressed genes are
    shown in blue. The heterologous taxadiene synthase is shown in red. The endogenous genes without any modiﬁcation are
    shown in grey.