Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         3 of 15




                                Several microbial platforms have been developed to produce taxadiene. Expect-
                               edly, the ﬁrst attempt was in the prokaryote workhorse, E. coli [20,21]. Although the
                          production of taxadiene in E. coli is promising, it is not an ideal system for studying the
                                paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway because many steps in the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway
                             are catalyzed by P450s, which require endoplasmic reticulum anchoring, unavailable in
                           prokaryotes [13,20,21]. Nonetheless, some attempts to follow the ﬁrst step have been
                         conducted in E. coli with a great success, producing more than 500 mg/L of taxane. This
                      was achieved by swapping the N-terminus of P450 with an eight-residue peptide (8RP)
                        from bovine as demonstrated by Biggs et al. [21,22]. Despite this success, the manda-
                            tory modiﬁcations of the heterologous P450s enzymes for expression in E. coli will add
                           complications for studying the ambiguous paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway. Therefore,
                           using the budding yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) as a platform to investigate the paclitaxel
                             biosynthetic pathway might be more reliable and advantageous over E. coli.
                              Production of taxadiene in S. cerevisiae has been previously attempted [23–26]. The
                               ﬁrst attempt was performed by the Croteau lab and successfully yielded 1 mg/L taxadiene.
                             Currently, the highest reported titer of taxadiene production is ~57 mg/L, which was
                           achieved by optimizing TS expression and providing multi-copies of TS in the genome [26].
                             Since S. cerevisiae does not synthesize diterpenoid-derived metabolites, one essential modi-
                            ﬁcation is enhancing the production of GGPP [27]. Previous studies utilized characterized
                           geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase (GGPPS) from Taxus spp., archaea, and carotenoid-
                          producing bacteria (Escherichia vulneris) [24–26]. However, different GGPPSs have not been
                           comparatively examined to enhance taxadiene production in yeast.
                                 In this study, our goal was to build a taxadiene-producing yeast strain that can be
                         used as a microbial platform to elucidate the remaining steps of the paclitaxel biosynthetic
                           pathway. To achieve this, we screened various GGPPS overexpression impacts on taxadiene
                                    titer in yeast and integrated necessary genes to make an efﬁcient taxadiene-producing
                            yeast strain without plasmid transformations. By achieving this goal, the subsequent
                       enzymes in the paclitaxel biosynthesis pathway can be studied with greater efﬁciency
                          without involving selection markers for the yeast plasmids.

                                   2. Results and Discussion
                                   2.1. pIPP Construction to Increase the Flux towards Terpenoid Pathway

                             To build a taxadiene-producing yeast strain, the endogenous yeast mevalonate (MVA)
                       pathway needs to be enhanced (Figure 1).  It has been shown that the truncated and
                             soluble version of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (tHMGR) can improve the
                          production of terpenoid in yeast as it is a rate-limiting and a key regulatory enzyme in
                            the MVA pathway [28,29]. However, the overexpression of one rate-limiting enzyme
                         might not be sufﬁcient for the overall ﬂux increase in the MVA pathway as shown in the
                               glycolytic pathway [30,31]. To increase the overall ﬂux toward the terpenoid pathway, we
                          decided to ﬁrst overexpress the four-middle genes in the MVA pathway (ERG13, tHMGR,
                        ERG12, and ERG8) using a plasmid. We utilized the DNA assembler method [32] to
                             construct the pIPP plasmid that contains these genes under constitutive promoters with
                          a CEN6/ARS4 origin of replication (Figure 2). To test the expression of these genes in
                               yeast, the quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) was performed. The transcript
                         abundance of these genes in transgenic yeast, relative to those in wild-type yeast, showed
                              that the transformation of these genes into yeast indeed increased their transcript levels
                           ranging from 2- to 5-fold (Figure 2). This result indicated that pIPP can be used to increase
                       ﬂux towards taxadiene production.