Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                        11 of 15




                                   3. Materials and Methods
                                   3.1. Yeast and Bacterial Strains
                                Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain BY4742 (MATα; his3∆1; leu2∆0; lys2∆0; ura3∆0) was
                         used for transforming all taxadiene-related plasmids. Escherichia coli strains TOP10 were
                          purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA) and used for cloning procedures.

                                   3.2. Plasmid and Synthetic DNA Construction

                           The pIPP plasmid was constructed using the DNA assembler method [32]. The dif-
                              ferent DNA parts were ampliﬁed by PCR using Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase
                        (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA), resolved by gel electrophoresis, and in-
                            dividually puriﬁed using Qiagen Gel Puriﬁcation kit (Valencia, CA, USA). DNA parts
                             (promoter, gene, terminator) with overlapping homologous sequences were pooled with a
                              linearized plasmid and transformed into the appropriate auxotrophic yeast strain using the
                            Gietz method [47]. Assembled plasmids were selected by growth on minimal medium and
                            the resulting plasmids were recovered from yeast and transformed into E. coli for mainte-
                           nance. Sanger sequencing conﬁrmed the correct assembly of each construct. Promoters
                       and terminators required for assembly were ampliﬁed from S. cerevisiae CEN.PK genomic
                    DNA. Yeast mevalonate pathway genes ERG8, ERG12, ERG13, and a truncated HMGR
                       (tHMGR) were also ampliﬁed from S. cerevisiae CEN.PK genomic DNA and assembled into
                          a centromeric plasmid derived from pGREG505 [48].
                          TS and GGPPS expression plasmid were based on the pESC-URA plasmid (Agilent
                              Technologies). TS and its modiﬁcations were cloned into MCS1 using the Gibson assembly
                       method between NotI and SpeI sites (New England BioLabs, Ipswich, MA, USA). Mean-
                            while, all GGPPS were cloned into MCS2 using the Gibson assembly method between
                       XmaI and SalI sites. Tags (FLAG and c-Myc, respectively) in both MCS were retained
                               for detecting the gene expression. Synthetic genes were codon-optimized for S. cerevisiae
                           expression by GeneArt (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA). The linker and
                  MBP sequences from Apel et al. were used for tagging TS with MBP [25].

                                   3.3. RNA Isolation, cDNA Synthesis, and qPCR Analysis

                                 Yeast cells were lysed with 1 mL of Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Total
                 RNA was extracted based on the manufacturer’s protocol. First-strand synthesis of cDNA
                      was performed using 1 µg of extracted total RNA as templated mixed with the M-MulV
                            reverse transcriptase (New England BioLabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) and anchored oligo
                          dT22 (IDT, Coralville, IA, USA). The synthesis of cDNA was performed according to the
                           manufacturer’s protocol.
                              For qPCR analysis, the reaction mixture was as follows: 5 µL Power SYBR Green
                         Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA), 0.6 µL each of forward and
                            reverse primers (3.35 pmol/µL), 1 µL cDNA template (250 ng/µL), and 2.8 µL of sterile
                       H2O. ROX was used as a passive reference dye in our qPCR. qPCR was then performed
                          using a StepOne Real-Time PCR machine (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).
                         Thermocycling parameters used for qPCR were 95 ◦C for 10 min, 95 ◦C for 15 s, and a
                         combined extension and annealing step of 60 ◦C for 1 min with a total of 40 cycles. Relative
                               transcript abundance was calculated using the efﬁciency corrected 2−∆∆CT method based
                       on actin as the reference gene.

                                   3.4. Yeast Expression and Cultivation

                                 Yeast was transformed using the Gietz method [49] with selection on synthetic com-
                              plete (SC) medium (6.7 g/L yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 1.4 g/L appropriate
                              synthetic drop-out mix for SC-URA, and SC-URA-LEU, and 20 g/L glucose). For taxadiene
                            production, yeast colonies were cultivated overnight in an appropriate liquid medium at
                           30 ◦C, 200 rpm. Then, 0.6 mL of overnight culture were transferred into 30 mL medium (SC
                      medium same as above except with 0.2 g/L glucose, 1.8 g/L galactose, and 10 mM HEPES),
                        and were grown at 30◦C, 200 rpm for 3 days. For TXD9, the colonies were grown in YPDA