Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         5 of 15




                              to synthesize GGPP [33]. To get a clear conclusion on the most suitable GGPPS for the
                           production of taxadiene in yeast, we screened GGPPS from various sources: yeast (BTS1),
                             algae (CrGGPPS), pepper (CaGGPPS), modiﬁed yeast FPP synthase (mERG20) [34], and ar-
                           chaea (SaGGPPS). Two of those (mERG20 and SaGGPPS) were used to increase diterpenoid
                           production in yeast, but their impacts on diterpene production relative to each other have
                            not been reported [24,34], while the others have not been studied for diterpene production
                              in yeast. These genes were codon-optimized for yeast and overexpressed simultaneously
                         with TS in the same plasmid, together with pIPP, to assess the effect of these genes on
                           taxadiene production. Expression of all GGPPSs was checked by immunoblot analysis
                             (Figure S1).
                            Most of the previous studies on improving taxadiene production in yeast did not use
                       BTS1 overexpression since BTS1, like human GGPPS, is active only when FPP is present
                        and may compete with squalene synthase for the common substrate, FPP [24–27]. However,
                    we had overexpressed BTS1 to enhance diterpenes production in yeast and a signiﬁcant
                             increase in diterpene production was observed [35]. Therefore, we included BTS1 to
                            evaluate its impacts on taxadiene production in comparison to other GGPPSs. The second
                     GGPPS is from thermoacidophilic archaea, Sulfolobus acidocaldarius (SaGGPPS). This GGPPS
                          has been previously used to improve taxadiene production in yeast [24]. Different from
                         BTS1, it shows a higher activity when utilizing DMAPP, although some activity is still
                          observed when FPP is present [36]. The third GGPPS is from pepper, Capsicum annum
                         (CaGGPPS). There is no kinetic velocity data for CaGGPPS, but it has been shown that
                      CaGGPPS has a slightly higher afﬁnity towards DMAPP compared to FPP [37]. Meanwhile,
                            algae (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii) GGPPS activity has not been tested since its discovery,
                        which was identiﬁed solely based on comparative genomics in the studies of carotenoid
                             biosynthetic genes in C. reinhardtii [38]. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
                           study to examine CrGGPPS functionality to increase diterpene production in yeast. Finally,
                            the yeast FPPS (ERG20) with a single mutation (mERG20) was included as it had been
                            previously shown to improve GGPP production of diterpenoids in yeast [34].
                               Here, we compared the effects of various GGPPS expression toward the production
                              of taxadiene when they were transformed simultaneously with TS and pIPP. Our results
                      showed that overexpression of endogenous yeast GGPPS (BTS1) led to the highest taxa-
                          diene production with 782 ± 14 µg/L, almost an 80-fold increase compared to the yeast
                          without GGPPS overexpression (Figure 3). BTS1 overexpression also showed a four-fold
                             increase in taxadiene titer, compared to the yeast overexpressing SaGGPPS, which was
                         used in a previous study [24]. Taxadiene production using the BTS1 overexpression was
                             also 80-fold higher than using mERG20. These data are contradictory to the report that
                       showed overexpression of mERG20 in yeast resulted in an over 80-fold increase in diterpene
                          production compared to the BTS1 overexpression [34]. The difference between our study
                        and the previous one regarding BTS1 and mERG20 impacts on taxadiene titer could be due
                              to a difference in the expression strategy. In the Ignea et al. study, they used a constitutive
                          promoter for the diterpene synthase and a galactose inducible promoter for GGPPS in two
                                different plasmids [34]. Meanwhile, we used the galactose inducible promoters for both TS
                       and GGPPS in a single plasmid (pESC). The expression of both genes in a single plasmid,
                            as we employed in this study, should lead to a more synchronized gene expression of
                           diterpene synthase and GGPPS. Thus, additional factors such as differences in plasmid
                        copy numbers can be eliminated, and the taxadiene titer differences between BTS1 and
                    mERG20 overexpression are caused by their internal characteristics.
                            Another intriguing result is from the C. reinhardtii GGPPS (CrGGPPS). C. reinhardtii
                                    is a model organism to study microalgae and photosynthesis [38]. However, its GGPPS
                               activity has not been evaluated. There is an indication from the sequence alignment
                          with cyanobacteria GGPPS that C. reinhardtii may encode a preprotein (CrGGPPS), and a
                           mature, truncated version of GGPPS (Cr-trGGPPS) is produced from the preprotein [38].
                           Thus, both versions were tested to examine their effects on taxadiene production in yeast.
                            Figure 3 shows that indeed overexpression of the mature version (Cr-trGGPPS) resulted in