Metabolites 2021, 11, 147                                                                                                         9 of 15




                             To further increase the efﬁciency of taxadiene production in yeast, we optimized the
                            expression of taxadiene synthase (TS) by codon-optimization for yeast expression, which
                                    is a common strategy that has been used in previous studies [24,42]. Unfortunately, this
                              strategy (TXD5 strain) only increased taxadiene production by 1.4-fold (1.07 ± 0.04 mg/L)
                       compared to native TS. We suspected that TS activity could be regulated not only by
                              translation efﬁciency but also by protein stability at the post-translational level. Indeed,
                        Apel et al. reported that TS enzyme in yeast has a low solubility, which can be increased
                       by tagging a maltose-binding protein (MBP) in the C-terminus of TS [25]. Combining
                                this strategy with our previous metabolic engineering resulted in TXD6 strain, in which
                            taxadiene production increased to 2.02 ± 0.40 mg/L, nearly twice more than TXD5 (without
                     MBP) and 1900-fold when compared to TXD1 (base strain).

                                   2.4. CRISPR-Mediated Gene Integration

                              Taxadiene is the ﬁrst committed precursor of the paclitaxel biosynthesis pathway
                       and subsequent steps are predominantly catalyzed by cytochrome P450 enzymes. Since
                           plasmid-based gene expression is limited by available selection markers and the stability of
                            plasmids, generating yeast strains with stable gene integration in the genome can beneﬁt
                             the studies of downstream candidate genes. Therefore, we sought to integrate the genes of
                               interest into the yeast genome. Recently, we have identiﬁed several loci for strong gene
                           expression and high integration rates by CRISPR-Cas9 [43]. We utilized four of these
                                 loci (iADH1, iPDC1, iPGK1, and iTEF2) to integrate genes in pIPP, BTS1, and optimized
                     TS-MBP into the yeast genome (Figure 6).





                              Figure 6. Schematic diagram of the MVA pathway genes, BTS1, and TS-MBP integration into yeast
                        genome to create TXD7, TXD8, and TXD9. The label on the left indicates the intergenic loci of
                                 respective genes, e.g., iTEF2 means intergenic locus ﬂanking the TEF2 gene. The location of the loci in
                                the genome was also indicated here. To produce taxadiene, a pESC-Ura plasmid containing TS-MBP
                         and BTS1 was transformed into TXD7 and TXD8. TXD9 is capable to produce taxadiene without
                              plasmid. The promoters that were used were listed in Table 1.