
[PDF physical page 1]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.26.684697; this version posted October 27, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.





Predicting protein complexes in biosynthetic gene clusters

Yoshitaka Moriwaki1,2, †, Taro Shiraishi3, Yohei Katsuyama2,4, Kenichi Matsuda5, Toyoyuki Ose6, Atsushi
Minami7, Hideaki Oikawa8, Tomohisa Kuzuyama2,4, Ryuichiro Ishitani1, Tohru Terada2,4

1Department of Computational Drug Discovery and Design, Medical Research Laboratory, Institute of Integrated Research, Institute
of Science Tokyo, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.
2Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.
3Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, 606-8502 Kyoto, Japan.
4Collaborative Research Institute for Innovative Microbiology, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan
5Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, kita-ku, Sapporo, 060-0812, Japan.
6Faculty of Advanced Life Science, Hokkaido University, kita-ku, Sapporo, 060-0810, Japan.
7Department of Chemistry, Institute of Science Tokyo, 2-12-1 O-okayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8551, Japan.
8Division of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, 060-0810, Japan.

ABSTRACT: Biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) are contiguous genomic regions that encode diverse, non-homologous proteins required for
the production of specific natural products. Their genetic diversity underlies the structural complexity of these compounds, and their
biosynthetic pathways still remain to be clarified in many cases. The biosynthetic mechanisms rely not only on substrate specificity between
proteins and ligands, but also on protein–protein interactions that mediate transport of intermediates, regulation of activity, and structural
 stabilization. However, sequence-based functional predictions have had limited success for many uncharacterized proteins within BGCs. To
address this challenge, we built a high-throughput complex prediction pipeline by replacing AlphaFold3’s multiple sequence alignment
generation with a faster MMSeqs2. We systematically screened 487,828 protein pairs derived from 2,437 BGCs registered in the Minimum
Information about a Biosynthetic Gene cluster (MIBiG) database and predicted 15,438 heteromeric interactions with an ipTM ≥ 0.6. Among
them, 1,390 protein pairs exhibited structural homology with an RMSD ≤ 2.0 Å. These predictions highlight intriguing molecular mechanisms
involving proteins previously annotated as uncharacterized or potentially dysfunctional. Furthermore, we provide these results in a reusable
format and as a protein interaction network map to facilitate future experimental validation by researchers.



INTRODUCTION                                                systems have enabled the expression of a wider range of proteins.
                                                                    Since the 2000s, progress in sequencing technologies, such as next-   Secondary  metabolites  are  natural  products  produced  by
                                                                     generation sequencing and metagenomic analysis, along with theorganisms  that  are  not  directly  involved  in  their  growth,
                                                              development of bioinformatics tools and the expansion of genomicdevelopment, or reproduction. Unlike primary metabolites, such as
                                                                         databases,  has  significantly  advanced  research on  secondaryamino acids, nucleotides, and carbohydrates, secondary metabolites
                                                                      metabolites derived from uncultivable microorganisms. For example,often play specialized roles in ecological interactions—such as
                                                           antiSMASH[7-14]  is a widely used bioinformatics tool for thedefense against predators[2], competition with other organisms[3],
                                                                                identification, annotation, and  analysis  of BGCs  in microbialor symbiotic  relationships[4]. These compounds are  typically
                                                              genomes. It also classifies clusters into known types by comparingsynthesized by biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs), which are co-
                                                         them  to  curated  reference  datasets,  including  the Minimumlocated sets of genes that collectively encode enzymes required to
                                                                   Information  about  a  Biosynthetic  Gene  cluster  (MIBiG)produce a  specific metabolite and  auxiliary  proteins such  as
                                                                      database[15]. DeepBGC[16]  incorporates deep  learning andtransporter and regulatory proteins[5,6]. Secondary metabolites
                                                                          natural language processing strategies and incorporates genomiccontain a wide variety of chemical structures and classes, including
                                                                        position dependency and order information not considered innon-ribosomal peptides (NRPs), polyketides (PKs), ribosomally
                                                               hidden  Markov  model  (HMM)-based   tools   such   assynthesized and post-translationally modified peptides (RiPPs),
                                                                   ClusterFinder[17]  and  antiSMASH.   This  improved   theterpenes, and saccharides, which have attracted significant interest
                                                                              identification of BGCs in bacterial genomes and contributed to thefrom both enzymology and organic chemistry.
                                                                      discovery of novel BGCs encoding natural products that could not
   Early studies on secondary metabolites were limited in scope due                                                             be detected by existing methods.
to the large number of host organisms that could not be cultured
                                                                      In addition to these sequence-based analyses, highly accurateunder  laboratory  conditions.  However,  advances  in  genetic
                                                                       prediction of protein tertiary structures, as exemplified by AlphaFoldengineering and the establishment of heterologous expression
                                                          2 (AF2)[18], has become available since 2021. The computational


[PDF physical page 2]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.26.684697; this version posted October 27, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

and biological breakthrough significantly expanded the availability    BGC accession IDs deposited in MIBiG version 4.0 (2024-11-15)
of protein structural information, which had previously been limited      that are currently maintained and updated. IDs marked as “retired”
to around 200,000 experimental structures. AlphaFold can generate      or “pending” were excluded from analysis. Second, among the
accurate models of protein monomers and complexes by predicting      proteins encoded in these BGCs, those with more than 1,950 amino
inter-residue distances based on co-evolution signals concealed in       acids, which are commonly found in PKS- or NRPS-modular type
the multiple sequence alignments (MSA) for the query sequence(s),       proteins, were excluded from the prediction, as they can exceed the
provided that more than roughly 30–100 effective homologous      computational limits of modeling using AF3. The amino acid
sequences are available in the target sequence database. The      sequences were obtained from the GBK format files provided by
predicted structures have been already used as search models of     MIBiG. Using the amino acid sequences that meet the criteria, we
molecular replacement method of for X-ray crystallography[19,20],     performed exhaustive predictions of homo- and heterodimeric
as  well  as  initial  structures  for  molecular  dynamics (MD)      complexes for each BGC.
simulations  and  quantum  mechanics/molecular  mechanics     MSA generation and structure prediction.  Despite recent
(QM/MM) calculations[21]. Furthermore, AlphaFold provides                                                                     advances, protein structure prediction with AF3  still  relies on
valuable  predictions  about  protein–protein[22] and  protein–                                                                                 sufficient number of multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) for the
ligand[23] interactions that are difficult to obtain from sequence-                                                                 query  sequences. To  achieve both high  accuracy and  high-
based bioinformatics tools alone. One of the applications of the                                                                 throughput prediction, we replaced the default MSA generation
former prediction is the discovery and experimental validation of the                                                                         pipeline using HMMER 3[33] implemented in AF3 with a faster
protein Tmem81, which  is conserved across vertebrates during                                                                               alternative: the colabfold_search command in LocalColabFold[34].
 fertilization of sperm and egg[24].                                                   MMseqs2 version 15-6f452[35] was used to build two sequence
   Formation of protein complexes also plays a crucial role in BGCs.      databases, Uniref30_2302 and colabfold_envdb_202108 (released
Notably,  protein–protein   interactions  observed   in   carrier     on   July   31,  2023),  which  can  be  downloaded  from
proteins[25], trans-type acyltransferase (AT) polyketide synthase      https://colabfold.mmseqs.com/ and generate MSAs for the query
(PKS)[26], cis-type AT PKS[27], type I/II PKS, and fatty acid      sequences. The obtained MSAs have been shown to be sufficient for
synthase[28,29] have been extensively studied and discussed as key      producing highly accurate predicted models with AF2 or ColabFold
components  in  the  biosynthetic pathways. In homomultimer       in most cases.[34] In addition to unpaired MSAs, we also obtained
complexes, residues that are distant in the primary and tertiary      paired MSAs to further improve the accuracy of complex modeling.
structures assemble at the multimer interface to form a single     The protein template search against PDB100 database was not
binding pocket[30]. Additionally, some heteromeric complexes      performed, as it is known to improve monomeric but not complex
influence the  stability,  specificity, and catalytic activity[31,32].      prediction accuracy. The MSA generation was performed on the
Because these interactions underlie the remarkable structural and     SuperComputer Flow Type III subsystem at Nagoya University.
chemical diversity of the products, many enzymes in these systems      This system comprises 16 Intel Xeon Platinum 8280M processors
have been structurally characterized to elucidate their molecular      (2.7 GHz, 28 cores each) and 24 TiB of RAM per node. Each query
 basis. Nevertheless, most BGCs still harbor numerous proteins of      took approximately 1–2 minutes on the calculation node. The
unknown function, often annotated simply as “hypothetical protein”      obtained a3m-formatted MSA files were added to the “pairedMsa”
in  MIBiG,  which  represents  a  major  challenge  for  the     and “UnpairedMsa” keys of the AF3 input JSON file using the
comprehensive understanding of their biosynthetic pathways.            msatojson command of the alphafold3_tools software that we
   Here, we report a comprehensive search of all pairwise complex      developed  and made  available on  our  GitHub  repository:
predictions among proteins encoded within each BGCs using      https://github.com/cddlab/alphafold3_tools/. The “modelSeeds”
AlphaFold3 (AF3)[23]. These computational analyses enabled      value in the AF3 input JSON file was set to 1 and five models were
highly sensitive detection of potential homo- and heteromultimer      generated for each prediction. For dimer with a total number of
formation  that  were  previously   difficult  to  predict  using      residues below  1500,  the complex  structure  prediction was
conventional sequence-based bioinformatics tools. This approach     performed using the SuperComputer Flow Type II subsystem with
led to the identification of novel pairs of proteins that are likely to act    NVIDIA GPU V100; for those with 1500 to 2000 residues, our in-
cooperatively. Furthermore, our results suggest that numerous     house NVIDIA GPU RTX4090; and for those with 2000–3900
structurally homologous heterocomplexes exist in BGCs and that       residues, NVIDIA GPU H100 (VRAM 94GB). The Predicted
many of them involve proteins previously annotated as having      Aligned Error (PAE) of the predicted structures was visualized using
unknown functions.  Finally, we visualized the protein–protein      the paeplot command of alphafold3_tools.
interaction network maps to provide a comprehensive overview in                                                              Validation of the predicted complex structures.
the BGCs. Taken together, these findings offer novel and significant
                                                                       Metrics. To  identify  biologically  plausible  protein–proteininsights into previously uncharacterized proteins in BGCs, thereby
                                                                           interactions in the AF3-predicted complexes, we employed twoproviding  valuable  contributions  to  both  experimental  and
                                                                         metrics:  the  interface  predicted TM-score (ipTM) and  thecomputational researcher communities engaged in the investigation
                                                                          interaction prediction score from aligned errors (ipSAE)[36]. Theof secondary metabolites.
                                                  ipTM measures the accuracy of the predicted relative arrangement
MATERIALS AND METHODS                                       of subunits. Values ≥ 0.8 indicate confident and high-quality
                                                                           predictions, < 0.6 suggest failure, and 0.6–0.8 represent an uncertain
Structure Prediction Workflow.                                    range.[22,23] The ipTM values are provided in the AF3 output
   Input amino acid sequences. We selected the proteins derived    JSON files. The ipSAE is a modified scoring function that evaluates
from BGCs for comprehensive protein-protein complex prediction      the quality of predicted interactions by focusing on residue pairs
based on the following criteria. First, we focused on 2,437 “active”       likely to participate in the interface, rather than the entire sequence.


[PDF physical page 3]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.26.684697; this version posted October 27, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


     1. Input       BGC0000001          2. MSA generation               3. Complex prediction          4. PPI network visualization



                     BGC0000002                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.68
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.86                 XXX06320.1Orf1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       XXX06309.1putativeligaseCoA           0.8
                                  colabfold_search /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               putativeXXX06310.1transferasemalonyl
                     BGC0002826        MMSeq2





 Figure 1 Computational workflow. 1. Input amino acid sequences. List all pairs of self or other protein sequences encoded in each BGC accession
 ID, excluding those with a length more than 1950 residues. 2. Generate paired and unpaired MSAs for all the protein pairs using MMseqs2 and colab-
 fold_search. 3. Predict the dimeric complex using AlphaFold3. The input JSON files were created with alphafold3_tools. 4. Visualize a protein-protein
 interaction (PPI) map for each BGC accession ID. Output JSON files containing ipTM and ipSAE metrics were also generated.

This metric can be computed by applying the ipSAE script[36] to       High-throughput  complex  prediction  pipeline.   We
the AF3 output JSON file with both the PAE cutoff (pae_cutoff) and      developed a computational pipeline for the systematic prediction of
Cα-Cα distance cutoff (dist_cutoff) set to 10. We did not use other      protein–protein complexes encoded within BGCs (Figure 1). The
metrics such as pDock[37], pDockQ2[38], or LIS[39] in this      pipeline takes as input the GenBank (.gbk) files associated with BGC
analysis, although they serve similar purposes in evaluating protein–      accession IDs registered in MIBiG. Users may also provide a
protein interactions.                                       GenBank  files generated by antiSMASH or FASTA-formatted
   Validation datasets and complex analysis. We evaluated      protein sequence files for unregistered BGCs. Here, we focused on
                                                          2437 BGCs that are labeled as “active” in MIBiG and targetedboth ipTM and ipSAE metrics for the predicted homo- and
heterodimeric structures by validating them against experimentally      proteins with up to 1,950 amino acid residues. For each BGC,
                                                               complexes were predicted for all possible protein combinations,determined complexes. For proteins encoded in the BGCs listed in
MIBiG version 4.0 and also registered in the Protein Data Bank      including self-pairs. Specifically, for a BGC containing N qualifying
(PDB), we retrieved their biologically relevant complex structures       proteins, we performed N(N − 1)/2 predictions for heteromeric
(also  referred  as  “biological  assemblies”) and  stoichiometry       pairs and N additional predictions for homomeric pairs, resulting in
information were retrieved from Protein Data Bank (PDB) as of      a total of N(N + 1)/2 predictions per BGC.
November 30, 2024. To minimize the impact of amino acid        Highly accurate structure prediction using AF3 requires the
substitutions on protein oligomerization, the sequence identity      generation of multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) for the input
threshold was set to 95%. Additionally, for complexes whose      sequences. However, comprehensive prediction using the AF3 Web
biological assemblies contained more than two chains and did not      server is not feasible due to its usage limits (currently 30 trials per
exceed 3,900 amino acid residues in total, we performed further      day). Moreover, the official AF3 inference code available on GitHub
structure  predictions  with  the  stoichiometries  to  obtain  the        is also impractical for the high-throughput workflows because the
corresponding ipTM and ipSAE metrics.                   MSA generation process using HMMER 3 (http://hmmer.org)
  For the obtained heterodimeric structures, the RMSD of the      [33] is slow. To address these issues, we used colabfold_search from
backbone heavy atoms (N, Cα, C, and O) between the two subunits      LocalColabFold[34] in conjunction with MMseqs2[35] to rapidly
was      calculated     using    Gemmi     version      0.7.3      generate MSAs. The resultant MSAs included both unpaired MSAs
(https://github.com/project-gemmi/gemmi)   [40],   with   the       for individual proteins and paired MSAs generated by concatenating
maximum number of outlier rejection cycles set to 5. To prevent      sequences from the same organism. These were assigned to the
calculation errors caused by very short sequences (e.g., precursor      “unpairedMsa” and “pairedMsa” keys, respectively, in the AF3 input
peptides), RMSD values were not computed for proteins with fewer    JSON file. This conversion process was achieved using msatojson
than 20 residues.                                       command developed as part of our toolkit of alphafold3_tools. Using
                                                                                 this pipeline, we prepared the input JSON files for subsequent
Network visualization                                                             complex structure prediction on 487,828 protein pairs.
  The protein–protein networks obtained for the 2437 BGCs were                                                                  Validation of the predicted homomeric complexes. We
drawn using NetworkX version 3.5. Each protein was represented as                                                                    subsequently  compared  the  predicted  complexes  with  the
a node, and edges were drawn between heterodimers that showed                                                                      experimentally determined protein complexes deposited in the PDB
ipTM > 0.55 in the AF3 structural prediction. Proteins that formed                                                                      to evaluate the validity. As of November 30, 2024, a total of 555
homodimers at the same threshold were represented with self-loop                                                         homomeric and 30 heteromeric protein entries were found in PDB
edges. Then, the network maps were output in SVG image format                                                                      to exhibit over 95% sequence identity with proteins registered in
and made available on a web server. Additionally, the JSON files and                                                    MIBiG ver. 4.0. Among the 555 homomeric proteins, 408 were
Python codes used for generating these network maps will be                                                                  annotated as homodimers, and 135 as homotrimers or higher-order
published as supplementary files, allowing users to regenerate them                                                                      assemblies that could be modeled on our GPUs. The remaining 12
in their own environments using arbitrary thresholds.                                                                             entries could not be predicted due to their extremely large complex
                                                                                      sizes. A high sequence similarity threshold of 95% was applied to
RESULTS
                                                               minimize the  effects of amino acid  differences,  insertions, or
                                                                         deletions that could  alter the composition of residues  at the


[PDF physical page 4]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.26.684697; this version posted October 27, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.





 Figure 2. Validation of the predicted complexes. (A) Scatter plot of chain-level ipTM and ipSAE values for predicted homodimers (n = 408). Marginal
 histograms for each axis are displayed above and to the right. (B) Differences in ipTM and ipSAE between the predicted homodimer (blue) and the
 biological assembly (red). Only biological assemblies forming homomeric complexes larger than dimers and computable on our GPUs are included (n
 = 135). (C) Scatter plot of ipTM and ipSAE values for predicted heterodimers. (D) Superimposition of the predicted OsCutA1 trimer (GenBank ID:
 BAT10611.1; blue, yellow, and green) and dimer (purple) with the crystal structure (PDB code: 2ZOM). (E) Predicted MupZ homotetramer (col-
 ored) and its crystal structure (white). An artificial N-terminal peptide (orange) is shown in stick representation. (F) Predicted HitB (GenBank ID:
 BAR73008.1)–HitD (BAR73010.1) and its crystal structure (white and gray). The cross-linking probe in the crystal structure is shown in brown stick
 representation. (G) Superimposition of the predicted PbtA (AGY49587.1; blue)–PbtF (AGY49592.1; yellow) complex with the crystal structure
 (PDB code: 8T19; white and gray). Residues of PbtA at the interface are shown in stick representation.

multimerization  interface  and  thereby  lead  to  inaccurate      (residues 1–64) was not included in the prediction. This finding also
measurements.                                                         indicated  that  the  long-disordered  region  lowered  ipTM
  For the protein structures registered in the PDB as homodimers,     (Supplementary Figure S1). Despite this, ipSAE remained high,
our predicted dimeric models showed ipTM ≥ 0.8 for 294/408      underscoring its reliability as an evaluation metric in such cases.
(72.1%) and ipTM ≥ 0.6 for 358/408 (87.7%) (Figure 2A). The         Nevertheless, some of the predicted complexes did not exhibit
ipSAE metric, which represents a corrected ipTM calculated using      high ipTM/ipSAE values even when using the stoichiometries of
only interchain residue pairs with reliable PAE scores, correlated       biological assemblies. Closer inspection revealed that several of
well with ipTM above the 0.6 threshold, but approached zero below      these cases represented artifacts, either due to misassignments of
this cutoff. We next examined the 135 proteins annotated as forming      stoichiometry   inferred  from   the   crystal   packing   using
higher-order homomeric complexes. When predicted as dimers,     PDBePISA[41], or the inclusion of artificial sequence tags that
these proteins frequently yielded ipTM values around 0.6. However,      induced unnatural oligomerization. The former example is MxaA in
when  re-predicted  with  their  stoichiometries  of  biological       Stigmatella aurantiaca (GenBank ID: AAK57184.1; PDB code:
assemblies  registered  in PDB,  the ipTM  values  substantially     4U7W), which is experimentally validated as a monomer[42]. The
improved,  exceeding  0.8  in  most  cases  (Figure  2B). A       latter example is MupZ from Pseudomonas fluorescens (GenBank ID:
representative example is CutA1 from Oryza sativa (PDB code:     AFD33556.1; PDB code: 6FXD), which is registered as a homo-
2ZOM). In the dimeric prediction, the substructure was nearly      tetramer due  to C-terminal His₆-tag–induced  tetramerization,
identical to the crystal structure but exhibited low confidence scores      although the native protein forms a dimer.[43] We summarized the
(ipTM = 0.38; ipSAE = 0.001). In contrast, the trimeric prediction,      proteins exhibiting low ipSAE and ipTM values in Supplementary
corresponding to the biological assembly, closely reproduced the     Table 1. These observations highlight the challenges of constructing
experimental structure, with improved ipTM and ipSAE values of       fully reliable datasets of multimeric assemblies from the PDB.
0.64 and 0.84, respectively (Figure 2D). These results highlight the      Nonetheless, our findings suggest that an ipTM threshold of 0.6 is
limitations of using ipTM or ipSAE thresholds for dimer prediction,       effective   for   screening   proteins   for   the   potential   of
especially when the inter-subunit interface is small. Additionally, the      homooligomerization.
ipTM and ipSAE metrics were further improved to 0.93 and 0.86,        Validation of the predicted heteromeric complexes. For the
respectively, when  its N-terminal long  transit peptide region                                                          30 heteromeric complexes, we observed similar ipTM and ipSAE


[PDF physical page 5]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.26.684697; this version posted October 27, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.





 Figure 3. Examples of predicted complex models. (A) cae45685.1 (green)–cae45686.1 (purple)–Acetyl-CoA (brown) trimeric complex model. (B)
 The predicted complex colored by pLDDT (orange, 0–50; yellow, 50–70; cyan, 70–90; and blue, 90–100). (C) The predicted aligned error (PAE)
 matrix with chain coloring of (A) on the side bars. The dashed black lines indicate the chain boundaries. (D) Superimposition of the Naa30 crystal
 structure (white) on the predicted model shown in Panel A. The N-terminal region of major capsid protein as a substrate peptide (Uniprot ID: P32503)
 is shown as cyan stick. (E) PGA1_262p00820 (green)–PGA1_262p00830 (purple) complex model found in BGC0000932. (F) pLDDT-colored
 predicted PGA1_262p00820 –PGA1_262p00830 complex. The PAE matrix with chain coloring of (F) is shown on right panel. (G) Predicted
 PGA1_262p00820 monomer structure colored by pLDDT. The right panel shows the PAE matrix. These data were obtained from the AlphaFold
 Protein Structure Database[1] (UniProt ID: I7E6A3).

correlations to those in the homomeric complexes. Among these,     peptide–enzyme  complexes,  a  statistical  evaluation  for them
6M01[44],    7YN3[45],    8K4R[46],    8T19    (DOI:      remains difficult.
10.2210/pdb8T19/pdb), and 4TX3[47] showed ipTM < 0.6. We       Taken together, these results indicate that AF3 successfully
further investigated the cause of these low ipTM values. First, in                                                                      predicted complex formation (ipTM ≥ 0.6) in 26 out of the 30
PDB entries of 7YN3, 8K4R (VinM-VinL), and 6M01, a chemical      heteromeric cases. However, there are limitations in its predictive
reagent to induce covalent cross-linking between the two proteins                                                                                  capabilities, particularly for transient complexes or those with small
was used to obtain the crystal structure of the heterodimeric      binding interfaces, such as those formed by ACPs or precursor
complexes. Biologically, one of the proteins in these two PDB entries                                                                          peptides.
 is an acyl carrier protein (ACP), which is known to form a transient
                                                            Novel heterocomplexes. Among 487,828 predicted protein
complex with the other protein. Thus, it is speculated that the ipTM
                                                                                   pairs, 15,438 heterodimers exhibited ipTM ≥ 0.6, and 3,754 showed
does not yield high values for such complexes.
                                                  ipTM ≥  0.8. These include complexes formed by previously
  PDB code 8T19 represents the complex structure of PbtA, a RiPP                                                                     uncharacterized proteins. Here, we can hypothesize the functions of
precursor peptide, and its modifying enzyme PbtF from the GE2270                                                                      these proteins based on the predicted models. For example, a
BGC (BGC0001155). The ipTM and ipSAE values were 0.39 and                                                                 heterodimer of cae45685.1 and cae45686.1 (Figure 3A–C) found
 0.1, respectively. Interestingly, AF3 predicted that the peptide binds                                                                           in borrelidin BGC from Streptomyces parvulus (MIBiG accession ID:
to the β-strand region of PbtF; however, the predicted binding                                                          BGC0000031)[52-54] is annotated as “hypothetical protein” in
position was shifted by two residues compared with the crystal                                                          MIBiG, and to our knowledge, no studies have been reported for
structure. We further investigated NisB from Lactococcus lactis subsp.                                                                      these proteins. BLASTp[55] search predicted both proteins have
 lactis  and  StrB  from   Streptococcus   thermophilus  LMD-9                                                                                 partial sequence similarity with GCN5-related N-acetyltransferase
(BGC0001209)[48] to gain insights into proteins that bind RiPP                                                     (GNAT). Structure-based searches against PDB100 database using
precursor peptides. The crystal structure of NisB in complex with its                                                                     the Foldseek webserver[56] indicated that the predicted complex
precursor peptide NisA was not included in the validation dataset                                                                          structure resembles the single subunit Naa30 of the heterotrimeric
because these proteins were fused within the same chain (PDB code:                                                     NatC complex (PDB code: 6YGD, chain A)[57], which catalyzes N-
4WD9)[49] or the peptide is chemically modified (PDB code:                                                                      terminal  acetylation  (Nt-acetylation)  of numerous  eukaryotic
6M7Y)[50].  StrB  shares 94.98%  sequence  identity  with  its                                                                            proteins. Superimposition of the complex model on the Naa30
homologous protein SuiB from Streptococcus  suis (PDB code:                                                                          structure revealed that a binding pocket for the cofactor acetyl-CoA
5V1T)[51]. The predicted complex structures for both matched                                                                                               is formed between the cae45685.1–cae45686.1 interface, with the
well with their corresponding crystal structures, showing no residue                                                                            acetyl group of acetyl-CoA being exposed to the peptide-binding site
 shift and high ipTM and ipSAE values (Supplementary Figure S2).                                                                          of Naa30 (Figure 3D). This suggests that this heterocomplex may
However, because of the extremely limited number of available                                                                           also catalyze Nt-acetylation of its substrate. Recently, Streptomyces
structures or experimental data on formation of RiPP precursor                                                                           mutabilis sp. MII, which is thought to possess a BGC similar to


[PDF physical page 6]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.26.684697; this version posted October 27, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.





 Figure 4. Predicted structurally homologous complexes. (A) Histogram of structural RMSD values between monomeric units of predicted heterodi-
 mer pairs. An inset shows a magnified view of the 0–10 Å range. (B) Superimposition of the predicted complex structure of actinorhodin polyketide β-
 ketoacyl synthase alpha (KS) and beta (CLF) subunits (blue and red) on the crystal structure (PDB code: 1TQY; green and yellow). KS is shown in
 blue and green, and CLF in red and yellow. (C) mbg cluster. Only the genes encoding KS and CLF are depicted. (D) Computed ipTM and ipSAE
 values for each complex prediction of the four KS (horizontal) and four CLF (vertical) subunits in mbg cluster. (E) Superimposition of the predicted
 MonBI (blue)–MonBII (yellow) heterodimer on the crystal structure of the MonBI homodimer (PDB code: 3WMD; cyan). The computed ipTM
 values for each homo- and hetero-dimer are shown below. (F) Predicted Ams8 (blue)–Ams9 (yellow) complex. (G) Close-up view of the FAD binding
 site in the predicted structures of Ams8 (blue) and Ams9 (yellow). The pltA crystal structure (PDB code: 5DBJ) is shown in gray. Residues presumed
 to be important for chlorination activity are shown in stick representation. (H) Proposed trichlorination mechanism in the armeniaspirol BGC (bot-
 tom). Formation of the dichloropyrrole moiety catalyzed by PltA during pyoluteorin biosynthesis is shown on the top for comparison.

BGC0000031, has been reported to produce N-acetylborrelidin B in        Structurally homologous heterocomplexes. By examining
addition to borrelidin (Supplementary Figure S3A)[58]. Given      the predicted heterodimers, we identified 952 pairs (4.9%) in which
that  borrelidin  B,  a known  precursor  of  borrelidin,  has an      the structural RMSD between constituent proteins was ≤1.0 Å, and
aminomethyl group  at C12  carbon,  it  is  plausible  that  the     1390 pairs (7.1%) with RMSD ≤ 2.0 Å (Figure 4A). The median
heterocomplex  binds  borrelidin B  at  a  peptide-binding  site    ipTM and ipSAE values for the protein pairs with RMSD ≤2.0 Å
analogous to that of Naa30 and catalyzes its acetylation to yield N-     were 0.82 and 0.71, respectively, indicating that these predictions
acetylborrelidin B (Supplementary Figure S3B and C).              were made with high confidence. This observation suggests that
  We also identified several Domain Unknown Function (DUF)       structurally homologous heterodimers are present across BGCs and
proteins whose function appears to  arise only upon complex      contribute to the biosynthesis. A well-characterized and popular
formation.  For  example,  PGA1_262p00820  (Genbank  ID:     example is a ketosynthase (KS)–chain length factor (CLF) complex,
AFO93364.1) in tropodithietic acid BGC from Phaeobacter inhibens     which constitutes the central catalytic machinery in Type II PKSs. In
DSM 17395 (MIBiG  accession  ID: BGC0000932)[59] was       this complex, the KS subunit catalyzes the decarboxylation of the
annotated as a DUF4399 domain–containing protein, a family for      malonyl unit tethered to a phosphopantetheinyl arm of an ACP, and
which functional characterization remains scarce. Our analysis      the condensation of the resulting enolate anion with a growing
predicted that this protein forms a complex with PGA1_262p00830      polyketide chain attached to its catalytic cysteine. The CLF subunit
(AFO93365.1), a DoxX-family protein, with an ipTM of 0.82 and an        is a KS homolog lacking catalytic residues, but the internal tunnel
ipSAE of 0.64 (Figure 3E). Notably, the N-terminal region of     formed by the complex plays a critical role in determining the
PGA1_262p00820 was predicted to be disordered as a monomer;      polyketide chain length. The actinorhodin polyketide beta-ketoacyl
however, in the heterodimer, this region adopted an α-helical      synthase   alpha  (GenBank  ID:  CAC44200.1)  and   beta
conformation with high pLDDT and formed an interaction interface     (CAC44201.1) subunits of BGC0000194 have been identified as
with a helix of PGA1_262p00830 (Figure 3F and G). Given that    KS and CLF, respectively, and their heterocomplex structure was
DoxX-family  proteins  are  localized  to  the  cell  membrane,      determined (PDB  code: 1TQY)[60]. The  protein  pair was
PGA1_262p00820    is   expected   to  be  embedded   with      predicted to form a complex with high ipTM and ipSAE values of
PGA1_262p00830 in the cell membrane. Thus, the two proteins      0.96 and 0.93, respectively, and closely matched the crystal structure
may act cooperatively as membrane-bound enzymes or transporters.      (Figure 4B). Interestingly, despite the KS and CLF subunits sharing


[PDF physical page 7]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.26.684697; this version posted October 27, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the same fold with an RMSD of 1.02 Å, the homodimeric prediction      Our structure prediction pipeline showed that Ams8 and Ams9
for KS yielded relatively low scores (ipTM = 0.65, ipSAE = 0.38),     may form homodimers with ipTM values  of 0.77 and  0.73,
and CLF showed almost no signal (ipTM = 0.20, ipSAE = 0.0).       respectively, whereas their heterodimer displayed a higher ipTM
These findings indicate that AF3 is capable of correctly identifying      value of 0.86 (Figure 4F). Intriguingly, the predicted structure of
heterocomplex  formation  independent  of  overall  structural    Ams8 revealed that E337 is positioned at a site that would inhibit the
similarity between monomers.                                       binding of flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), an essential cofactor
   Subsequently, we examined whether ipTM and ipSAE could       for halogenation. In addition, the conserved lysine residue required
                                                                      to mediate the reaction between the substrate and hypochlorousidentify correct KS–CLF pairs within a BGC cluster encoding
multiple KS and CLF  proteins.  In  our  previous  work, we     acid[66-68]—generated from FAD, molecular oxygen, and chloride
                                                              ions—is replaced by N90 in Ams8. (Figure 4G). These unusualexperimentally  validated  the  correct  pairing  in mbg  cluster
(BGC0002441;  Figure 4C)  as Mbg7–Mbg3, Mbg6–Mbg5,      residue substitutions strongly suggest that Ams8 lacks halogenase
                                                                                     activity. By contrast, Ams9 and Ams22 retain these conservedMbg16–Mbg15, and Mbg21–Mbg22 [61]. Our all-by-all complex
predictions for the 4 × 4 combinations showed that both ipTM and       residues. However, gene deletion of ams8 completely abolished the
                                                                        biosynthetic process of armeniaspirol, whereas deletion of eitheripSAE values reached their maximum values for the experimentally
validated pairs (Figure 4D). Notably, ipSAE yielded lower values     ams9 or ams22 reduced its production by 100-fold but did not lead
                                                                      to complete loss[64]. This indicates that Ams8 is more essential forfor incorrect pairings than ipTM, indicating greater discriminatory
power. A  similar  trend  was  observed  in  the  Ysf  cluster      the biosynthetic pathway. Overall, these findings suggest that Ams9
                                                                       functions  as  the  enzyme  catalyzing  trichlorination  of  4,5-(BGC0002547)[62], which encodes three KSs and three CLFs,
where the highest values again corresponded to the experimentally      dichloropyrrolyl–S-Ams22, while Ams8 acts as an auxiliary protein
                                                                           that supports the activity of Ams9 through complex formationconfirmed pairings (Supplementary Figure S4). Collectively, these
results demonstrate that the ipTM and ipSAE metrics provide      (Figure 4H).
reliable indicators for identifying true KS–CLF pairs and predicting        Visualization of the protein–protein interaction network
their   released   polyketide   intermediates,  even  when  the     map. To facilitate the use of our computational results by a broad
corresponding genes are not located adjacent within the BGC.           range of researchers, we created a web site that visualizes protein–
  Our comprehensive predictions further identified 381 protein      protein network diagrams for the 2437 BGCs. On this site, users can
pairs that are likely to form both homodimers and heterodimers,        filter  the  data by MIBiG  accession ID, taxonomy,  class, or
meeting the criteria of ipTM ≥ 0.6 and ipSAE ≥ 0.6. A representative     compound names, and view both the network diagrams and
example is the pair MonBI and MonBII from the monensin BGC      representative chemical structures of the products (Figure 5A).
(BGC0000100). Although the crystal structure of the MonBI      Proteins are represented as nodes, and pairs of proteins predicted to
homodimer has been determined in our previous work (PDB code:     form homodimers or heterodimers are connected by edges when
3WMD)[63], biological assays have shown that MonBI also forms a      they exceed a certain threshold (Figure 5B). The JSON files and
heterodimer with MonBII, and this complex displays enzymatic     Python scripts used to generate these network diagrams are available
 activity. AF3 predictions indicated that MonBI and MonBII form      in the supplementary files, allowing users to perform their own
homodimers with ipTM values of 0.87 and 0.84, respectively, while       analyses.
they form a heterodimer with a higher ipTM value of 0.93 (Figure
                                               DISCUSSION4E). The predicted MonBI–MonBII heterodimer structure closely
matched the MonBI homodimer crystal structure, with an RMSD of      One of the core challenges in the field of secondary metabolism
1.0 Å. This result suggests that dimer formation between these two     and biosynthesis research is to elucidate the origins and biosynthetic
proteins is competitive, and that the heterodimer is preferentially     mechanisms of the vast repertoire of natural products. In this study,
formed.                                              we established a high-throughput complex prediction pipeline based
                                                        on AF3 and demonstrated that it enables comprehensive detection   Proteins predicted to form both homo- and hetero-dimers were
                                                                          of protein–protein interactions within BGCs. We further showedalso observed among other functional proteins. We highlight three
                                                                           that BGCs contain a considerable proportion of protein homo- orflavin-dependent  halogenase-like proteins—Ams8, Ams9, and
                                                                       hetero- complexes whose function emerges only upon complexAms22—from the armeniaspirol BGC (BGC0002022)[64] as an
                                                                      formation, as well as structurally homologous heterocomplexes.example. Within the BGC, Ams21 and Ams22 share sequence
 similarities of 43% and 65% with PltL and PltA, respectively, from        Although our pipeline and network maps provide valuable
the characterized pyoluteorin BGC (BGC0000127), suggesting that       insights into the interactome in BGCs, they have three limitations.
Ams21 functions as an ACP and Ams22 as a flavin-dependent       First, AF2 (including AlphaFold-Multimer) and AF3 often fail to
halogenase. Moreover, the structure of the active site of Ams22 is      accurately  predict weak or  transient protein complexes. This
highly similar to that of PltA (PDB code: 5DBJ)[65], which       limitation arises because their algorithms infer three-dimensional
catalyzes the 4,5-dichlorination of the pyrrolyl moiety covalently      protein structures primarily from coevolutionary signals in the MSA
attached  to  the  phosphopantetheinyl arm  of  PltL,  strongly      derived from individual amino acid sequence(s), and inter-chain
suggesting that Ams22 catalyzes the same reaction (Supplementary       interactions were not considered during their training processes[23].
Figure  S5). However,  unlike  in  the  pyoluteorin BGC,  the      Carrier proteins, such as ACPs in PKSs and peptidyl carrier proteins
armeniaspirol BGC was reported to produce a 3,4,5-trichlorinated     (PCPs) in NRPSs, exemplify this limitation. These proteins tether
pyrollyl intermediate during the biosynthetic process[64]. Thus, the      biosynthetic intermediates via a thioester bond to the thiol group of
remaining  halogenase-like  enzymes,  Ams8  and  Ams9,  are      a phosphopantetheinyl arm attached to a conserved serine residue.
hypothesized to catalyze chlorination at the 3-position of the     They then interact with multiple catalytic domains in a specific yet
pyrrolyl moiety, although the mechanism remains unclear[64].           transient manner to promote stepwise transformations of the
                                                                             substrate. Although identifying their partner enzymes is crucial for


[PDF physical page 8]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.26.684697; this version posted October 27, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.





 Figure 5. Visualization of the protein–protein interaction (PPI) network map. (A) The interface on the website. (B) The PPI network map in the
 monensin BGC (BGC0000100). The nodes represent proteins encoded within the BGC. Edges indicate predicted interactions, with labels showing
 the corresponding ipTM values. Blue edges denote structurally homologous interactions. Only nodes connected by edges above the ipTM threshold
 are displayed (ipTM > 0.55 was applied on the website).
studying  biosynthetic  pathways,  improving  their  prediction        Third, our method may fail to correctly predict the complex
accuracy remains an important  technical  challenge.  Similarly,      formation of proteins with potentially conformational changes.
predicting the binding position of precursor peptides in RiPPs is also     Although talaromyolides tlx BGC from Talaromyces purpureogenus
 difficult for the same reason.                                         has not been registered in the current MIBiG dataset yet, the TlxJ–
                                                                      TlxI heterodimer  crystal structure (PDB code: 7VBQ)[71]  is   Second, our computational pipeline did not perform complex
predictions  for  proteins  larger  than  1,950  residues due  to      notable case to discuss the issue (Supplementary Figure S6A).
                                                             While sequence analysis suggests that both TlxJ (GenBank ID:computational limitations. Such large proteins are typically found in
type I PKS or NRPS systems, where multiple catalytic domains are     BDC03472.1) and  TlxI (BDC03471.1) were nonheme  iron
                                                                  oxygenases and the RMSD between the two proteins was 1.6 Å, TlxIlinked within a single polypeptide to form the core scaffold of the
product. While these modular proteins mainly assemble the product        is suggested to be enzymatically dysfunctional as oxidases due to the
                                                                           lack of an arginine residue for α-ketoglutarate (α-KG) binding andthrough their intramolecular domain–domain interactions, some
tailoring enzymes within the same BGC can modify intermediates      serve as an auxiliary protein to assist in TlxJ expression enhancing its
                                                                                catalytic activity[71]. The gel  filtration analysis and the X-raytethered to the modular proteins, thereby expanding the chemical
diversity of the final products.[69,70] Prior prediction of these      crystallography indicated that TlxI  is monomeric (PDB code:
                                                            7VBR).[71] However, while TlxJ–TlxI was correctly predicted as ainteractions could help identify novel tailoring enzymes responsible
for  introducing  unusual  functional  groups;  however,  such      heterocomplex with an ipTM of 0.91 (Supplementary Figure S6B),
                                                                      TlxI was predicted to form a homodimer with an ipTM of 0.85predictions were not fully performed in this study.
                                                           (Supplementary Figure S6C). Interestingly, the crystal structures


[PDF physical page 9]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.26.684697; this version posted October 27, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

revealed that TlxI undergoes a large conformational change when     The predicted protein–protein interaction network and JSON files un-
forming a heterocomplex with TlxJ. Yet the predicted TlxI structure       derlying     this     article    are    available    in   Zenodo    at
was close to the conformation observed in the heterocomplex crystal      https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17451667.
structure   in   both  monomeric  and  homomeric   forms
(Supplementary  Figure S6C and D).  This  observation  is   AUTHOR INFORMATION
consistent with the caveat that AF3 does not adequately predict                                                        Corresponding Author
proteins that undergo conformational changes[23]. By contrast,
                                                                       moriwaki.yoshitaka@tmd.ac.jp
AF3 successfully predicted the homodimer of MonBI with an ipTM
of 0.87 and the heterodimer with MonBII with a higher ipTM of 0.93     Author Contributions (CRediT Taxonomy)
(Figure 4E). These results suggest that MonBI does not undergo      Yoshitaka Moriwaki (Conceptualization [lead], Data curation [lead],
significant conformational changes upon dimerization. To our      Formal analysis [lead], Funding acquisition [equal], Investigation
knowledge, MSA subsampling with AF2 or ColabFold[72] is one of       [lead], Methodology[lead], Resources [equal], Software [lead], Vali-
the best strategies for predicting such conformational changes in      dation [lead], Visualization [lead], Writing—original draft [lead],
advance. However, we did not apply this approach in this study      Writing—review & editing [equal]),
because of its high computational cost.                              Taro Shiraishi (Conceptualization [equal], Investigation [supporting],
                                                                     Resources [equal], Validation [equal], Writing—review & editing   Although  several  technical  challenges remain  in  accurately
                                                                             [equal]),predicting  protein  complexes,  our  comprehensive  approach
                                                                  Yohei Katsuyama (Conceptualization [equal], Investigation [support-
uncovered numerous plausible complexes hidden within BGCs.
                                                                                   ing], Validation [equal], Writing—review & editing [equal]),
Notably, the structurally homologous heterodimers identified in this
                                                                      Kenichi Matsuda (Conceptualization [equal], Investigation [support-
study may serve as intriguing targets for future research, particularly                                                                                   ing], Writing—review & editing [equal]),
in the context of microbial evolution. According to the genome                                                                Toyoyuki Ose (Writing—review & editing [supporting]),
streamlining theory, natural selection in prokaryotes tends to      Atsushi Minami (Writing—review & editing [supporting]),
eliminate genetic redundancy and nonessential sequences, leading      Hideaki Oikawa (Writing—review & editing [supporting]),
to the evolution of highly compact and efficient genomes[73,74].     Tomohisa Kuzuyama (Funding acquisition [lead], Project administra-
Thus, the structurally homologous complexes are unlikely to be       tion [lead], Writing—review & editing [equal]),
mere products of gene duplication but are instead expected to      Ryuichiro Ishitani (Funding acquisition [equal], Resources [equal],
possess distinct functional roles such as regulation or assistance in      Supervision [equal], Writing—review & editing [equal]),
protein expression. Examples of the former function have been     Tohru Terada (Funding acquisition [equal], Project administration
reported in both homo-[75,76] and hetero-complexes[71], and       [lead], Resources [equal], Supervision [equal], Writing—review & ed-
their characterization is relatively straightforward. In contrast, the       iting [equal])
 latter function can only be uncovered through co-expression of a
specific  protein  combination,  and   its  underlying  molecular   ACKNOWLEDGMENT
mechanisms remain largely unexplored. Among the reported cases,    We thank Dr Naruki Yoshikawa for a fruitful discussion.
MonBI–MonBII[63] and LstA–LstB[77] become functional only
                                                      Funding Sources
when co-expressed. Co-expression of LxmK and LxmY has been
                                                                    This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,shown not only to improve stability but also to increase yield.[78]
                                                                       Science and Technology, Japan [Grant-in-Aid for Transformative Re-Interestingly, TalA from Talaromyces pinophilus LD-7[79] and
                                                                         search Areas, 22H05126 to Y.M. and T.T., 22H05120 to T.K. and T.S.,Lsd19 from Streptomyces lasaliensis[80-83] have been identified as
                                                          22H05130 to Y.K., 22H05128 to K.M., 25H01575 to A.M., and
naturally occurring chimeric enzymes, in which two structurally
                                                          25H02250  to  R.I.;  Grant-in-Aid  for  Scientific  Research  (JSPS
homologous protein domains are fused into a single polypeptide
                                                      KAKENHI), 25K01890 to Y.M. and 19H04634 to T.O.]. Additional
chain. Such protein (or domain) pairs may exist to expand the range                                                                      support was provided by the Medical Research Center Initiative for
of catalytic functions that can be achieved by a single enzyme alone.                                                             High Depth Omics at the Institute of Science Tokyo, Nanken-Kyoten at
   Currently, sequence-based prediction tools such as DeepBGC      the Institute of Science Tokyo 2025, and the Multilayered Stress Dis-
and ClusterFinder are widely used to identify BGCs that produce       eases project (JPMXP1323015483) at the Institute of Science Tokyo.
novel natural products. In contrast, structure-based approaches have      This work utilized computational resources from the supercomputer
the potential to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying      “Flow” provided by the Information Technology Center at Nagoya Uni-
these products based on the relationship between protein function       versity through the HPCI System Research Project (Project IDs:
and tertiary structure. The development of prediction tools for      jh240001 and jh250002) and the TSUBAME 4.0 supercomputer at the
                                                                                   Institute of Science Tokyo.protein structures and their interaction networks is a key step toward
unraveling enzymatic mechanisms and entire metabolic pathways,
                                                                  Conflict of interesteven  in  uncultivable  microorganisms. Our  results  provide  a
                                                       None declared.comprehensive overview of the constituent proteins within BGCs
and highlight intriguing protein complexes for future investigation.
                                              ABBREVIATIONS
These bottom-up approaches  will  accelerate  identification  of
                                                      BGC, biosynthetic gene cluster; ipTM, interface predicted templateprotein pairs that should be co-expressed or co-analyzed and deepen
                                                                     modeling; AF3, AlphaFold3; RiPP(s), ribosomally synthesized andour  biochemical  understanding,  ultimately  providing  insights
                                                                                 post-translationally modified peptide(s); ACP, acyl-carrier protein.essential for the rational engineering of enzymes.

                                              REFERENCESASSOCIATED CONTENT
                                                                                                     1.      Varadi M, Anyango S, Deshpande M  et  al. AlphaFold Protein
Data Availability                                                              Structure Database: massively expanding the structural coverage of protein-


[PDF physical page 10]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.26.684697; this version posted October 27, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

sequence space with high-accuracy models. Nucleic Acids Res 2022;50:D439–           23.    Abramson J, Adler J, Dunger J et al. Accurate structure prediction of
D444. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1061                                     biomolecular  interactions  with  AlphaFold  3.  Nature  2024;630:493–500.
    2.     Zhang S, Mukherji R, Chowdhury S et al. Lipopeptide-mediated       https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07487-w
 bacterial interaction enables cooperative predator defense. Proc Natl Acad Sci           24.    Deneke V, Blaha A, Lu Y et al. A conserved fertilization complex
USA 2021;118:e2013759118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2013759118             bridges sperm and  egg  in  vertebrates.  Cell  2024;187:7066–7078.e7022.
    3.      Chevrette M, Thomas C, Hurley A et al. Microbiome composition       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.09.035
modulates secondary metabolism in a multispecies bacterial community. Proc           25.     Gulick A and Aldrich C. Trapping interactions between catalytic
Natl        Acad          Sci      USA        2022;119:e2212930119.      domains and carrier proteins of modular biosynthetic enzymes with chemical
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2212930119                                          probes.        Nat        Prod        Rep        2018;35:1156–1184.
    4.     Modolon F, Barno A, Villela H et al. Ecological and biotechnological       https://doi.org/10.1039/c8np00044a
importance of secondary metabolites produced by coral-associated bacteria. J           26.     Kosol S, Jenner M, Lewandowski J et al. Protein–protein interactions
Appl Microbiol 2020;129:1441–1457. https://doi.org/10.1111/jam.14766             in  trans-AT  polyketide  synthases.  Nat  Prod  Rep  2018;35:1097–1109.
    5.      Malpartida  F  and  Hopwood D  A.  Physical  and  genetic       https://doi.org/10.1039/c8np00066b
 characterisation of the gene cluster for the antibiotic actinorhodin in Streptomyces           27.    Dodge G, Maloney F and Smith J. Protein–protein interactions in
 coelicolor A3(2). Mol Genet Genomics 1986;205:66–73.                                “cis-AT”   polyketide   synthases.  Nat   Prod  Rep  2018;35:1082–1096.
    6.      Stanzak R, Matsushima P, Baltz R et al. Cloning and Expression in       https://doi.org/10.1039/c8np00058a
 Streptomyces  lividans of Clustered Erythromycin Biosynthesis Genes from           28.     Herbst D, Townsend C and Maier T. The architectures of iterative
 Streptomyces         erythreus.        Bio/Technology       1986;4:229–232.       type    I  PKS   and   FAS.   Nat   Prod   Rep   2018;35:1046–1069.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt0386-229                                           https://doi.org/10.1039/c8np00039e
    7.     Medema M, Blin K, Cimermancic P  et  al. antiSMASH: rapid           29.    Chen A, Re R and Burkart M. Type II fatty acid and polyketide
 identification, annotation and analysis of secondary metabolite biosynthesis gene       synthases: deciphering protein–protein and protein–substrate interactions. Nat
 clusters  in  bacterial  and  fungal genome  sequences.  Nucleic  Acids  Res       Prod Rep 2018;35:1029–1045. https://doi.org/10.1039/c8np00040a
2011;39:W339–W346. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkr466                             30.     Mori T, Moriwaki Y, Sakurada K et  al. Molecular basis for the
    8.       Blin K, Medema M, Kazempour D et al. antiSMASH 2.0—a versatile        diversification of lincosamide biosynthesis by pyridoxal phosphate-dependent
 platform for genome mining of secondary metabolite producers. Nucleic Acids Res       enzymes. Nat Chem 2025;17:256–264. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-024-
2013;41:W204–W212. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkt449                      01687-7
    9.     Weber T, Blin K, Duddela S et al. antiSMASH 3.0-a comprehensive           31.     Sikandar A and Koehnke J. The role of protein-protein interactions
 resource for the genome mining of biosynthetic gene clusters. Nucleic Acids Res        in the biosynthesis of ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified
2015;43:W237–W243. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv437                          peptides.       Nat        Prod        Rep        2019;36:1576–1588.
    10.      Blin K, Wolf T, Chevrette M et al. antiSMASH 4.0-improvements in       https://doi.org/10.1039/c8np00064f
chemistry prediction and gene cluster boundary identification. Nucleic Acids Res           32.      Rattray D and Foster L. Dynamics of protein complex components.
2017;45:W36–W41. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx319                         Curr         Opin        Chem            Biol          2019;48:81–85.
    11.      Blin K, Shaw S, Steinke K et al. antiSMASH 5.0: updates to the       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpa.2018.11.003
secondary metabolite genome mining pipeline. Nucleic Acids Res 2019;47:W81–           33.    Eddy S R. Accelerated Profile HMM Searches. PLoS Comp Biol
W87. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz310                                      2011;7:e1002195. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002195
    12.      Blin K, Shaw S, Kloosterman A et al. antiSMASH 6.0: improving           34.     Mirdita M, Schütze K, Moriwaki Y et al. ColabFold: making protein
 cluster detection and comparison capabilities. Nucleic Acids Res 2021;49:W29–        folding     accessible    to      all.    Nat    Methods    2022;19:679–682.
W35. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab335                                      https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01488-1
    13.      Blin K, Shaw S, Augustijn H et al. antiSMASH 7.0: new and improved           35.     Steinegger M and Söding  J. MMseqs2 enables sensitive protein
 predictions for detection, regulation, chemical structures and visualisation.       sequence searching  for the  analysis  of massive data  sets. Nat  Biotechnol
 Nucleic Acids Res 2023;51:W46–W50. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkad344         2017;35:1026–1028. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.3988
    14.      Blin K, Shaw S, Vader L et al. antiSMASH 8.0: extended gene cluster           36.     Dunbrack R L. Rēs ipSAE loquunt: What’s wrong with AlphaFold’s
 detection capabilities and analyses of chemistry, enzymology, and regulation.     ipTM  score  and how  to   fix   it.  bioRxiv  2025;2025.2002.2010.637595.
 Nucleic Acids Res 2025;53:W32–W38. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaf334          https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.02.10.637595
    15.    Zdouc M, Blin K, Louwen N et al. MIBiG 4.0: advancing biosynthetic           37.     Bryant P, Pozzati G and Elofsson A. Improved prediction of protein-
gene  cluster  curation  through  global  collaboration.  Nucleic  Acids  Res       protein   interactions  using  AlphaFold2.  Nat  Commun  2022;13:1265.
2025;53:D678–D690. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkae1115                      https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-28865-w
    16.     Hannigan G, Prihoda D, Palicka A et al. A deep learning genome-           38.    Zhu W, Shenoy A, Kundrotas P et al. Evaluation of AlphaFold-
mining strategy for biosynthetic gene cluster prediction. Nucleic Acids Res      Multimer  prediction  on  multi-chain  protein  complexes.  Bioinformatics
2019;47:https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz654                                    2023;39:btad424. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btad424
    17.     Cimermancic P, Medema M, Claesen J et al. Insights into Secondary           39.    Kim A-R, Hu Y, Comjean A  et  al. Enhanced Protein-Protein
Metabolism from a Global Analysis of Prokaryotic Biosynthetic Gene Clusters.        Interaction      Discovery       via      AlphaFold-Multimer.      bioRxiv
 Cell 2014;158:412–421. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.034                 2024;2024.2002.2019.580970. https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.19.580970
    18.     Jumper J, Evans R, Pritzel A et al. Highly accurate protein structure           40.     Wojdyr M. GEMMI: A library for structural biology. J Open Source
 prediction      with      AlphaFold.      Nature      2021;596:583–589.       Softw 2022;7:4200. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.04200
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2                                           41.      Krissinel E and Henrick K. Inference of macromolecular assemblies
    19.    McCoy A, Sammito M and Read R. Implications of AlphaFold2 for      from      crystalline      state.      J    Mol     Biol    2007;372:774–797.
 crystallographic phasing by molecular replacement. Acta  Crystallographica       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2007.05.022
 Section        D:          Structural          Biology        2022;78:1–13.           42.      Barajas J, Phelan R, Schaub A et al. Comprehensive Structural and
https://doi.org/10.1107/S2059798321012122                                   Biochemical Analysis of the Terminal Myxalamid Reductase Domain for the
    20.     Akdel M, Pires D, Pardo E et al. A structural biology community       Engineered Production of Primary Alcohols. Chem Biol 2015;22:1018–1029.
assessment of AlphaFold2 applications. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2022;29:1056–1067.       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2015.06.022
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-022-00849-w                                          43.    Wang L, Parnell A, Williams C et al. A Rieske oxygenase/epoxide
    21.   Homma M, Wakabayashi T, Moriwaki Y  et  al.  Insights  into       hydrolase-catalysed reaction cascade creates oxygen heterocycles in mupirocin
 stereoselective ring formation in canonical strigolactone: Discovery of a dirigent        biosynthesis. Nat Catal 2018;1:968–976. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-018-
domain-containing enzyme catalyzing orobanchol synthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci       0183-5
USA 2024;121:e2313683121. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2313683121                44.     Miyanaga A, Kurihara S, Chisuga T et al. Structural Characterization
    22.     Evans R, O’Neill M, Pritzel A et al. Protein complex prediction with        of Complex of Adenylation Domain and Carrier Protein by Using Pantetheine
AlphaFold-Multimer.          bioRxiv         2022;2021.2010.2004.463034.       Cross-Linking    Probe.   ACS   Chem     Biol    2020;15:1808–1812.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.04.463034                                      https://doi.org/10.1021/acschembio.0c00403


[PDF physical page 11]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.26.684697; this version posted October 27, 2025. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

    45.     Mori T, Kadlcik S, Lyu S et al. Molecular basis for carrier protein-           65.     Pang A, Garneau-Tsodikova S and Tsodikov O. Crystal structure of
dependent amide bond formation in the biosynthesis of lincosamide antibiotics.       halogenase PltA from the pyoluteorin biosynthetic pathway. J Struct Chem
Nat Catal 2023;6:531–542. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41929-023-00971-y           2015;192:349–357. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsb.2015.09.013
    46.     Miyanaga A, Nagata K, Nakajima J et al. Structural Basis of Amide-           66.     Barker R D, Yu Y, De Maria L et al. Mechanism of Action of Flavin-
Forming Adenylation Enzyme VinM in Vicenistatin Biosynthesis. ACS Chem Biol      Dependent     Halogenases.    ACS     Catal     2022;12:15352–15360.
2023;18:2343–2348. https://doi.org/10.1021/acschembio.3c00517                 https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.2c05231
    47.     Haslinger K, Peschke M, Brieke C  et  al. X-domain of peptide           67.    Yeh E, Blasiak L C, Koglin A et al. Chlorination by a long-lived
 synthetases recruits oxygenases crucial for glycopeptide biosynthesis. Nature       intermediate in the mechanism of flavin-dependent halogenases. Biochemistry
2015;521:105–109. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14141                        2007;46:1284–1292. https://doi.org/10.1021/bi0621213
    48.    Schramma K R, Bushin L B and Seyedsayamdost M R. Structure and           68.     Flecks S, Patallo E P, Zhu X et al. New insights into the mechanism
 biosynthesis of a macrocyclic peptide containing an unprecedented lysine-to-        of enzymatic chlorination of tryptophan. Angew Chem Int Ed 2008;47:9533–
tryptophan         crosslink.      Nat      Chem       2015;7:431–437.       9536. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200802466
https://doi.org/10.1038/nchem.2237                                                   69.    Ames  B, Nguyen C, Bruegger  J  et  al.  Crystal  structure and
    49.     Ortega M A, Hao Y, Zhang Q et al. Structure and mechanism of the       biochemical studies of the trans-acting polyketide enoyl reductase LovC from
tRNA-dependent  lantibiotic dehydratase NisB. Nature 2015;517:509–512.        lovastatin  biosynthesis. Proc Natl Acad  Sci USA 2012;109:11144–11149.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13888                                           https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1113029109
    50.     Bothwell I R, Cogan D P, Kim T et al. Characterization of glutamyl-           70.     Matthews M, Krest C, Barr E et al. Substrate-Triggered Formation
tRNA-dependent dehydratases using nonreactive substrate mimics. Proc Natl      and Remarkable Stability of the C-H Bond-Cleaving Chloroferryl Intermediate
Acad               Sci         USA            2019;116:17245–17250.        in  the  Aliphatic  Halogenase,  SyrB2.  Biochemistry  2009;48:4331–4343.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1905240116                                       https://doi.org/10.1021/bi900109z
    51.     Davis K M, Schramma K R, Hansen W A et al. Structures of the           71.      Li X, Awakawa T, Mori T et al. Heterodimeric Non-heme Iron
peptide-modifying radical SAM enzyme SuiB elucidate the basis of substrate      Enzymes   in  Fungal  Meroterpenoid   Biosynthesis.   J Am  Chem  Soc
 recognition.   Proc   Natl   Acad    Sci  USA   2017;114:10420–10425.      2021;143:21425–21432. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.1c11548
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1703663114                                              72.      del Alamo D, Sala D, McHaourab H S et al. Sampling alternative
    52.     Olano C, Wilkinson B, Moss S et al. Evidence from engineered gene       conformational states of transporters and receptors with AlphaFold2. eLife
 fusions for the repeated use of a module in a modular polyketide synthase. Chem       2022;11:https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.75751
Commun 2003;2780–2782. https://doi.org/10.1039/b310648a                          73.     Giovannoni S, Tripp H, Givan S et al. Genome streamlining in a
    53.     Olano C, Moss S, Braña A et al. Biosynthesis of the angiogenesis       cosmopolitan    oceanic    bacterium.     Science    2005;309:1242–1245.
 inhibitor borrelidin by Streptomyces parvulus Tü4055: insights into  nitrile       https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1114057
 formation. Mol Microbiol 2004;52:1745–1756. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-           74.     Giovannoni  S, Thrash  J and Temperton  B.  Implications  of
2958.2004.04090.x                                                                  streamlining  theory  for  microbial  ecology. ISME  J  2014;8:1553–1565.
    54.     Olano C, Wilkinson B, Sánchez C  et  al. Biosynthesis  of the       https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2014.60
 angiogenesis inhibitor borrelidin by Streptomyces parvulus Tü4055: Cluster           75.     Kotaka M, Ren  J, Lockyer M et al. Structures of R- and T-state
 analysis  and  assignment   of   functions.  Chem   Biol  2004;11:87–97.        Escherichia coli aspartokinase III: Mechanisms of the allosteric transition and
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2003.12.018                                      inhibition    by     lysine.     J    Biol   Chem    2006;281:31544–31552.
    55.    Camacho C, Coulouris G, Avagyan V et al. BLAST+ : architecture       https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M605886200
and        applications.    BMC        Bioinformatics       2009;10:421.           76.     Mattevi A, Valentini G, Rizzi M et al. Crystal structure of Escherichia
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-10-421                                                     coli pyruvate kinase type I: molecular basis of the allosteric transition. Structure
    56.     van Kempen M, Kim S S, Tumescheit C et al. Fast and accurate       1995;3:729–741. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0969-2126(01)00207-6
 protein  structure  search with  Foldseek. Nat  Biotechnol 2024;42:243–246           77.    Zhang D, Zhang F and Liu W. A KAS-III Heterodimer in Lipstatin
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01773-0                                       Biosynthesis Nondecarboxylatively Condenses C8 and C14 Fatty Acyl-CoA
    57.     Grunwald S, Hopf L, Bock-Bierbaum T et al. Divergent architecture       Substrates by a Variable Mechanism during the Establishment of a C22 Aliphatic
 of the heterotrimeric NatC complex explains N-terminal acetylation of cognate       Skeleton.        J    Am     Chem      Soc      2019;141:3993–4001.
 substrates. Nat Commun 2020;11:5506. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-       https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.8b12843
19321-8                                                                                78.     Randall G, Grant-Mackie E, Chunkath S et al. A Stable Dehydratase
    58.    Hamed A, Abdel-Razek A, Frese M et al. N-Acetylborrelidin B: a new      Complex Catalyzes the Formation of Dehydrated Amino Acids in a Class V
 bioactive metabolite from Streptomyces mutabilis sp MII. Z Naturforsch, C: Biosci       Lanthipeptide.     ACS     Chem        Biol      2024;19:2548–2556.
2018;73:49–57. https://doi.org/10.1515/znc-2017-0140                           https://doi.org/10.1021/acschembio.4c00637
    59.     Brock N, Nikolay A and Dickschat J. Biosynthesis of the antibiotic           79.    Ren M, Li Z, Wang Z  et  al.  Antiviral Chlorinated Drimane
 tropodithietic acid by the marine bacterium Phaeobacter inhibens. Chem Commun       Meroterpenoids from the Fungus Talaromyces pinophilus LD-7 and Their
2014;50:5487–5489. https://doi.org/10.1039/c4cc01924e                           Biosynthetic     Pathway.       J    Nat     Prod     2024;87:2034–2044.
    60.     Keatinge-Clay A, Maltby D, Medzihradszky K et al. An antibiotic       https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jnatprod.4c00539
 factory  caught   in   action.  Nat   Struct  Mol   Biol  2004;11:888–893.           80.     Hotta K, Chen X, Paton R et al. Enzymatic catalysis of anti-Baldwin
https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb808                                                    ring   closure   in   polyether   biosynthesis.   Nature  2012;483:355–358.
    61.    Zhang  J, Yuzawa S, Thong W et al. Reconstitution of a Highly       https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10865
Reducing Type II PKS System Reveals 6π-Electrocyclization Is Required for o-           81.    Minami A, Oguri H, Watanabe K et al. Biosynthetic machinery of
Dialkylbenzene   Biosynthesis.   J Am  Chem  Soc  2021;143:2962–2969.       ionophore polyether lasalocid: enzymatic construction of polyether skeleton.
 https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.0c13378                                          Curr         Opin       Chem           Biol         2013;17:555–561.
    62.    Deng Z, Liu J, Li T et al. An Unusual Type II Polyketide Synthase       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpa.2013.06.004
System Involved  in Cinnamoyl  Lipid  Biosynthesis. Angew Chem  Int Ed           82.     Migita A, Watanabe M, Hirose Y et al. Identification of a Gene
2021;60:153–158. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202007777                         Cluster of Polyether Antibiotic Lasalocid from Streptomyces lasaliensis. Biosci
    63.    Minami A, Ose T, Sato K et al. Allosteric Regulation of Epoxide        Biotechnol Biochem 2009;73:169–176. https://doi.org/10.1271/bbb.80631
Opening Cascades by a Pair of Epoxide Hydrolases in Monensin Biosynthesis.           83.    Wong F, Hotta K, Chen X et al. Epoxide Hydrolase-Lasalocid A
ACS Chem Biol 2014;9:562–569. https://doi.org/10.1021/cb4006485                Structure  Provides  Mechanistic  Insight  into  Polyether  Natural  Product
    64.    Fu C, Xie F, Hoffmann J et al. Armeniaspirol Antibiotic Biosynthesis:        Biosynthesis.         J    Am     Chem       Soc      2015;137:86–89.
 Chlorination and Oxidative Dechlorination Steps Affording Spiro[4.4]non-8-       https://doi.org/10.1021/ja511374k
 ene.                ChemBioChem                  2019;20:764–769.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cbic.201800791