
[PDF physical page 1]
                                                                                                     ORIGINAL RESEARCH
                                                                                                                                           published: 13 May 2020
                                                                                                                                                   doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.00410




         A Novel Hydroxylation Step in the
           Taxane Biosynthetic Pathway: A New
           Approach to Paclitaxel Production by
             Synthetic Biology

                            Raul Sanchez-Muñoz1, Edgar Perez-Mata2, Lorena Almagro3, Rosa M. Cusido2,
                          Mercedes Bonﬁll2, Javier Palazon2 and Elisabeth Moyano1*

                                                            1 Departament de Ciències Experimentals  i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 2 Secció de Fisiologia
                                            Vegetal, Facultat de Farmacia, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3 Departamento de Biología Vegetal, Facultad
                                   de Biología, Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain


                           Engineered plant cell lines have the potential to achieve enhanced metabolite production
                                 rates, providing a  high-yielding source  of compounds  of  interest. Improving the
                             production of taxanes, pharmacologically valuable secondary metabolites of Taxus spp.,
                      Edited by:     is hindered by an incomplete knowledge of the taxane biosynthetic pathway. Of the ﬁve
                      Ethan I. Lan,
       National Chiao Tung University,   unknown steps, three are thought to involve cytochrome P450-like hydroxylases. In
                           Taiwan    the current work, after an in-depth in silico characterization of four candidate enzymes
                 Reviewed by:   proposed in a previous cDNA-AFLP assay, TB506 was selected as a candidate for
               Kwon-Young Choi,
                             the hydroxylation of the taxane side chain. A docking assay indicated TB506  is         Ajou University, South Korea
                 Chin-Yuan Chang,    active after the attachment of the side chain based on its afﬁnity to the ligand 3′N-
       National Chiao Tung University,    dehydroxydebenzoyltaxol. Finally, the involvement of TB506 in the last hydroxylation
                           Taiwan
                            step of the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway was conﬁrmed by functional assays. The
              *Correspondence:
                    Elisabeth Moyano    identiﬁcation of  this hydroxylase  will contribute to the development of alternative
          elisabeth.moyano@upf.edu    sustainable paclitaxel production systems using synthetic biology techniques.

                Specialty section:     Keywords:  taxane  hydroxylase,  paclitaxel,  protoplasts  transfection, cytochrome  P450,  biotechnological
         This article was submitted to     production, biotransformation
                    Synthetic Biology,
             a section of the journal
       Frontiers in Bioengineering and  INTRODUCTION
                      Biotechnology
       Received: 28 February 2020   Due to their diversity and wide range of activities, plant secondary metabolites represent a
          Accepted: 14 April 2020    vast source of pharmacological molecules. This group of metabolites are mainly used by plants
           Published: 13 May 2020    for defense and environmental interactions and, for that reason, they are produced in very
                           Citation:    low quantities under normal conditions (Fura, 2006; Breitling et al., 2013). Plant cell cultures
   Sanchez-Muñoz R, Perez-Mata E,    are increasingly being applied as biofactories to produce metabolites of pharmaceutical interest
    Almagro L, Cusido RM, Bonﬁll M,   (Ramachandra Rao and Ravishankar, 2002; Sharma et al., 2014). These alternative production
    Palazon J and Moyano E (2020) A    systems can be manipulated to improve yields by empirical or rational approaches, or ideally a
           Novel Hydroxylation Step    combination of both (Moyano et al., 2003; Vidal-Limon et al., 2018). Yet the metabolic engineering
   in the Taxane Biosynthetic Pathway:
                                  of cell lines is challenged by an incomplete knowledge of highly complex biosynthetic pathways      A New Approach to Paclitaxel
     Production by Synthetic Biology.    involving numerous enzymes (Zhang et al., 2004).
     Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 8:410.       Taxanes, secondary metabolites produced by Taxus spp., are a treatment of choice for several
       doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.00410    types of cancer (Exposito et al., 2010). This importance lies in the fact that paclitaxel and other




Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org             1                                   May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 410


[PDF physical page 2]
Sanchez-Muñoz et al.                                                                      A Novel Taxane-Hydroxylase Characterized



taxanes play a dual role in their anticancer eﬀect, a mechanism  numerous  group. There  are nine  hydroxylation  steps, but
only shown by this group of compounds. First, they bind and   only six hydroxylases have been characterized to date [taxane
stabilize the dimers of α- and β-tubulin preventing microtubules   5α-hydroxylase (T5αOH), taxane 13α-hydroxylase (T13αOH),
dynamism and cell division (Magnani et al., 2009). In addition, it   taxane  10β-hydroxylase (T10βOH),  taxane  14β-hydroxylase
has been demonstrated that taxanes bind and inhibit the function   (T14βOH),  taxane  2α-hydroxylase  (T2αOH)  and  taxane
of the human protein Bcl-2, involved in preventing apoptosis,   7β-hydroxylase (T7βOH)] (Jennewein et al., 2001, 2003, 2004;
enhancing apoptosis and increasing anticancer eﬀects (Fang et al.,   Schoendorf et al., 2001; Chau and Croteau, 2004; Chau et al.,
1998; Rodi et  al., 1999). Due to taxanes limited production   2004; Figure 1).
by their natural source (concentrations below 0.02% in the      All the identiﬁed hydroxylases  of Taxus  spp. belong  to
inner bark of adult trees), their biotechnological production   the cytochrome P450 superfamily (subfamily CYP725) and are
has become their main current source (Vidal-Limon  et  al.,   classiﬁed as class  II (Kaspera and Croteau, 2006), the most
2018). Taxus spp. cell cultures have yielded higher quantities  common class in eukaryotes. These enzymes are formed by
of  paclitaxel and other taxanes than complete  plants, and   proteins associated with the outer face of the endoplasmic
production  has been improved by  elicitation  with methyl   reticulum, where they are anchored in the membrane with
jasmonate or coronatine (CORO) increasing their production   independent NADPH-reductases (Kaspera and Croteau, 2006).
between 6- and 83-times and their release to the culture medium   Primary structure conservation among plant cytochromes P450
up to 100% (Cusido et  al., 2002, 2014; Expósito et  al., 2009;    is typically low (ranging from 10 to 15%), but the sequence
Sabater-Jara et al., 2010; Onrubia et al., 2013; Vidal-Limon et al.,   identity (SID)  of taxane cytochrome P450 hydroxylases  in
2018). Yields could be improved still further by the engineering   Taxus cuspidata L. was shown to be higher than 70%, thus
of genetically modiﬁed lines, but this is hindered by the gaps in   indicating  a  closer  relation (Jennewein  et  al.,  2004). This
our knowledge of the taxane biosynthetic pathway.               unusual cytochrome P450 group could be the  result  of a
   Although taxane accumulation varies among species, the   strong sequence conservation associated with a strict substrate
biosynthetic pathway  is thought to be universal throughout   selectivity and recognition. Also, although sequence conservation
the Taxus genus (Cameron and Smith, 2008). To date, 14 of   in  this enzyme  superfamily  is low  overall, secondary and
the postulated 19 steps of the pathway have been elucidated   tertiary structures maintain high conservation rates, which could
(Vongpaseuth and Roberts, 2007). In an initial step, the taxane   be the  basis for the deﬁnition of novel cytochromes P450
tricyclic skeleton  is constructed from the substrate geranyl-   (Werck-Reichhart et al., 2002).
geranyl diphosphate, and after several chemical modiﬁcations    Among the known steps of taxane biosynthesis, the most
involving  cytochrome-P450  hydroxylases,  acyl  transferases   challenging to elucidate have been the side chain attachment
and other enzymes, the intermediate baccatin III is obtained.   to baccatin III and its posterior modiﬁcations. The conversion
The  late  steps  of the pathway include the binding  of the   of α-phenylalanine to β-phenylalanine (Walker et  al., 2004),
side  chain  by  the enzyme  baccatin  III  13-O-(3-amino-3-   the activation of the latter to a CoA ester (Ramírez-Estrada
phenylpropanoyl) transferase (BAPT), the hydroxylation of the   et  al., 2016) and  its subsequent transfer to baccatin  III to
side chain  at carbon  2′ by an uncharacterized hydroxylase,   form the side chain (Walker et al., 2002) are well established,
and    benzoylation   by    3′-N-debenzoyl-2′-deoxytaxol-N-   but  it remains unclear whether the 2′-hydroxylation of the
benzoyltransferase (DBTNBT),  leading  to  the end product   β-phenylalanine side chain occurrs before or after its binding.
paclitaxel (Croteau et al., 2006).                            The conversion of the intermediate β-phenylalanoyl baccatin
  The limited knowledge of the genes involved in the pathway    III to 3-phenylisoserinoyl baccatin  III in Taxus microsomes
means taxane biosynthesis remains an open research  ﬁeld.   indicates that the hydroxylation may take place after the amino
The  functional  assays  required  to conﬁrm  the  suitability   phenylpropanoid transfer to baccatin III (Long and Croteau,
of uncharacterized candidate genes can be challenging, but   2005). However, the hydroxylase responsible for this step  is
the valuable insights aﬀorded by a computational approach    still unknown, owing to the complexities of selecting putative
increase  their  feasibility.  This may  include  the homology   hydroxylases belonging to the cytochrome P450 superfamily
evaluation of enzymes that perform similar functions, structural   for functional studies. As well as the diﬃculty of choosing a
prediction  of  the  putative  enzyme, and  the  performance   suitable candidate, there is a lack of intermediate compounds
of docking  assays  to  predict  if the candidate enzyme can   in  the  taxane  biosynthetic pathway  to  carry  out  speciﬁc
interact with  its putative substrate (Dukka, 2017). Using a   functional assays.
combined  in  silico and experimental approach, our group     The functional analysis of cytochromes P450 has numerous
recently identiﬁed a gene encoding a novel CoA ligase that   obstacles: the  size  of  this superfamily, the high degree  of
activates  ß-phenylalanine  to  form  the  taxane  side  chain   divergence among the enzymes, their low transcript abundance
(Ramírez-Estrada  et  al., 2016). The gene was characterized  and their selective expression. Another limiting factor is their
using  data  obtained  from  a  cDNA-ampliﬁed  fragment-   possible need for colocalized electron transfer partners such
length polymorphism  assay (cDNA-AFLP) combined  with   as NADPH-reductases (Schuler and Werck-Reichhart, 2003).
the metabolic proﬁling of elicited Taxus baccata L. cell cultures   Considering the challenging nature of the functional deﬁnition
(Ramírez-Estrada et al., 2016).                                     of novel P450 proteins, it is necessary to carry out an exhaustive
  Among  the unknown enzymes  involved  in  the  taxane   preliminary  study  to choose  a  suitable  candidate,  thereby
biosynthetic  pathway,   the   hydroxylases   are   the  most   overcoming the ﬁrst of the aforementioned stumbling blocks.




Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org             2                                   May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 410


[PDF physical page 3]
Sanchez-Muñoz et al.                                                                      A Novel Taxane-Hydroxylase Characterized





 FIGURE 1 | Taxane biosynthesis summary. Enzymes involved in the pathway are in blue if characterized and in red if unknown. Taxadiene synthase (TXS), taxane
  5α-hydroxylase (T5αOH), taxadien-5α-ol-O-acetyl-transferase (TAT), taxane 13α-hydroxylase (T13αOH), taxane 10β-hydroxylase (T10βOH), taxane 14β-hydroxylase
  (T14βOH), taxane 2α-hydroxylase (T2αOH) and taxane 7β-hydroxylase (T7βOH), taxane 2α-O-benzoyl transferase (TBT), 10-deacetyl-baccatin III-10-O-
  acetyltransferase (DBAT), phenylalanine aminomutase (PAM), 13-O-(3-amino-3-phenylpropanoyl) transferase (BAPT), 3′-N-debenzoyl-2′-deoxytaxol-N-
  benzoyltransferase (DBTNBT). The candidate hydroxylase TB506 is indicated in the putative site of action.


   In a previous cDNA-AFLP assay, which provided a wide  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
transcriptome of Taxus × media  cells under MeJA  elicited
conditions, unknown upregulated proteins were  selected  as  Candidate Selection and Primary
possible candidates on the basis of their putative functions
                                            Structure Study(Onrubia  et  al., 2014; Ramírez-Estrada  et  al.,  2016). Four
of them were  suitable  to be  responsible  for some  of  the   Four of the entire set of candidate enzymes found in previous
hydroxylation steps in  paclitaxel  biosynthesis. Since further  cDNA-AFLP  assays  in  T.  baccata  (Onrubia  et   al.,  2014;
analysis were necessary to reveal the real implication of these   Ramírez-Estrada et al., 2016) were postulated as possible taxane
candidates in the pathway, in the present study the four putative   hydroxylases (tagged as TB506, TB224, TB331, and TB574)
hydroxylases were studied. The most suitable candidate was   (Supplementary Table S1). Two of the selected tags (TB331 and
selected after an in-depth in  silico analysis and comparison   TB574) showed homology with known taxane hydroxylases and
with the previously characterized taxane hydroxylases. After   other putative cytochromes P450, one (TB506) was homologous
the construction and optimization of a structural model, the   with a cinnamate 4-hydroxylase (C 4-OH), and the other (TB224)
tertiary structure of the selected candidate and the other taxane   only showed homology with a putative cytochrome P450.
hydroxylases was studied. Finally, the aﬃnity of the putative     Based on  the  unusually  high  sequence  identity  of  the
hydroxylase with diﬀerent ligands was studied by a docking assay   candidates TB331 and TB574 with the characterized taxane
to conﬁrm its implication in the taxane biosynthetic pathway.   hydroxylases,  they  seemed   suitable  candidates   for  the
Once the suitability of the selected candidate was established, a   hydroxylases acting on carbons 1β and 9α in the intermediate
biotransformation assay was performed within a heterologous   steps of the taxane pathway, hydroxylating the taxane core. In
system expressing the candidate enzyme and the last enzymes   contrast, TB506 showed a low amino acid sequence conservation
involved in taxane biosynthesis (BAPT and DBTNBT) to verify   with the characterized taxane hydroxylases, as could be expected
if the combination  of the three enzymes would allow the   for the hydroxylase acting on the N-benzoyl-3-phenylisoserinoyl
transformation of intermediate metabolite baccatin III into the   side chain  at C2′. Furthermore, the structural  similarity of
ﬁnal product paclitaxel.                                          the substrates of the unknown C2′ hydroxylase and C 4-OH




Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org             3                                   May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 410


[PDF physical page 4]
Sanchez-Muñoz et al.                                                                      A Novel Taxane-Hydroxylase Characterized



could explain the homology shown by these two enzymes   group with the consensus sequence ([FW]-[SGNH]-X-[GD]-{F}-
(Supplementary Figure S1). Despite this preliminary analysis  [RKHPT]-{P}-C-[LIVMFAP]-[GAD]) containing the essential
seems indicate that TB506 could be a hydroxylase acting on the   cysteine residue, the ETLR motif with the absolute conserved
C2′ of taxane structure, further sequence and structural features  E-X-X-R  pattern and  the consensus sequence PERF motif
were studied to clarify its implication in taxanes biosynthesis.     (Du et al., 2016).
   Since  all  the  characterized  hydroxylases  belong  to  the     Figure 2B shows the sequence alignment of the characterized
superfamily cytochrome P450, the unknown hydroxylases were   taxane hydroxylases, the candidate TB506 and the characterized
also expected to belong to this protein group. The identiﬁcation  C 4-OH. Despite the low SID between the hydroxylases and
of  novel cytochrome P450  proteins  involves  studying  the  TB506 (Figure 2A), CYP450 signature consensus patterns were
sequences and structural traits related to diﬀerential features   found in  all analyzed sequences, conﬁrming membership of
(Goyal et al., 2015). First, sequence identities (SIDs) between the   the same superfamily. The typical PERF sequences were only
characterized hydroxylases and the putative taxane hydroxylase   observed in TB506 and C 4-OH, while the variation PSRF
TB506  were  analyzed  to  identify  conserved and  variable   was found in the other hydroxylases, in accordance with their
sequence regions.                                              unusually high degree of conservation (Jennewein et al., 2004).
   Thus,  a  primary  structure  comparison  was  performed  The ETLR motif exhibited the absolute conserved E-X-X-R
among the characterized taxane hydroxylases in an intraspeciﬁc   pattern in all cases, while the other two variable residues were
alignment (belonging to a single Taxus species). Although no   present in all the studied sequences with the exception of T7βOH
Taxus species has a complete set of known hydroxylases, the  and T10βOH. The heme-binding group matched the consensus
high  level of homology between species allowed us to add   patterns of the CYP450 superfamily in all the studied sequences,
sequences from another organism (Jennewein  et  al., 2004).  and the variable amino acids of the candidate TB506 matched
Despite relatively high SIDs, ranging from 55.51 to 71.86%  some of the characterized taxane hydroxylases.
(Figure  2), two  clusters  of  genes  were  found: T10βOH,      Accordingly, despite the low SID between the candidate
T13αOH, and T14βOH in one, and T2αOH and T7βOH in  TB506 and the other taxane hydroxylases, the presence of the
the other. In contrast, T5αOH showed high SID with all the   consensus sequences of the salt-bridge ETLR, the heme-binding
hydroxylases, especially with T14βOH. These results reﬂect the   group and the PERF motif indicate that all the tested enzymes
diﬀerent action sites of the hydroxylases. T10βOH, T13αOH,   belong to the same superfamily. This constitutes further evidence
and T14βOH hydroxylate the taxane core in the initial steps of   that the candidate TB506 functions as a hydroxylase in the
the pathway, which starts with the hydroxylation of taxadiene-   taxane biosynthetic pathway (Bak et al., 2011; Du et al., 2016).
5α-ol and taxadiene-5α-yl acetate by T10βOH and T13αOH,   Furthermore, since the motifs PERF, ETLR and the heme-binding
respectively. The biosynthesis of taxanes then continues or   group are involved in protein folding, the higher aminoacid
the activity of T14βOH leads to the formation of taxadiene-   conservation in these motifs between TB506 and C 4-OH are the
5α,10β-14β-triol acetate, a derivative compound not included   ﬁrst indicative of their binding site similarity.
in the pathway (Kaspera and Croteau, 2006). Situated in the
intermediate steps are T2αOH and T7βOH, which were observed
clustered together. Involved in the early steps of the pathway,  Structural Model Building and Geometric
T5αOH is able to hydroxylate both tautomers produced by the  Optimization
action of taxadiene synthase (TXS), indicating lower substrate  Due to the low primary sequence conservation observed in
selectivity. This higher substrate permissiveness could explain   the previous alignments, secondary and tertiary structures were
the higher SIDs shown by T5αOH in comparison with the   also studied. As no structural information about any taxane
other hydroxylases.                                            hydroxylase was available, predictions were performed using
  When the candidate TB506 was added to the comparison, its    all the enzymes in the previous analysis, as described above.
alignment showed a SID of 20.73 and 23.68% with T14βOH and  To increase the reliability of the predicted structures, diﬀerent
T10βOH, respectively, clearly lower than the SID between the   oxidoreductases belonging to the same CYP superfamily from
characterized hydroxylases. The sequence similarity of the known   diﬀerent organisms were used as templates the complete table
hydroxylases, depending on their hydroxylation site, matched   of templates for TB506 is available in the Supplementary Table
with the low SID of the candidate TB506 with them, which   S1 and the templates for the rest of structures in Supplementary
could be explained by its putative function hydroxylating the   Table S2. In the case of the putative hydroxylase TB506, a model
side chain. When added to the comparison, C 4-OH was found   was achieved with a conﬁdence level of >90% in 95% of the
to share a 75.51% SID with TB506, whereas lower SIDs were   molecule (Figure 3), showing a low conﬁdence level only at the
obtained with the other hydroxylases, with values similar to those   N-terminal α-helix.
of TB506 (Figure 2A).                                               After  modeling  the  putative  TB506  hydroxylase,  the
  A primary structure comparison also allowed us to detect   knowledge-based energy pattern of the molecule was studied
conserved  features  between  the  diﬀerent  enzymes. Some   to detect the erroneous parts of the model (Wiederstein and
signature  sequences  shared among  cytochromes P450  are   Sippl, 2007; Cossio et al., 2012). The knowledge-based pattern
involved in common mechanisms, such as electron and proton  showed two high peaks of positive knowledge-based energy at the
transfer or the activation of the oxygen molecule to carry out   N-terminal sequence, and a central lower peak and a moderate
the hydroxylation reaction (Bak et al., 2011): the heme-binding   one at the C-terminal sequence (Supplementary Figure S2A),




Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org             4                                   May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 410


[PDF physical page 5]
Sanchez-Muñoz et al.                                                                      A Novel Taxane-Hydroxylase Characterized





 FIGURE 2 | Primary sequence alignment between taxane hydroxylases T2αOH, T5αOH, T7βOH, T10βOH, T13αOH, T14βOH, the candidate TB506 and the
  cinnamate 4-hydroxylase (C 4-OH). (A) Matrix similarity constructed by SIDs. Color scale ranges from blue (the minimum value of sequence identity) to red (the
 maximum value of sequence identity). (B) Sequence alignment. Consensus sequences are highlighted in green (the salt bridge ETLR involved in the stabilization of
  the enzyme core), orange (the PERF motif which interacts with the ETLR motif and locks the heme-binding group) and red (the heme-binding group that serves as a
  ligand for the cofactor heme-iron).





Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org             5                                   May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 410


[PDF physical page 6]
Sanchez-Muñoz et al.                                                                      A Novel Taxane-Hydroxylase Characterized





 FIGURE 3 | Structural model of the putative hydroxylase TB506. (A) Predicted tertiary structure of TB506. (B) The conﬁdence level is shown on a scale from >90 to
 <10% (red to blue, respectively).



indicating a structural problem. Thus, a geometric optimization   heme-group by several hydrogen bonds (Figure 4A). The motifs
was necessary to ﬁnd the conformation with minimal potential  PERF and ETLR, which  stabilize the structure, were found
energy and avoid errors in side chain packaging or van der   to be connected by hydrogen bonds and  also linked with
Waals clashes between atoms. After an energy minimization and   other surrounding residues to form a stable protein core, thus
structural optimization to relax the structure and avoid van der   establishing the E-R-R triad (Figure 4B). These features and their
Waals clashes between atoms, some of the peaks reduced their   correct orientation and interactions conﬁrmed that the model
knowledge-based energy, resulting in unmodiﬁed high peaks in   of the candidate has a correct folding, allowing it to be used in
the N-terminal (residues 1–40 of the model), in the central part   the docking assay.
(residues 275–301) and in the C-terminal (residues 430–451)    To detect structural conservation, the structures of TB506,
(Supplementary Figure S2B). The  rest  of the hydroxylase   the characterized taxane hydroxylases and the C 4-OH were
models showed a knowledge-based energy pattern very similar  compared by a structural alignment (Supplementary Table S3).
to the putative TB506 hydroxylase. As shown in Supplementary  The alignment  of the candidate TB506 with the C 4-OH
Figure S2C, the ﬁrst problematic region contains an alpha-helix,  showed  the  lowest root-mean  standard  deviation (RMSD)
while the other two are external loops.                               value, being the enzyme with the highest structural similarity
  To reveal the cause of the high knowledge-based energy found   with  our  putative  hydroxylase.  The  set  of  characterized
in the N-terminal sequence, the subcellular location of the protein   taxane hydroxylases showed relatively low RMSD values when
was predicted to check if some of these points are accomplishing   aligned with TB506, indicating structural similarity [although
speciﬁc functions. As expected, the prediction showed that the   previous sequence alignments showed high sequence variations
high peak found in the N-terminus corresponds, with a high   (Figure 2A)].
conﬁdence degree, to a transmembrane helix that anchors the      In order to know  if the RMSD values were low enough
protein to the membrane and situated the rest of the molecule   to indicate similarity between this group and the candidate
in the cytoplasm (Supplementary Figure S3). Furthermore, the   TB506, an external structure not belonging to the superfamily
subcellular location prediction situated the putative hydroxylase   cytochrome P450, but with the same SID as the characterized
(TB506) in the secretory pathway with high conﬁdence (0.884),   hydroxylases, was added to the comparison (1DSB protein, an
possibly being anchored in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane   oxidoreductase from Escherichia coli). As expected, the RMSD of
by the transmembrane helix detected previously. This situates   the external structure and the candidate TB506 was very high in
the putative hydroxylase TB506 in class II of the cytochrome   comparison with the other values, indicating a strong structural
P450 superfamily, like the characterized taxane hydroxylases   divergence. With this result, we can conﬁrm that despite the
(Kaspera and Croteau, 2006). The rest of the regions with high   low primary structure conservation between the characterized
peak energies did not show any probability to be membrane-   taxane hydroxylases and the candidate TB506, they belong to
associated zones, so when deﬁning the regions interacting with   the same cytochrome P450 superfamily, showing their typical
the substrate it will be necessary to study if they are involved in   high degree of sequence divergence for similar P450 structures
the substrate recognition.                                        (Schuler and Werck-Reichhart, 2003). Furthermore, the higher
                                                                      structural similarity between TB506 and C 4-OH could indicate
Structural Traits of the Putative                     that they are sharing also structural features that are not present
Hydroxylase TB506                                       in the characterized taxane hydroxylases, such as the binding site.
Thanks to the model of the conﬁrmed hydroxylase TB506, the
role of the previously identiﬁed consensus sequences could be  Molecular Docking
studied in the structure. The CYP450 signature motif responsible  The  structural  conservation  between  cytochromes  P450,
for the heme-ligand bond was observed interacting with the   especially  of the regions involved  in  substrate  recognition,




Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org             6                                   May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 410


[PDF physical page 7]
Sanchez-Muñoz et al.                                                                      A Novel Taxane-Hydroxylase Characterized





 FIGURE 4 | Relationship between the conserved motifs in the putative hydroxylase TB506. (A) Consensus heme-binding group motif (red) and the heme-group
  (yellow). (B) Interactions between the PERF (orange) and ETLR (green) motifs with the protein core. In yellow, the hydrogen bond interaction.



allow the study of relevant structural  traits of novel CYPs   docked into the complete set of structures as possible ligands
(Baudry et al., 2003). Thus, we aligned the putative hydroxylase   (Supplementary Figure S5).
TB506 with the CYP450 prototype (see section “Experimental    From the entire set of results, the ligand energies range from
procedures”) to detect the residues belonging to the solvent   -4.0 to -7.0 kcal/mol using ß-phenylalanine as a ligand, from -
channel and the active site, which would be used as coordinates   6.53 to -10.80 kcal/mol with ß-phenylalanine-CoA and from -4.4
to perform the docking assay to detect ligand interactions. In   to -7.5 kcal/mol with 3′N-dehydroxydebenzoyltaxol. The more
this alignment, the deﬁned substrate recognition  sites (SRS)   negative the ligand energies, the more aﬃnity was shown for the
of the CYP450 prototype were extrapolated to the structure   receptor; and all the results showed good interactions between
of our sequence, and the involved residues were identiﬁed   the candidate and all the ligands assayed. Despite this, not all the
by their structural location (Supplementary Figure S4). All   docking results were correctly situated in the active site. Thus, the
the regions identiﬁed as SRSs deﬁned a solvent channel that   complete set of results was screened to consider only the docking
allows external compounds to arrive to the active site of the   outputs situating the ligand near the active site.
CYP450, where the heme-group is situated and interacts with     Taking into account all the outputs from the docking assay,
the signature patterns. Since the transmembrane helix does   ß-phenylalanine is almost always inside the solving channel and
not contribute to the conformation of the protein or to the   near the heme-group (Figure 5A), whereas ß-phenylalanine-CoA
hydroxylase activity, the apo form of the protein was used to    is never inside the active site (Figure 5B), due to its bigger size.
carry out the docking assay. It should be noted that none of the  The 3′N-dehydroxydebenzoyltaxol docking assay only gave ﬁve
loops showing high knowledge-based energy (Supplementary   results in the expected position (Figure 5C), possibly because the
Figure S2) were involved in the SRSs, so they would not interfere   larger structure of this ligand can only ﬁt in the active site in a
in the docking assay.                                        few structural variants of the candidate TB506. In addition, these
  The previous assays had conﬁrmed that the candidate TB506   outputs situate the ligand interacting with the residues involved
belongs to the cytochrome P450 superfamily, but there were   in the previously deﬁned SRSs, indicating the correct binding of
still no data about its possible interaction with potential ligands.   3′N-dehydroxydebenzoyltaxol to the active site (Supplementary
To  detect  if there are  interactions between the  ligands  of   Figure S6). The best of these ﬁve results was -7.4 kcal/mol,
T2′OH and the candidate, a docking assay was performed. Since   which is a better result than the complete set obtained with ß-
cytochrome P450 proteins are characterized by an extensive   phenylalanine. For this reason, although both ligands seem to be
plasticity and ﬂexibility in their active site (Hritz et al., 2008),   interacting with the putative hydroxylase TB506, the complete
an ensemble of 220 alternative conformations was created by   structure of 3′N-dehydroxydebenzoyltaxol seems to be a better
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations before launching the   ligand than ß-phenylalanine, supporting a hydroxylation role in
docking process, as described in Pang and Kozikowski (1994).      the side chain of the taxane biosynthetic pathway. The possible
  By  the  construction  of  the  220  structural  variants,   interaction with two of the ligands assayed indicates that, like
diﬀerent  orientations  of  the  side  chains  were  obtained   other taxane hydroxylases such as T5αOH (Croteau et al., 2006),
and,   thereafter,  temperature  and   structural  ﬂuctuations   our candidate may have aﬃnity for diﬀerent structures involved
that could aﬀect the solvent channel volume and  size are   in taxane biosynthesis. In the same way, the action of the putative
taken  into  account,  representing  the  typical  ﬂexibility  of   hydroxylase TB506 on the substrate ß-phenylalanine-CoA can
CYP450  binding   sites.  ß-phenylalanine,  ß-phenylalanine-   be discarded due to structural incompatibilities, with no docking
CoA and 3′N-dehydroxydebenzoyltaxol structures were then   result situating the ligand in the active site.




Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org             7                                   May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 410


[PDF physical page 8]
Sanchez-Muñoz et al.                                                                      A Novel Taxane-Hydroxylase Characterized





 FIGURE 5 | Docking outputs for the candidate TB506 and the ligands ß-phenylalanine (A), ß-phenylalanine-CoA (B) and 3′N-dehydroxydebenzoyltaxol (C). The
  regions responsible for the recognition of the substrate are highlighted in red.



   Therefore, the results of the in silico characterization indicate     Once  the  expression  of  the  three  genes  was  veriﬁed,
that the candidate TB506  is a hydroxylase belonging to the   protoplasts  transiently  transfected  with  the  genes  BAPT,
CYP450 superfamily and the docking assay revealed high aﬃnity  DBTNBT and the candidate TB506 were incubated in the
with the ligand 3′N-dehydroxydebenzoyltaxol, situating it in the   osmotic medium W5 containing the intermediate metabolites
hydroxylation step after BAPT activity, as expected.                of  the  taxane  biosynthetic  pathway  ß-phenylalanine-CoA
                                                      and baccatin III in the presence of 1 µM CORO. In order
                                                                   to  diﬀerentiate the  action  of the hydroxylase TB506 from
Biotransformation of Baccatin III to              other  hydroxylases  present  in  the  P.  sativum  protoplasts,
Paclitaxel                                            which could be acting non-speciﬁcally, protoplasts transfected
Once the suitability of the selected candidate was demonstrated   only with BAPT and DBTNBT were added to the analysis as
by the exhaustive in silico characterization, a functional assay   control samples.
was performed with the hydroxylase TB506 using a heterologous      Expecting low  quantities of  paclitaxel in the transfected
system of Pisum sativum L. protoplasts (Figures 6A–C). Thus,   samples due to the diﬀerent conditions of the heterologous
protoplasts of P. sativum were transiently transfected with the   system, a method using a HPLC-MS/MS analysis that allows
genes BAPT, DBTNBT and TB506, and then incubated with   the detection of taxane traces was used (Gallego et al., 2015).
1 µM CORO for 6 h in the presence of 100 mg/L baccatin III  The HPLC-MS/MS analysis performed after the incubation of
and 100 mg/L β-phenylalanine-CoA. As shown in Figure 6C,   the transfected protoplasts for 72 h showed that baccatin III
P. sativum  protoplasts remained  viable  after the treatment  and paclitaxel were present in all analyzed samples, both at the
with CORO and both paclitaxel precursors (with about 90%   extra- and intracellular level (Supplementary Figure S7). The ion
viability). In agreement with these results, Ketchum et al. (2007)   fragmentation pattern of baccatin III was found in all samples
reported that the addition of 125 µM (70.82 mg/L) baccatin   (m/z 587.248, m/z 207.101, m/z 405.190, m/z 509.216, m/z
III to Taxus cells increased paclitaxel production and the cells   527.227, and m/z 327.164 eluting at 10.10 min) (Supplementary
remained viable.                                             Figure S8), matching with the ion fragmentation of the standard
   In order to detect the transgenes expression, a RT-PCR were   solution of baccatin III (Supplementary Figure S9). These results
performed to conﬁrm the transfection process as described   indicate that part of this intermediate metabolite, both intra-
in Sanchez-Muñoz et  al. (2019). This analysis revealed that  and extracellular, remained unmetabolized by the transfected
BAPT, DBTNBT and the candidate TB506 were expressed   protoplasts. The presence of intra- and extracellular baccatin III
in the protoplasts of P. sativum under elicitation conditions   indicates its delivery to the apoplast of the P. sativum protoplast
(Figures 6D–F).                                                         after its addition to the osmotic medium. Ketchum et al. (2007)
  The use of transfected P. sativum protoplasts as heterologous  showed that labeled baccatin III molecules were able to enter
system was chosen because the previous results suggested the   Taxus cells and be transformed into paclitaxel, indicating an
putative hydroxylase TB506 was a  class  II CYP450, which    ability to cross the plasma membrane and be metabolized by
colocalize with NADPH-reductases in the endoplasmic reticulum   the last enzymes of the taxane biosynthetic pathway. Although
membrane  to perform  electron  transfer and  hydroxylation   baccatin III was found in the protoplasts transfected with the
(Schuler and Werck-Reichhart, 2003). As this kind of proteins   three genes (BAPT, TB506, and DBTNBT) and in the control
need to be anchored in the endoplasmic reticulum, in vitro   samples (only transfected with BAPT and DBTNBT), the quantity
functional assays are complex. Therefore, due to the feasibility   of baccatin III detected in the samples containing the candidate
of transient protoplast transfection (Sheen, 2001), a P. sativum  TB506 was slightly lower (0.0881 g/L in the samples containing
protoplast culture was chosen as a suitable heterologous system.    the three genes in contraposition of the 0.0999 g/L in the




Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org             8                                   May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 410


[PDF physical page 9]
Sanchez-Muñoz et al.                                                                      A Novel Taxane-Hydroxylase Characterized





 FIGURE 6 | Source plant material (A), protoplast culture (B) and cell viability (C) (assessed by DAF as described in section “Materials and Methods”) of transfected P.
  sativum protoplasts treated for 6 h with 1 µM coronatine. RT-PCR analysis of BAPT (D), DBTNBT (E) and TB506 (F) genes in P. sativum protoplasts at 6 h of
  treatment with coronatine. First lanes of the gels correspond to a 100-bp plus DNA ladder.



control samples), indicating that part of this compound could had   intracellular and extracellular content, respectively. The intra-
been metabolized.                                        and extracellular paclitaxel content of the transfected samples
   In  order  to know   if  the  lack  of  baccatin  III  in  the   indicates that the three transgenes (BAPT, TB506, and DBTNBT)
protoplasts  expressing  the  candidate TB506  is due  to  its   are involved in binding the side chain to baccatin III, side chain
conversion to paclitaxel, the presence of this metabolite in the   hydroxylation, and the last benzoylation step to obtain the end
transfected protoplasts was studied. The presence of paclitaxel   product paclitaxel.
in the transfected protoplasts was conﬁrmed by its retention     The detection of both intra- and extracellular paclitaxel (as
time and comparing the MS/MS fragmentation pattern with   well as baccatin III) suggests a ﬂux allowing its movement across
the standard  (ions  at m/z  854.338, m/z 509.216 and m/z   the cell membrane. Paclitaxel secretion in Taxus spp. cells is
286.106 eluting at 14.992 min) (Figure 7 and Supplementary   dependent on speciﬁc mechanisms requiring ATP consumption
Figure S10). On contrary, the control samples not containing   (Naill et al., 2012). Sabater-Jara et al. (2014) reported an enhanced
the candidate TB506 lacked  this peak,  indicating  that  the   expression of a gene encoding an unspeciﬁc ABC transporter
presence of the genes BAPT and DBTNBT was not able to   in Taxus cell cultures elicited with cyclodextrins and methyl
transform baccatin III into paclitaxel, pointing out TB506 as   jasmonate, as well as an increase in extracellular paclitaxel.
the responsible for the needed hydroxylation step. Regarding   This indicated that ABC transporters could be involved in
the exact quantity of paclitaxel found in the studied samples,   the transfer of intracellular paclitaxel to the culture medium
it was detected 0.00188 and 0.00119 g/L of paclitaxel in the   (Sabater-Jara et  al., 2014). Similarly, our results suggest that




Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org             9                                   May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 410


[PDF physical page 10]
Sanchez-Muñoz et al.                                                                      A Novel Taxane-Hydroxylase Characterized





 FIGURE 7 | HPLC-MS/MS chromatograms of intra- and extracellular paclitaxel in P. sativum protoplasts transiently transfected with the genes BAPT, DBTNBT and
  the candidate TB506 and treated with 1 µM coronatine in the presence of baccatin III and ß-phenylalanine-CoA. From top to bottom, the chromatograms represent
  the different molecular ions corresponding to paclitaxel (m/z: 854.338, 286.106, and 509.216 at the retention time of 14.992 min).



ABC-like transporters in P. sativum protoplasts can transfer   of this novel protein, and the method successfully used here
paclitaxel molecules.                                               to biotransform the valuable intermediate metabolite baccatin
  To discard the eﬀect of a non-speciﬁc hydroxylase encoded    III into paclitaxel, opens up possibilities of developing novel
by the P. sativum genome, control samples expressing only   strategies for the in vivo production of paclitaxel, avoiding the
the genes BAPT and DBTNBT were studied. Baccatin III was    classical chemical semi-synthesis.
detected in the control samples as it was added to the protoplast
medium as a precursor (Supplementary Figure S11A), but no
signals for paclitaxel at the speciﬁc retention time or any of the CONCLUSION
corresponding ions were observed in any of the analyzed samples
(Supplementary Figure S11B).                             With the aim of enhancing the biotechnological production
   These results conﬁrm that the hydroxylase tagged as TB506,   of paclitaxel, the suitability of four candidate enzymes derived
in combination with the enzymes BAPT and DBTNBT, is able   from a previous cDNA-AFLP assay was studied to unravel
to metabolize baccatin  III in the presence of the activated   the unknown hydroxylation steps of taxane biosynthesis. Based
precursor of the ß-phenylalanine-CoA side chain, producing  on the homology  of the  putative hydroxylase TB506 with
paclitaxel as the end product. Accordingly, the gene TB506   the enzyme cinnamate 4-hydroxylase and the  similarity  of
encodes a hydroxylase involved in the ﬁnal hydroxylation step   their substrates, TB506 was selected as a candidate enzyme
of taxane  biosynthesis, and  its identiﬁcation completes the   responsible for the hydroxylation of the ß-phenylalanoyl side
last unknown step at the end of the pathway. The deﬁnition   chain near the end of the taxane biosynthetic pathway. The




Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org            10                                   May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 410


[PDF physical page 11]
Sanchez-Muñoz et al.                                                                      A Novel Taxane-Hydroxylase Characterized



primary  structure comparison,  together with the  structural   (B2Z6P5) and the candidate TB506 (AKH04263) were added
traits in the constructed models, revealed signature cytochrome   to the MSA. To visualize and analyze the MSA, the software
P450 patterns and a strong structural conservation between   Unipro UGENE v1.29.0 (Okonechnikov et al., 2012) was used.
the candidate and previously characterized taxane hydroxylases.  The online tools TMHMM (Krogh et al., 2001) and TargetP 1.1
Thus, the analysis situated TB506 within the cytochrome P450   (Emanuelsson et al., 2000) were used to reveal the subcellular
superfamily, supporting its putative function as a hydroxylase.   location of the candidate hydroxylase TB506.
Moreover, in silico analysis proved to be a useful approach to
overcome the challenge of selecting suitable candidates for the                                              Structural Model Building, Validation and
functional characterization of cytochromes P450.
                                       Geometric Optimization  A favorable interaction between the hydroxylase TB506 and
the ligands potentially involved in the last hydroxylation step of  The Phyre2 online  tool  (Kelley  et  al., 2015) was used  to
the pathway was observed in the docking assay. A subsequent   predict the structural conformation of the characterized taxane
biotransformation assay using baccatin III and the side chain   hydroxylases, the candidate TB506 and the cinnamate 4-OH
precursor ß-phenylalanine-CoA showed the capacity  of the  (C 4-OH). Diﬀerent oxidoreductases belonging to the same
hydroxylase TB506, together with BAPT and DBTNBT,  to  CYP superfamily from diﬀerent organisms served as templates
produce the end product paclitaxel.                           (Supplementary Table S1). NAMD software (Phillips et  al.,
  The suitability of TB506 for the ﬁnal hydroxylation step,   2005) was used to ﬁnd the optimal conformation of  all the
postulated to occur after the side chain-binding by the BAPT   models, minimizing the energy of each residue. The process was
enzyme,  is  supported by  its  high  aﬃnity  with  the  3′N-   carried out in two phases, ﬁrst modifying the orientation of the
dehydroxydebenzoyltaxol  structure and the functional assay   side chains and then the complete residues, to avoid structural
results. Yet the aﬃnity shown toward the ß-phenylalanine   changes due to incorrect sidechain packaging. Two thousand
structure indicates a degree of plasticity in substrate recognition,   cycles and a dielectric constant of 80 were used. PROSAweb
as in previously characterized taxane hydroxylases. The ability   software (Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007) was used to reveal the
of BAPT to transfer the hydroxylated side chain structure was   quality of the prediction and possible problematic regions of the
shown experimentally, indicating that the hydroxylase could have  model with high potential energy, both in the original model and
residual activity in the side chain before its binding to baccatin   the optimized structure.
III. The aﬃnity for ß-phenylalanine situates this residual activity
before the action of the CoA-ligase, as the complete structure with  Molecular Dynamics and Protein-Ligand
the CoA molecule attached is unable to enter the active site of the  Molecular Docking
hydroxylase TB506.
                                                To deﬁne the coordinates of the  active  site to launch the
  The  deﬁnition and  characterization  of  this  hydroxylase
                                                           docking assay, a structural alignment between the candidate
contribute to the clariﬁcation of one of the most elusive steps
                                                   TB506 and the CYP450 prototype (PDB code: 2HPD) (Schuler
of the taxane biosynthetic pathway and bring the complete
                                                      and Werck-Reichhart, 2003) was performed by the PyMOL
elucidation of paclitaxel biosynthesis closer. This hydroxylation
                                                            Molecular graphic system (DeLano scientiﬁc: San Carlos, CA,
step could be a key factor in the development of environmentally
                                                          United  States). Molecular dynamics (MD) calculations were
friendly biotechnological approaches to paclitaxel production
                                                         performed by NAMD software using the apo form of the enzyme
based on the abundant intermediate baccatin III, commonly used
                                                               containing the heme-group (Phillips et al., 2005). In previous
for the chemical semi-synthesis of paclitaxel.
                                 MD calculations, an energy minimization was carried out using
                                                              standard conditions (10,000 cycles, 1 femtosecond per cycle
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES                and a dielectric constant of 80). The MD calculations gave
                                                         220 derivative structures from the candidate TB506. Putative
                                                                    substrates were constructed and  topologically optimized byPrimary Structure Study
                                                   ACD/ChemSketch software v1.7 2007 (ACD/Labs: Toronto, ON,
The software Clustal Omega (Sievers et al., 2011; Li et al., 2015)
                                                            Canada). Molecular docking was performed by AutoDockTools
was used to generate an amino acid multiple sequence alignment
                                                         4 (Morris et al., 2009) providing the coordinates corresponding
(MSA) between the characterized hydroxylases of several Taxus
                                                                   to the active site of the molecule.
spp.: T5αOH [T. cuspidata (Q6WG30), T. × media (Q6SPR0) and
T. wallichiana var. chinensis (Q8H6A8)]; T13αOH [T. cuspidata
(Q8W4T9), T. × media (Q5BU48) and T. wallichiana  var.  Protoplast Isolation
chinensis  (Q56GD5)]; T10αOH  [T.  cuspidata  (Q9AXM6),   For protoplast isolation, young leaves of P. sativum were cut in
T. ×  media  (H9BII4)  and  T.  wallichiana  var.  chinensis   1 mm strips. The enzymatic cocktail consisting of 2% cellulase,
(Q6JLD0)]; T2αOH [T. wallichiana var. chinensis (Q5S1U2) and   0.1% pectinase from Rhizopus spp. and 0.3% macerozyme R10
T. canadiensis (Q6JD68)]; T14αOH [T. × media (H9BII0) and   from Rhizopus spp. was added to an osmotic medium (consisting
T. cuspidata (Q84KI1)] and T7αOH [T. × media (H9BII3),   of 10 mM Tris-MES, 0.6 M sorbitol, 1 mM CaCl2 and 0.1%
T. cuspidata (Q6JTJ0) and T. mairei (G8XSN5)]. The diﬀerent  BSA at pH 5.4). Then, 2 g of plant material were incubated
amino acid sequences were aligned to reveal the sequence identity   with 10 ml of digestion medium (the enzymatic cocktail diluted
(SID). Furthermore, sequences of a cinnamate 4-OH (C 4-OH)   in the osmotic medium at pH 5.4). After incubating the plant




Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org            11                                   May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 410


[PDF physical page 12]
Sanchez-Muñoz et al.                                                                      A Novel Taxane-Hydroxylase Characterized



material for 1 h, the protoplasts were harvested by ﬁltration   in  the   transfected   protoplasts   at  6  h   of  treatment.
with 0.65 µm nylon ﬁlters and centrifugation at 100 g for   Total RNA  was  extracted  from  approximately  500 mg
5 min, before being rinsed and cleaned three times with the   of   protoplast   pellet   using   the  ARNzol   kit  (REAL,
same osmotic medium at pH 7. Finally, the protoplasts were   Valencia,  Spain) and  treated  with  Superscript IV  Reverse
resuspended in 2 ml osmotic medium at pH 7 before proceeding   Transcriptase  (Invitrogen,  Carlsbad,  CA,  United   States)
to the transfection assay. Protoplasts were quantiﬁed under a  and  the TURBO DNA-free  kit (Thermo  Fisher  Scientiﬁc,
light microscope with a Neubauer Hemocytometer, using the   Waltham,  MA,   United   States)   to   obtain   complete
formula: protoplast yield (protoplasts/ml) = average number  cDNA  from  1  µg   of   total  RNA.  cDNA  from  the
of protoplasts counted per section × 104 × dilution factor.   transfected   protoplasts   was   ampliﬁed   with   speciﬁc
Protoplast viability was determined using ﬂuorescein diacetate   primers  for BAPT (forward: TGAGCGAGTCATGGTAGAC;
(DAF) and propidium iodide (IP) as described by Duncan and   reverse: AACCCCCACATGTAAAACGA),  TB506  (forward:
Widholm (1990).                               GGGAACGGGCAAGACATGG; reverse: GCCCACTCCATCGA
                                           CCACAG) and DBTNBT (forward: CGGGGGGTTTGTTGTGG
Protoplast Transfection Assay                GATT;   reverse:  CATTATCCATTGCACATG)   using   the
Genes BAPT (KC988329.1), the candidate TB506 (KP178208),  Dream-Taq  Green PCR  Master  Mix   kit  (ThermoFisher
and DBTNBT (AY563629.1) were cloned into the plasmids   Scientiﬁc). The PCR conditions were: denaturation at 95◦C
pK7WG2D, pJCV52 (Laboratory  of  Plant Systems  Biology,   for 5 min, 35  cycles  of 95◦C  for 1 min, Tm (64◦C  for
Ghent University, Belgium), and pCAMBIA1301 (GeneScript,  BAPT, 58◦C  for TB506 and 48◦C  for DBTNBT  primers)
Piscataway, NJ, United  States),  respectively, and introduced   for  1  min  and  72◦C  for  1min,  with  a  ﬁnal  step  at
in  E.  coli DH5α. The  plasmid  was  extracted  using  the  72◦C for 5 min.
PROMEGA Wizard  Plus SV  Minipreps DNA  Puriﬁcation
System  Kit. To  transfect  the  protoplasts  obtained  from
P.  sativum, 10 µg  of each plasmid DNA were placed  in  DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
a 2 ml round-bottom  tube and  approximately 5 ×  106
protoplasts  were  added and  carefully  mixed. 1× volume  The datasets generated for this study can be found in the Genbank
of a PEG  solution  consisting  of 40% PEG6000, 100 mM  KP178208 (TB506).
glucose, 10 mM CaCl2, and  0.7 mM KH2PO4  at pH  5.8
adjusted with KOH was added  to the tube dropwise and
slightly mixed. After 15 min of incubation, 400 µl of W5 AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
medium (2 mM MES, 154 mM NaCl, 125 mM CaCl2 and
5 mM KCl) was added  following  the same procedure  as   JP and EM conceived the project and designed the research
with the PEG  solution, and protoplasts were harvested by   plan. RS-M performed the computational approaches for the
centrifugation  at  600  g  for  2  min.  Following  the same   in silico characterization. EP-M and LA performed the functional
procedure, samples of the obtained protoplasts were transfected   analysis. EM supervised the computational work. RC supervised
only with  the genes BAPT and DBTNBT and used  as a   the functional analysis. RS-M and EM wrote the manuscript. MB,
negative control to discard the eﬀect of unknown hydroxylases   RC, and JP supervised and complemented the writing. RS-M and
on the substrates.                                   EP-M contributed equally to this manuscript.

Biotransformation of Baccatin III to
Paclitaxel                          FUNDING
Transfected  protoplasts  were  placed  in  0.5  ml  of W5
medium  containing  1 µM CORO,  0.1  g/L  baccatin  III   This work  has been  carried  out  at  the  Plant  Physiology
and 0.1 g/L β-phenylalanine-CoA and they were incubated   Laboratory (University of Barcelona) and the Plant Biology
at 25◦C in darkness  for 72  h. After the incubation time,   Department (University of Murcia). It was ﬁnancially supported
cells were  harvested by  centrifugation  at  13,000 rpm  for   by the Spanish MEIC (BIO2017-82374-R) (AEI/FEDER, UE),
3  min.  Total  taxanes  were  extracted  from  both   cells   the Generalitat de Catalunya (2017SGR242) and the Fundación
and  culture  media  (Cusidó  et   al.,  1999;  Bonﬁll  et   al.,   Seneca-Agencia de Ciencia y Tecnología de la Región de Murcia
2003)  and  paclitaxel  detection  was  performed  using  the   (1987/GERM/15). RS-M was supported by a fellowship from the
method  for  the  detection  of  taxanes  traces  by  liquid   University Pompeu Fabra.
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS)
(Gallego et al., 2015).
                                SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Transfection Conﬁrmation
After   the   incubation  with  1 µM  CORO,   0.1  g/L  The Supplementary Material  for  this  article can be found
of   baccatin    III   and   0.1   g/L   of   β-phenylalanine-   online   at:   https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fbioe.
CoA,  the  expression  of  the  three  genes  was  studied   2020.00410/full#supplementary-material





Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org            12                                   May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 410


[PDF physical page 13]
Sanchez-Muñoz et al.                                                                      A Novel Taxane-Hydroxylase Characterized


REFERENCES                                                        Fura, A. (2006). Role of pharmacologically active metabolites in drug discovery and
                                                                               development. Drug Discov. Today 11, 133–142.  doi: 10.1016/S1359-6446(05)
Bak, S., Beisson, F., Bishop, G., Hamberger, B., Höfer, R., Paquette, S., et al. (2011).      03681-0
   Cytochromes p450. BioOne Complete 9:e0144. doi: 10.1199/tab.0144              Gallego,  A.,  Jáuregui,  O., Moyano,  E.,  Palazon,   J., and  Casals,  I.  (2015).
Baudry, J., Li, W., Pan, L., Berenbaum, M. R., and Schuler, M. A. (2003). Molecular      Optimization of a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method
   docking of substrates and inhibitors in the catalytic site of CYP6B1, an insect       for the quantiﬁcation of traces of taxanes in a Corylus avellana cell suspension
   cytochrome p450 monooxygenase. Protein Eng. 16, 577–587.  doi: 10.1093/     medium. RSC Adv. 5, 17976–17983.
   protein/gzg075                                                              Goyal, A., Kim, B.-G., Hwang, K.-S., and Lee, S.-G. (2015). Identiﬁcation of
Bonﬁll, M., Palazón, J., Cusidó, R. M., Joly, S., Morales, C., and Piñol, M. T. (2003).      novel cytochrome P450 homologs using overlapped conserved residues based
   Inﬂuence of elicitors on taxane production and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl      approach. Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng. BBE 20, 431–438.
   coenzyme A reductase activity in Taxus media cells. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 41,    Hritz,  J., de Ruiter, A., and Oostenbrink, C. (2008). Impact of plasticity and
   91–96.                                                                                     ﬂexibility on docking results for cytochrome P450 2D6: a combined approach
Breitling, R., Ceniceros, A., Jankevics, A., and Takano, E. (2013). Metabolomics       of molecular dynamics and ligand docking.  J. Med. Chem. 51, 7469–7477.
   for secondary metabolite research. Metabolites 3, 1076–1083. doi: 10.3390/       doi: 10.1021/jm801005m
   metabo3041076                                                            Jennewein, S., Long, R. M., Williams, R. M., and Croteau, R. (2004). Cytochrome
Cameron, S. I., and Smith, R. F. (2008). Seasonal changes in the concentration of      p450 taxadiene 5alpha-hydroxylase, a mechanistically unusual monooxygenase
   major taxanes in the biomass of wild Canada Yew (Taxus canadensis. Marsh.).       catalyzing the ﬁrst oxygenation step of taxol biosynthesis. Chem. Biol. 11,
   Pharm. Biol. 46, 35–40.                                                        379–387. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2004.02.022
Chau, M., and Croteau, R. (2004). Molecular cloning and characterization of a   Jennewein,  S.,  Rithner,  C.  D.,  Williams,  R.  M., and  Croteau,  R.  (2003).
   cytochrome P450 taxoid 2alpha-hydroxylase involved in Taxol biosynthesis.      Taxoid metabolism: taxoid 14β-hydroxylase is a cytochrome P450-dependent
   Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 427, 48–57. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2004.04.016                monooxygenase. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 413, 262–270.  doi: 10.1016/s0003-
Chau, M., Jennewein, S., Walker, K., and Croteau, R. (2004). Taxol biosynthesis:      9861(03)00090-0
   molecular cloning and characterization of a cytochrome P450 taxoid 7β-   Jennewein, S., Rithner, C. D., Williams, R. M., and Croteau, R. B. (2001). Taxol
   hydroxylase. Chem. Biol. 11, 663–672. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2004.02.025           biosynthesis: taxane 13 alpha-hydroxylase is a cytochrome P450-dependent
Cossio, P., Granata, D., Laio, A., Seno, F. and Trovato A. (2012). A simple and      monooxygenase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 13595–13600.  doi: 10.1073/
   eﬃcient statistical potential for scoring ensembles of protein structures. Sci. Rep.      pnas.251539398
   2:351. doi: 10.1038/srep00351                                                 Kaspera, R., and Croteau, R. (2006). Cytochrome P450 oxygenases of Taxol
Croteau, R., Ketchum, R. E. B., Long, R. M., Kaspera, R., and Wildung, M. R. (2006).       biosynthesis. Phytochem. Rev. 5, 433–444. doi: 10.1007/s11101-006-9006-4
   Taxol biosynthesis and molecular genetics. Phytochem. Rev. 5, 75–97.              Kelley, L. A., Mezulis, S., Yates, C. M., Wass, M. N., and Sternberg, M. J. E. (2015).
Cusido, R. M., Onrubia, M., Sabater-Jara, A. B., Moyano, E., Bonﬁll, M., Goossens,     The Phyre2 web portal for protein modeling, prediction and analysis. Nat.
   A., et  al. (2014). A rational approach to improving the biotechnological       Protoc. 10, 845–858. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2015.053
   production of taxanes in plant cell cultures of Taxus spp. Biotechnol. Adv. 32,   Ketchum, R. E.  B., Horiguchi,  T., Qiu, D., Williams, R. M., and Croteau,
   1157–1167. doi: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2014.03.002                                  R. B. (2007). Administering cultured Taxus cells with early precursors reveals
Cusido, R. M., Palazon, J., Bonﬁll, M., Navia-Osorio, A., Morales, C., and Pinol,       bifurcations in the taxoid biosynthetic pathway. Phytochemistry 68, 335–341.
  M. T. (2002). Improved paclitaxel and baccatin III production in suspension       doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2006.10.019
   cultures of Taxus media. Biotechnol. Prog. 18, 418–423. doi: 10.1021/bp0101583   Krogh, A., Larsson, B., von Heijne, G., and Sonnhammer, E. L. (2001). Predicting
Cusidó, R. M., Palazón, J., Navia-Osorio, A., Mallol, A., Bonﬁll, M., Morales, C.,      transmembrane protein topology with a hidden Markov model: application to
    et al. (1999). Production of Taxol R⃝and baccatin III by a selected Taxus baccata      complete genomes. J. Mol. Biol. 305, 567–580. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.2000.4315
    callus line and its derived cell suspension culture. Plant Sci. Int. J. Exp. Plant    Li, W.,  Cowley,  A.,  Uludag,  M.,  Gur,  T., McWilliam,  H.,  Squizzato,  S.,
    Biol. 146, 101–107.                                                                          et   al.  (2015).  The EMBL-EBI  bioinformatics web  and  programmatic
Du, H., Ran, F., Dong, H.-L., Wen, J., Li, J.-N., and Liang, Z. (2016). Genome-wide       tools framework. Nucleic Acids  Res.  43, W580–W584.  doi: 10.1093/nar/
    analysis, classiﬁcation, evolution, and expression analysis of the cytochrome      gkv279
   P450 93 family in land plants. PLoS One 11:e0165020. doi: 10.1371/journal.   Long, R. M., and Croteau, R. (2005). Preliminary assessment of the C13-side chain
   pone.0165020                                                                    2′-hydroxylase involved in Taxol biosynthesis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
Dukka, B. K. C. (2017). Recent advances in sequence-based protein structure       338, 410–417. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.08.119
   prediction.   Brief.   Bioinform.   18,  1021–1032.   doi:   10.1093/bib/bbw   Magnani, M., Maccari, G., Andreu, J. M., Díaz, J. F., and Botta, M. (2009). Possible
   070                                                                          binding site for paclitaxel at microtubule pores. FEBS J. 276, 2701–2712. doi:
Duncan, D. R., and Widholm, J. M. (1990). “Measurements of viability suitable for       10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.06994.x
   plant tissue cultures,” in Methods Mol Biol, eds J. M. Pollard and J. M. Walker    Morris, G. M., Huey, R., Lindstrom, W., Sanner, M. F., Belew, R. K., Goodsell,
   (Totowa: The Humana Press), 29–37. doi: 10.1385/0-89603-161-6:29              D. S., et al. (2009). AutoDock4 and AutoDockTools4: automated docking with
Emanuelsson, O., Nielsen, H., Brunak, S., and von Heijne, G. (2000). Predicting        selective receptor ﬂexibility. J. Comput. Chem. 30, 2785–2791. doi: 10.1002/jcc.
   subcellular localization of proteins based on their N-terminal amino acid      21256
   sequence. J. Mol. Biol. 300, 1005–1016. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.2000.3903           Moyano, E., Jouhikainen, K., Tammela, P., Palazon, J., Cusido, R. M., Pinol, M. T.,
Expósito, O., Bonﬁll, M., Onrubia, M., Jané, A., Moyano, E., Cusidó, R. M., et al.        et al. (2003). Eﬀect of pmt gene overexpression on tropane alkaloid production
   (2009). Eﬀect of taxol feeding on taxol and related taxane production in Taxus       in transformed root cultures of Datura metel and Hyoscyamus muticus. J. Exp.
   baccata suspension cultures. New Biotechnol. 25, 252–259. doi: 10.1016/j.nbt.       Bot. 54, 203–211. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erg014
   2008.11.001                                                                               Naill, M. C., Kolewe, M. E., and Roberts, S. C. (2012). Paclitaxel uptake and
Exposito, O., Syklowska-Baranek, K., Moyano,  E., Onrubia, M., Bonﬁll, M.,       transport in Taxus cell suspension cultures. Biochem. Eng. J. 63, 50–56. doi:
   Palazon, J., et al. (2010). Metabolic responses of Taxus media transformed cell       10.1016/j.bej.2012.01.006
   cultures to the addition of methyl jasmonate. Biotechnol. Prog. 26, 1145–1153.   Okonechnikov, K., Golosova, O., Fursov, M., and UGENE team (2012). Unipro
   doi: 10.1002/btpr.424                                            UGENE: a uniﬁed bioinformatics toolkit. Bioinformatics 28, 1166–1167. doi:
Fang,  G., Chang,  B.  S., Kim, C.  N.,  Perkins,  C., Thompson, C.  B., and       10.1093/bioinformatics/bts091
   Bhalla, K. N. (1998). “Loop” domain is necessary for taxol-induced mobility   Onrubia, M., Moyano, E., Bonﬁll, M., Cusidó, R. M., Goossens, A., and Palazón, J.
    shift and phosphorylation of Bcl-2 as well as for inhibiting taxol-induced       (2013). Coronatine, a more powerful elicitor for inducing taxane biosynthesis in
   cytosolic accumulation  of cytochrome c and  apoptosis. Cancer  Res.  58,      Taxus media cell cultures than methyl jasmonate. J. Plant Physiol. 170, 211–219.
   3202–3208.                                                                              doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2012.09.004





Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org            13                                   May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 410


[PDF physical page 14]
Sanchez-Muñoz et al.                                                                      A Novel Taxane-Hydroxylase Characterized




Onrubia, M., Pollier, J., Vanden Bossche, R., Goethals, M., Gevaert, K., Moyano,   Sheen,  J.  (2001).  Signal transduction  in maize and Arabidopsis mesophyll
    E., et al. (2014). Taximin, a conserved plant-speciﬁc peptide is involved in the       protoplasts. Plant Physiol. 127, 1466–1475.
   modulation of plant-specialized metabolism. Plant Biotechnol. J. 12, 971–983.    Sievers, F., Wilm, A., Dineen, D., Gibson, T. J., Karplus, K., Li, W., et al. (2011).
   doi: 10.1111/pbi.12205                                                                     Fast, scalable generation of high-quality protein multiple sequence alignments
Pang, Y. P., and Kozikowski, A. P. (1994). Prediction of the binding sites of       using Clustal Omega. Mol. Syst. Biol. 7:539. doi: 10.1038/msb.2011.75
   huperzine A in acetylcholinesterase by docking studies. J. Comput. Aided Mol.   Vidal-Limon, H., Sanchez-Muñoz, R., Khojasteh, A., Moyano, E., Cusido, R. M.,
   Des. 8, 669–681. doi: 10.1007/bf00124014                                   and Palazon, J. (2018). “Taxus cell cultures: an eﬀective biotechnological tool
Phillips, J. C., Braun, R., Wang, W., Gumbart, J., Tajkhorshid, E., Villa, E., et al.       to enhance and gain new biosynthetic insights into taxane production,” in
   (2005). Scalable molecular dynamics with NAMD. J. Comput. Chem. 26, 1781–       Reference Series in Phytochemistry, eds A. Pavlov and T. Bley (Cham: Springer),
   1802.                                                                       295–316.
Ramachandra Rao, S., and Ravishankar, G. A. (2002). Plant cell cultures: chemical   Vongpaseuth, K., and Roberts, S. C. (2007). Advancements in the understanding
    factories of secondary metabolites. Biotechnol. Adv. 20, 101–153. doi: 10.1016/       of Paclitaxel metabolism in tissue culture. Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 8, 219–236.
   s0734-9750(02)00007-1                                                                 doi: 10.2174/138920107781387393
Ramírez-Estrada, K., Altabella, T., Onrubia, M., Moyano, E., Notredame, C.,   Walker, K., Fujisaki,  S., Long, R., and Croteau, R. (2002). Molecular cloning
   Osuna, L., et al. (2016). Transcript proﬁling of jasmonate-elicited Taxus cells      and heterologous expression of the C-13 phenylpropanoid side chain-CoA
   reveals a β-phenylalanine-CoA ligase. Plant Biotechnol. J. 14, 85–96.  doi: 10.       acyltransferase that functions in Taxol biosynthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
   1111/pbi.12359                                                                       99, 12715–12720. doi: 10.1073/pnas.192463699
Rodi, D.  J., Janes, R. W., Sanganee, H.  J., Holton, R. A., Wallace, B. A., and   Walker, K. D.,  Klettke,  K., Akiyama,  T., and Croteau, R. (2004). Cloning,
   Makowski, L. (1999). Screening of a library of phage-displayed peptides       heterologous expression, and characterization of a phenylalanine aminomutase
   identiﬁes human Bcl-2 as a taxol-binding protein 1 1Edited by I. A. Wilson.       involved in Taxol biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 53947–53954. doi: 10.1074/
     J. Mol. Biol. 285, 197–203. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.1998.2303                          jbc.M411215200
Sabater-Jara, A.-B., Onrubia, M., Moyano, E., Bonﬁll, M., Palazón,  J., Pedreño,   Werck-Reichhart,  D., Bak,  S., and Paquette,  S.  (2002). Cytochromes P450.
  M. A., et al. (2014). Synergistic eﬀect of cyclodextrins and methyl jasmonate       Arabidopsis Book Am. Soc. Plant Biol. 1:e0028.
   on taxane production in Taxus x media cell cultures. Plant Biotechnol. J. 12,    Wiederstein, M., and Sippl, M. J. (2007). ProSA-web: interactive web service for the
   1075–1084. doi: 10.1111/pbi.12214                                                 recognition of errors in three-dimensional structures of proteins. Nucleic Acids
Sabater-Jara, A. B., Tudela, L. R., and López-Pérez, A. J. (2010). In vitro culture of       Res. 35, W407–W410. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm290
   Taxus sp.: strategies to increase cell growth and taxoid production. Phytochem.   Zhang, W., Franco,  C.,  Curtin,  C., and Conn,  S.  (2004). To  stretch  the
   Rev. 9, 343–356. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7652.2011.00664.x                         boundary of secondary metabolite production in plant cell-based bioprocessing:
Sanchez-Muñoz,  R., Almagro,  L., Cusido,  R. M.,  Bonﬁll, M.,  Palazon,   J.,      anthocyanin as a case study.  J. Biomed. & Biotechnol. 2004, 264–271.  doi:
   and Moyano, E. (2019). Transfecting Taxus x media protoplasts to study      10.1155/S1110724304404148
   transcription factors BIS2 and TSAR2 as activators of taxane-related genes.
   Plant Cell Physiol. 61, 576–583. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcz225                      Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
Schoendorf, A., Rithner, C. D., Williams, R. M., and Croteau, R. B. (2001).   absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
   Molecular cloning of a cytochrome P450 taxane 10-hydroxylase cDNA from    potential conﬂict of interest.
   Taxus and functional expression in yeast. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98,
   1501–1506. doi: 10.1073/pnas.98.4.1501                                       Copyright © 2020 Sanchez-Muñoz, Perez-Mata, Almagro, Cusido, Bonﬁll, Palazon
Schuler, M. A., and Werck-Reichhart, D. (2003). Functional genomics of P450s.   and Moyano. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
   Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 54, 629–667.                                 Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in
Sharma, P., Sharma, S., Yadav, S., Srivastava, A., Purohit, I., and Shrivastava, N.    other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s)
   (2014). “Plant derived bioactive molecules: culture vessels to bioreactors,” in    are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance
   Production of Biomass and Bioactive Compounds Using Bioreactor Technology,   with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted
   eds K. Y. Paek, H. Murthy, and J. J. Zhong (Dordrecht: Springer), 47–60.         which does not comply with these terms.





Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org            14                                   May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 410