
[PDF physical page 1]
       Article                                                                                      https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63441-y
   Genetic engineering of Sorangium cellulosum
   reveals hidden enzymology in myxobacterial
   natural product biosynthesis



        Received: 19 February 2025              Xiaotong Zhong    1,2,3,5, Shan Liu    1,2,3,5, Bingda Ma1,2,3, Kaining Gao1,2,3,
                                      Dayong Jiang1,2,3, Yingshuo Hou    1,2, Huliang Chen1,2,3, Jiaqi Lv    1,2,
       Accepted: 18 August 2025                                                                             4                                       James I. Bowen   4, Matthew P. Crump   4, Christine L. Willis    &
                                              Luoyi Wang   1,2,3


          Check for updates

                                        Sorangium cellulosum is a cellulolytic myxobacterium that produces a vast
                                              array of complex natural products with diverse chemical scaffolds and biolo-1234567890():,;                 1234567890():,;
                                                   gical activities. However, biosynthetic investigations of these metabolites have
                                      been hindered by the scarcity of genetic manipulation tools available for their
                                         producing microorganisms. Here, we develop an efﬁcient electroporation
                                    method for transforming foreign DNA into various Sorangium strains, enabling
                                                 effective genetic engineering via homologous recombination. This facilitates
                                              delineation of the biosynthetic pathway to ambruticin, unveiling several pre-
                                               viously undisclosed steps. Notably, AmbK is identiﬁed as the elusive epoxide
                                           hydrolase responsible for the formation of the tetrahydropyran ring during
                                             post-polyketide synthase (PKS) modiﬁcation, while the terminal PKS module
                              AmbH is shown to catalyse dual rounds of chain elongation during polyketide
                                           assembly. Our ﬁndings provide signiﬁcant insights into the intricate molecular
                                        machinery governing myxobacterial natural product biosynthesis and greatly
                                       enhance our ability to further engineer Sorangium strains to unlock their
                                              biosynthetic potentials.



        Natural products derived from microbial sources have long been a   metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters. This genomic richness under-
        cornerstone of pharmaceutical drug discovery due to their structural   scores  their substantial potential for natural product discovery,
         diversity and therapeutic potential1–3. Among the myriad of microbial   offering a diverse chemical repertoire for biotechnological and phar-
         natural product producers, such as fungi and actinomycetes, the   maceutical applications12,13. Prior studies have suggested that Sor-
        Gram-negative myxobacteria have gained increasing recognition for  angium harbours biosynthetic machinery unique to myxobacteria,
         their rich secondary metabolism in recent decades4–6. Sorangium cel-   featuring rare and unusual enzymology not typically observed in other
         lulosum, a cellulolytic member of the myxobacteria, accounts for   microbial organisms14.
         nearly half of all known metabolites produced by this bacterial group7.       Genetic manipulation of Sorangium strains is crucial for exploiting
       These include the anticancer epothilones8, the antifungal soraphens9,   their biosynthetic potential and gaining an in-depth understanding of
        the antibacterial sorangicins10 and the antiviral ratjadones11 (Fig. 1a).   these intricate pathways. However, such efforts have been extremely
         Strains of Sorangium are distinguished by their unusually large gen-   challenging due to the lack of robust genetic modiﬁcation tools15,16.
       omes, reaching up to 15 Mbp, which encode a wide array of secondary   These organisms are slow-growing and possess a complex social



          1State Key Laboratory of Microbial Diversity and Innovative Utilization, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. 2Beijing Key
         Laboratory of Genetic Element Biosourcing & Intelligent Design for Biomanufacturing, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
          3University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. 4School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. 5These authors contributed equally:
         Xiaotong Zhong, Shan Liu.    e-mail: chris.willis@bristol.ac.uk; wangluoyi@im.ac.cn



        Nature Communications| (2025)16:7996                                                                                                        1


[PDF physical page 2]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63441-y


   a





   b





    c

       ambA       ambB               ambC          ambD         ambE           ambF           I  G    ambH    J  P O N Q R S M

                                                                                                                                                       5 kb
                                                         PKS genes        tailoring genes
   d





Fig. 1 | Selected bioactive natural products produced by S. cellulosum and their   c Genetic organisation of the amb gene cluster. d Previously proposed biosynthetic
biosynthesis. a Examples of natural products from S. cellulosum with diverse       pathway of ambruticin showing key steps involving tetrahydropyran ring forma-
chemical scaffolds and biological activities. b Colonies of S. cellulosum So ce10       tion, ACP = acyl carrier protein, see Supplementary Fig. 1 for the full pathway.
showing a distinctive red colour on agar plate and the structures of ambruticins.



lifecycle, including fruiting body formation, which complicates their   Coccidioides  immitis, Histoplasma capsulatum, and Blastomyces
cultivation and genetic manipulation. The extensive GC-rich genome   dermatitidis24–30. The ambruticins share several key structural fea-
of S. cellulosum, containing many repetitive sequences and intrinsic   tures including a dihydropyran (DHP) and tetrahydropyran (THP)
antibiotic resistance genes, poses further difﬁculties for genomic   with an unsaturated hydrocarbon linker and an unusual trisub-
editing12,17. Previously, plasmids that could insert into the middle of the   stituted cyclopropyl ring, but differ mainly in the functionality at C-5
target gene were mainly introduced into Sorangium cells through   (Fig. 1b). In 2006, Reeves and co-workers reported analysis of the
conjugation with a helper E. coli strain, and gene disruptions were   ambruticin biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) in S. cellulosum So ce10
achieved via a single-crossover recombination event18,19. The conjuga-  and proposed several unusual features of the modular biosynthetic
tion approach is time-consuming and has been found to be strain-   pathway and post-PKS tailoring based on extensive bioinformatic
speciﬁc; protocols developed for one particular strain often cannot be   analysis, selected gene disruption experiments and isotopic label-
applied to another20. Electroporation has been reported scarcely and   ling studies (Fig. 1c)31. Interestingly, one of the PKS modules in AmbE
has not seen widespread application21.                           was hypothesised to catalyse three iterative chain elongations and
    The ambruticins were ﬁrst reported in the late 1970s and are  downstream processes, including a Favorskii rearrangement and a
among the earliest characterised metabolites produced by Sor-   carbon atom excision event would afford the cyclopropyl inter-
angium strains22,23. They have since attracted sustained interest due   mediate for further modiﬁcations (Supplementary Fig. 1)31. However,
to  their unusual chemical architectures and potent antifungal   these steps remain speculative and await further experimental
activities  against  a  variety  of  fungal  pathogens,  including   validation.



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7996                                                                            2


[PDF physical page 3]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63441-y


    Since 2014, Hahn and colleagues have undertaken a series of     We next aimed to deliver the plasmid pXZ-crtBKO into S. cellulo-
biosynthetic investigations on the ambruticins and the closely related  sum So ce10 by electroporation. Electrocompetent cells prepared in
jerangolids32–38. Through in vitro assays using synthetic substrate sur-  10% glycerol were mixed with plasmid DNA, electroporated, and
rogates, their studies on key enzymes have elucidated several steps   immediately transferred to recovery medium. The recovered cells
involved in ambruticin biosynthesis. The DHP is formed via an intra-   were then plated on hygromycin-containing selection plates. After 5-7
molecular oxa-Michael addition catalysed by AmbDH3 of linear poly-   days of incubation, both orange and white colonies were observed,
ketide (Fig. 1d, structure i) to give THP (Fig. 1d, structure ii)32. AmbDH3   indicating successful transformation  (Fig. 2c,  i). By homologous
has broad substrate speciﬁcity and has been used in the total synthesis   recombination, a single-crossover event would integrate the plasmid
of the diarylheptanoid centrolobine39. More recent studies indicate   into the genome without disrupting crtB, thus retaining the orange
that oxidation of the THP to the DHP occurs prior to generation of the   phenotype (Fig. 2bi, ii). In contrast, a double-crossover event would
C3 to C7 dihydroxylated tetrahydropyran in ambruticin biosynthesis,   result in the replacement of crtB by the hygromycin selection marker,
but the precise timing remains unknown40.                            leading to a white phenotype (Fig. 2biii). PCR veriﬁcation conﬁrmed
    Using a combination of homology modelling, phylogenetic ana-   that the red and white colonies are indeed single-crossover and
lysis, and in vitro experiments, Hahn and co-workers reannotated   double-crossover transformants, respectively (Fig. 2cii).
AmbG as a fatty acyl:adenylate ligase (FAAL)–acyl carrier protein (ACP)      To enhance our workﬂow efﬁciency, we extensively screened and
didomain enzyme with an unusually broad substrate tolerance, pro-   optimised electroporation conditions. This included adjusting optical
viding an important advancement in the understanding of the bio-   density and the temperature of competent cells, as well as reﬁning
synthesis of the ambruticin middle fragment37. Nevertheless, much of   electroporation voltage and the number of pulses (Supplementary
the fundamental biosynthetic machinery of ambruticin, including   Table 2). A transformation efﬁciency of up to 1.2 × 10³ colony-forming
formation of the central cyclopropane ring and generation of the C3-   units (CFU)/μg DNA was achieved when electrocompetent cells were
C7 THP, remains elusive. This underscores the need for further   prepared at room temperature47 using cells at OD600 0.5, with elec-
exploration utilising advanced genetic engineering techniques to elu-   troporation carried out at a voltage of 15 kV/cm for 3 times (Fig. 2d). In
cidate the remaining complexities involved in its biosynthesis.          addition, the impact of homology arm length was explored. We
    Using the ambruticin-producing strain S. cellulosum So ce10 as a   determined that a minimum arm length of 1000 bp is necessary for
model system, we here present an efﬁcient approach to genetically   efﬁcient homologous recombination (Fig. 2e). However, an arm length
manipulate Sorangium strains and delineate the intricate molecular   of ~1500 bp  is preferred to maximise the occurrence of double-
machinery of ambruticin biosynthesis. Through targeted genetic   crossover events (Fig. 2f). Similar results were observed when using
engineering of the ambruticin BGC and characterisation of key meta-   other plasmid backbones such as pKC1139 and pYH7, which are com-
bolites from generated mutant strains, combined with feeding studies  monly employed for gene knockout studies in Streptomyces strains48,49.
and whole-cell biotransformation, we have established the roles of the   For sequential genetic manipulation, alternative antibiotic selection
otherwise cryptic AmbK in THP formation and AmbH in PKS module   markers were investigated. Both the tetracycline-resistance gene and
iteration in ambruticin biosynthesis. Our work marks a signiﬁcant step   the chloramphenicol-resistance gene were found to be effective mar-
towards a deeper understanding of the complex chemistry and biology   kers for So ce10, albeit with lower efﬁciency compared to the hygro-
of ambruticin biosynthesis, laying the groundwork for further inves-   mycin marker.
tigations aimed at elucidating the mechanistic details of unusual      The versatility of our electroporation method was tested on other
enzymology in polyketide assembly and modiﬁcations.               Sorangium strains, including the jerangolid producer So ce307 and the
                                                                   epothilone producer So ce836. In both cases, successful disruption of
Results                                                         the crtB gene was achieved with comparable efﬁciency to that of So
Development of the genetic engineering method for S.           ce10 (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Fig. 3). Notably, previous attempts to
cellulosum                                                              genetically manipulate So ce307 using conjugation methods were
Strains of S. cellulosum typically exhibit bright pigmentation attributed   unsuccessful31 while no prior genetic manipulation studies have been
to the presence of carotenoids (Fig. 1b). These pigments are usually   reported for So ce83650–52. To directly benchmark our electroporation
biosynthesised  through  a  well-conserved  biosynthetic  pathway   protocol against the traditional conjugation-based method, we inves-
(Fig. 2a)41. Inactivation or knockout of the crtB gene, which encodes   tigated crtB inactivation in these strains using both approaches in
phytoene synthase, a key enzyme in carotenoid biosynthesis, has been   parallel. Despite repeated efforts, the conjugation method failed to
observed to cause an orange-to-white phenotype change in many   yield any transformants in So ce307 or So ce836. In the case of So ce10,
microorganisms42–44. Our comparative analysis of all available whole-   only a few single-crossover mutants were obtained, and no double-
genome sequences of S. cellulosum revealed a high level of conserva-   crossover mutants could be recovered (Supplementary Fig. 4). Addi-
tion in their carotenoid biosynthetic gene clusters (Supplementary   tionally, the conjugation process was complicated by substantial
Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 1), indicating that crtB could poten-   background growth of the donor E. coli S17.1 strain. In contrast, our
tially serve as a reporter gene for Sorangium.                          electroporation protocol consistently achieved efﬁcient transforma-
   To construct the plasmid for targeted inactivation of crtB in S.   tion and a reproducible frequency of double-crossover events across
cellulosum So ce10, an antibiotic selection marker must be inserted   strains, highlighting both  its technical advancement and broader
between the upstream and downstream homology arms of the target   applicability (Supplementary Table 3).
site. Due to intrinsic antibiotic resistance genes in their genome,
strains  of  Sorangium  are  resistant  to many commonly  used  AmbK is an epoxide hydrolase catalysing THP ring formation
antibiotics12. Our preliminary screening indicated that S. cellulosum So  Our next goal was to investigate key steps in the ambruticin biosyn-
ce10  is  sensitive to hygromycin  B;  therefore, the hygromycin-   thetic pathway in S. cellulosum So ce10 using the genetic engineering
resistance gene hyg was initially chosen as the selection marker. For   strategy we had established, beginning with formation of the C3-C7
the plasmid backbone, the pEX18 suicide vector, which has been  THP  ring.  In  their biosynthetic  studies, Reeves and co-workers
widely used for Gram-negative  bacteria45,46, was selected. Conse-   disrupted ambJ, which encodes a ﬂavin-dependent epoxidase and
quently, the hyg marker ﬂanked by upstream and downstream   isolated ambruticin  J (1) as the putative PKS product lacking the
homology arms of ~1500 bp was ligated with the backbone vector to   6,7-epoxide31. Thus, it is hypothesised that AmbJ catalyses selective
create the knockout plasmid targeting crtB, designated as pXZ-   epoxidation of the 6,7-double bond to give 6,7-epoxy-ambruticin J (2),
crtBKO (Fig. 2b).                                                   followed by epoxide-opening at C-7 through nucleophilic attack by the



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7996                                                                        3


[PDF physical page 4]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63441-y


          a  S. cellulosum So ce10                  b                                        ori       kanR

                                  crtI   crtB         Z             crtC   crtD   crtE                              pXZ-crtBKO
                                                                                                                                   (9200 bp)
                                                                               2 kb

                                                                                                                             5’-armUp     hygR    3’-armDown



                                                                    OPP
                                               CrtE                                                               5’-arm  crtB  3’-arm      Chromosome


                                                                       OPP                                                                      Antibiotic selection

                                             CrtB

                                                                                                                                     (i)        5’-arm    hygR    3’-arm    kanR      ori     5’-arm  crtB   3’-arm

                                                                                                                     1581 bp                                         783 bp

                                       Phytoene
                                                                                                                                              (ii)        5’-arm  crtB   3’-arm    kanR      ori     5’-arm    hygR    3’-arm

                                                                                                                   783 bp                                        1581 bp

                                        Carotenoids                                                (iii)       5’-arm   hygR     3’-arm

                                                                                                                     1581 bp
          c                                     WT
                                                                             ce10                    Transformants                                                                                         pXZ-crtBKOSo       1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10  11  12  13



                                                                                                                                                                     1581 bp

                                                                                                                                                                     783 bp



                                                                         (i)                                                                                                     (ii)
         d                                                                                                   ********                                                                                                                                                                                   ****                                                                                                                                                                                                 ****                                                                                                                                             ****                                                  ***                                                                                    ****                                                                                                                                                                                      ****    ****                                                                                                                    1×10³                                                                                      1.6×10³       ****    ****                         4×10²                                                   1.2×10³

                                                                                                                    8×10²
                                                 9×10²                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              efficiency                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              efficiency                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    efficiency                                                                                                            efficiency                                                                                                                                                                                        DNA) 1.2×10³                                                                                                            DNA)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DNA) 6×10²                                                      DNA) 3×10²
                         2×10²                   6×10²                            8×10²
                                                                                                                    4×10²                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (CFU/μg                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (CFU/μg                                                                                                                                                                                            (CFU/μg                                                                                              (CFU/μg                                                 3×10²                                                                                   4×10²                         1×10²                                                                                                                    2×10²                                                                                                                                                        Transformation       0                                                                                                 Transformation        0                                                                                                                                                                  Transformation        0                                                                                                                                                                      Transformation       0
                         RT  4°C                   0.5  1   1.5  2                 12  15  18  21                1   2   3   4   5
                       Temperature           OD                     Voltage (kV/cm)               Pulse number
          e





                              1000 bp               1500 bp               1700 bp               2000 bp               2500 bp

                                                     Homology arm length
                 f                                          g          WT      ΔcrtB
                                     1.5×10³       Transformantion efficiency     50
                                                  Ratio of double-crossover (%)             Ratio
                                                                        40               So ce10
                                                                        of                                                                                                                               efficiency     1×10³                                                       DNA)                                         30

                                                                      So ce307
                                                                        20
                                    5×10²                                                                                                (CFU/μg
                                                                        10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                double-crossover                                                                                                                                                                                  Transformation                                                So ce836
                               0                             0   (%)
                                         1000  1500  1700  2000 2500
                                Homology arm length (bp)

Fig. 2 | Development of the genetic engineering method for S. cellulosum.       represent mean ± SD. N = 3 biological replicates for each temperature condition;
a Biosynthesis of carotenoids in S. cellulosum So ce10. b Construction of the pXZ-  N = 4, 3, 4, 5 replicates for OD600 of 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, respectively; N = 5, 4, 4, 5 replicates
crtBKO plasmid and possible outcomes from homologous recombination.           for Voltage of 12, 15, 18, 21 kV/cm, respectively; N = 5, 10, 5, 9, 5 replicates for pulse
c Veriﬁcation of crtB disruption by phenotype (i) and genotype (ii). The colour of   number of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, respectively. e, f Impact of homology arm length on overall
the numbers above the gel lanes indicates the colony appearance: orange numbers   transformation efﬁciency and ratio of double-crossover events. Error bars repre-
indicate colonies with an orange phenotype, and black numbers indicate colonies   sent mean ± SD, N = 4 biological replicates. g Disruption of the crtB gene in S. cel-
with a white phenotype. A total of 42 white colonies from three independent bio-   lulosum So ce307 and So ce836. Statistical analysis was performed using two-tailed
logical replicates (N = 3) were validated by genotype, uncropped gels are provided    Student’s t test or one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test
in the Source data ﬁle. d Optimisation of the electroporation conditions. Error bars    (***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001). Source data are provided as a Source data ﬁle.




Nature Communications| (2025)16:7996                                                                    4


[PDF physical page 5]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63441-y

   a

                                                                                                                                                            α2
                 I  G    ambH     J  P O N Q R S M                                   α4                      α1                 α3

                                                                                                    α2
                                                                                                                    β6

                                                                                                                                                          β5
                                                                                                                   β3
                                                                                                                                                       β4

                                                                                                                 α1
                 ambJ    ambK     ambP                      AmbK                    MupZ
                                                                                             (predicted by AlphaFold3)           (PDB ID: 6FXD)

   b                                   c
               (i) So ce10 WT

            VS
                              S

                 (ii) ΔambJ                               1




                  (iii) ΔambK
                       4




             7.0             9.0            11.0           13.0           15.0

                            Retention time (min)

   d





Fig. 3 | AmbK is an epoxide hydrolase catalysing THP ring formation in ambruticin biosynthesis. a Identiﬁcation of ambK from the amb BGC. b HPLC traces of the So
ce10 ΔambJ and ΔambK mutants. c Structural elucidation of ambruticin K (4). d Conﬁrmation of AmbK as the epoxide hydrolase responsible for THP ring formation.


3-hydroxyl group to form the six-membered THP ring and thereby   found  (Fig.  3a). Sequence analysis of this region identiﬁed two
generating ambruticin F (3) (Fig. 1d). Similar epoxide formation/   potential overlapping open reading frames (ORFs) in the same orien-
epoxide-opening cascades have been identiﬁed in the biosynthesis of   tation, which could be translated into peptide sequences of 136 (ORF1)
lasalocid53,54, mupirocin46 and xiamenmycin55, and in each case an  and 128 (ORF2) amino acids, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 6).
additional epoxide hydrolase (Lsd19, MupZ and XimE respectively) is  BLAST searches of these two sequences suggested that ORF1 might be
required to favour formation of the typically disfavoured THP ring56. In   non-functional as no signiﬁcant similarities were found, whereas ORF2
the absence of these epoxide hydrolases, spontaneous cyclisation   appears to encode for a YciI family protein, which we designated as
products with tetrahydrofuran (THF) rings are isolated from the  AmbK. Protein structure prediction of AmbK by AlphaFold360 indi-
epoxide intermediates (Supplementary Fig. 5).                        cated a similar α + β overall fold to that of Lsd1954, MupZ46, and XimE55,
   To date, no epoxide hydrolase has been identiﬁed within the amb   despite low sequence homology (Fig. 3a).
BGC. Hence, it has been speculated that either the epoxidase AmbJ     We hypothesised that AmbK might be a candidate for the cryptic
may be multifunctional, or alternatively, the presence of the 8,9-alkene   epoxide hydrolase implicated in THP formation and so investigated
moiety could increase the susceptibility of C-7 of the oxirane to   the function of this putative enzyme by ﬁrst disruption of the corre-
nucleophilic attack57,58. Indeed, our recent model studies using trun-   sponding gene in the ambruticin-producing strain S. cellulosum So
cated surrogates of ambruticin J indicated that both the 5-OH and the   ce10 (Supplementary Fig. 7). Using our developed method, ambJ and
8,9-alkene may inﬂuence the intramolecular ring opening, leading to  ambK knock-out mutant strains were successfully generated. As
the formation of a THP product59. However, details of the biosynthetic   expected, cultures of the resultant ΔambJ mutant produced ambruti-
mechanism of tetrahydropyran ring formation in the ambruticins   cin J (1, m/z 457 [M-H]-) as the major metabolite (Fig. 3bii)31. In contrast,
remain unknown.                                                      cultures of the ΔambK mutant strain contained none of the usual
    With this in mind, we carefully examined the genomic neigh-   metabolites (e.g. ambruticin S and the VS series of compounds) found
bourhoods of the ambJ gene in the BGC to search for a potential   in the wild-type strain (Fig. 1b) but instead yielded a compound with a
epoxide hydrolase.  Interestingly, a previously unidentiﬁed short  mass of 492 Da (4, m/z 491 [M-H]-) as the major metabolite (Fig. 3biii).
region of ca. 500 bp in length immediately downstream of ambJ was   1H and 13C NMR data analysis of compound 4, compared with those of



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7996                                                                          5


[PDF physical page 6]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63441-y


ambruticin J (1) and F (3), showed that a DHP ring and 3,5-dihydroxy        Inspired by Hahn’s work, we hypothesised that inactivating AmbG
acid were present but there were no signals which could be attributed  may facilitate capture of cryptic intermediates during polyketide chain
to the cyclopropyl group (Supplementary Fig. 8). Further detailed   assembly. With this in mind, the FAAL domain of AmbG was disrupted
analysis of its 2D NMR data, including 1H-1H COSY, HSQC and HMBC,  and the ΔambG mutant strain obtained (Supplementary Fig. 7c). A
suggested that compound 4, named ambruticin K, bears hydroxyl  compound with a mass of 370 Da was isolated from cultures of the
groups at C-6 and C-12, and features a conjugated 7E,9E-diene (Sup-  ΔambG mutant strain of S. cellulosum (Fig. 4b). Structural elucidation
plementary Table 4), as opposed to the 6E,8E-diene present in  by HRMS and extensive NMR analysis conﬁrmed that this product
ambruticin J (Fig. 3c). Acetylation of ambruticin K (4) gave tetraacetate   included an unsaturated carboxylic acid with intact cyclopropane and
5 and the 1H-NMR spectrum showed with characteristic downﬁeld   dihydropyran rings. Signals were apparent for 4 double bonds in the
shifts of the signals assigned to 3-H, 5-H, 6-H and 12-H in accord with   chain, including a 2E,4E-conjugated diene (Supplementary Table 6).
the proposed structure (Fig. 3c and Supplementary Fig. 9). The abso-  The compound, named ambruticin G (6) (Fig. 4c), is shorter than the
lute conﬁguration at C-12 was determined to be R by Mosher ester   mature chain of ambruticin J, effectively lacking two acetate units in
analysis of the acetonide derivative of 4 (Supplementary Meth-   accord with its potential role as a biosynthetic precursor to ambruticin
ods 1 and 2, Supplementary Fig. 10 and Supplementary Table 5)61. We     J (Supplementary Fig. 12). Since AmbH is presumed to be the sole PKS
propose that ambruticin K is formed via addition of water to C-12 of the  module acting after AmbG (Supplementary Fig. 1), we hypothesised
proposed intermediate 6,7-epoxy-ambruticin J (2), leading to opening   that AmbH could extend ambruticin G by two rounds of chain elon-
of the cyclopropane ring, and concomitant formation 7,9-diene and   gation to afford ambruticin J. This hypothesis is supported by the KS-
opening of the 6,7-epoxide to give the 7,9-dien-6-ol 4 (Fig. 3d). Whilst 2   AT-KR-ACP-TE domain architecture of the AmbH module, where
was not seen in crude extracts, it is well established that in many bio-   recursive chain extension and ketoreductase-catalysed reduction
synthetic pathways (e.g. lasalocid53,54 and mupirocin46) and synthetic  would be expected to yield the C-3 and C-5 hydroxyl groups found in
studies59 involving epoxide forming/epoxide opening cascades that   ambruticin J62.
epoxide intermediates are unstable and not detectable being readily      To test our hypothesis, the entire continuous region of the amb
transformed to a more stable product.                       BGC upstream of ambG (ambA-ambI) was knocked out from the ΔambJ
     Isolation of ambruticin K (4) from cultures of the ΔambK mutant   mutant to give the ΔambA-I/ΔambJ multi-domain mutant (Supple-
of S. cellulosum indicated that AmbK is the elusive epoxide hydrolase   mentary Fig. 7d). As expected, cultures of this strain produced no
required for THP ring formation in ambruticin biosynthesis. To verify   ambruticin-related metabolites as the main PKS modules were absent.
the function of AmbK, in vivo biotransformations were undertaken   However, AmbG and AmbH remained intact and functional in this
using E. coli cells overexpressing AmbJ and AmbK. Soluble expression   strain. Subsequent feeding studies of ambruticin G (6) into this
of both proteins was achieved after condition optimisations (Supple-   ΔambA-I/ΔambJ mutant were conducted, and  full conversion to
mentary Fig. 11a). First, ambruticin J (1) was incubated with AmbJ-   ambruticin J (1) was observed after 3 hours of incubation (Fig. 4d). In a
expressing E. coli cells, which gave the expected ambruticin K (4)   parallel experiment, the entire region of ambA-ambI was deleted from
(Supplementary Fig. 11b, ii). Pleasingly, incubation of ambruticin J with   the wild-type strain. Feeding ambruticin G into the resulting ΔambA-I
E. coli cells co-expressed with both AmbJ and AmbK gave ambruticin F   mutant showed conversion to ambruticin S and the VS series com-
(3) with the characteristic THP ring as conﬁrmed by NMR (Supple-   pounds, asisfound inthe wild-type strain(Fig. 4e).These results clearly
mentary Fig.  11biii). Furthermore, ambruticin K (4) with the co-   reveal that ambruticin G is a biosynthetic intermediate and highlight
expressed AmbJ and AmbK simply returned the starting material 4  AmbH as an iterative module catalysing dual chain elongation of
(Supplementary Fig. 11biv) in accord with the proposal that ambruticin   ambruticin G to afford ambruticin J (Fig. 4f).
K is not an intermediate in ambruticin biosynthesis but arises through
addition of water to the proposed intermediate 6,7-epoxy-ambruticin J  An updated pathway for ambruticin biosynthesis
(2). Overall, these studies conﬁrm that AmbJ catalyses selective epox-   Reeves and co-workers proposed that starting from AmbF in ambru-
idation of ambruticin J (1) to produce 6,7-epoxy-ambruticin J (2), fol-    ticin biosynthesis, unusual steps occur, including a Favorskii rearran-
lowed by the epoxide hydrolase AmbK catalysing regioselective  gement and a carbon atom excision event, which would deliver a
6-membered ring formation to generate the THP ring in ambruticin   cyclopropyl polyketide intermediate to the terminal PKS module
biosynthesis (Fig. 3d).                                AmbH for a ﬁnal round of chain elongation, followed by chain release
                                                                   to afford ambruticin J for further post-PKS modiﬁcations (Fig. 5a)31.
AmbH is an iterative module for polyketide backbone assembly   Collectively, the results described herein have revealed the critical
Our next goal was to gain a deeper understanding of assembly of the   roles of the otherwise cryptic AmbH and AmbK, providing signiﬁcant
polyketide backbone. The chain assembly has been proposed to initi-   insights into both the assembly of the polyketide backbone and the
ally follow the canonical type I PKS biosynthetic logic by the loading   post-PKS tailoring processes involved in ambruticin biosynthesis in S.
module and elongation modules 1–6 in AmbA-AmbE (Supplementary   cellulosum So ce10. These ﬁndings have led us to propose a revised
Fig. 1)31. Module 7 in AmbE then performs three iterative chain elon-   biosynthetic pathway for ambruticin (Fig. 5b).
gations, followed by further downstream processes involving AmbF,      With identiﬁcation of ambruticin G (6) as a biosynthetic inter-
AmbG, and AmbI to generate the cyclopropane ring-containing back-   mediate, it is now evident that the terminal module AmbH is iterative
bone. It was postulated that this backbone then undergoes another  and catalyses two rounds of chain elongation (Fig. 5b). Subsequent
round of elongation by the terminal PKS module AmbH, and is sub-  THP ring formation from ambruticin J (1) requires AmbJ, which func-
sequently hydrolysed by its thioesterase (TE) to release ambruticin J31.   tions as the epoxidase, and in this work, an additional epoxide
For many years, these steps lacked detailed, direct experimental evi-   hydrolase, AmbK, has been identiﬁed. In the absence of AmbK,
dence to support the proposed assembly process in ambruticin bio-   hydrolysis of epoxide 2 occurs giving ambruticin K (4), which is not an
synthesis. However, important insights were revealed from studies by   intermediate in ambruticin biosynthesis. Ambruticin F (3) contains all 3
Hahn and co-workers using extensive bioinformatic analysis and   rings (THP, DHP, and trisubstituted cyclopropane) characteristic of the
in vitro enzymatic assays37. They reannotated AmbG as a fatty acyl:a-   ambruticins, and further tailoring modiﬁcations at C-5 occur to yield
denylate  ligase (FAAL)–acyl  carrier protein (ACP) didomain and   the ﬁnal metabolites (Fig. 5b).
showed that it adenylates a wide range of free carboxylic acids with     A further important feature to note  is that the structure of
broad structural diversity (Fig. 4a).                                  ambruticin G (6) incorporates the DHP ring characteristic of the




Nature Communications| (2025)16:7996                                                                      6


[PDF physical page 7]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63441-y



                                                                                                                 (i) So ce10 WT
                                                                      S
                                                        VS



                                                                                                                        (ii) ΔambG
                                                                                                    6




                                                                                          Retention time (min)





                                                                                                                               23              20
                                                                                                                                            22
                                                                                                                                           21
                                                                                                                                 24




                                           2
           3                   4         5  1610   12 9                      18   14             11                   15   15 198  19    6 7


                                                     δ (ppm)


                (i) ambruticin G                                                                               (i) ambruticin G
                                        6                                                            6


                 (ii) ΔambA-I/ΔambJ + ambruticin G                                                     (ii) ΔambA-I + ambruticin G
                          1                                                           VS
                                                                       S                                        6

                  (iii) ambruticin J                                                                                       (iii) So ce10 WT
                                                                        S
                          1                                    VS



                          Retention time (min)                                                 Retention time (min)





Fig. 4 | AmbH is an iterative module for polyketide backbone assembly in       mutant. e Feeding study of ambruticin G (6) by the ΔambA-I mutant. f The iterative
ambruticin biosynthesis. a Previous in vitro studies of AmbG by Hahn and co-     module AmbH converts ambruticin G to ambruticin J, which is further metabolised
workers37. b HPLC trace of the So ce10 ΔambG mutant. c Structural elucidation of   by AmbJ and AmbK along with downstream enzymes to the ﬁnal ambruticin VS
ambruticin G (6). d Feeding study of ambruticin G (6) by the ΔambA-I/ΔambJ       compounds.




ambruticins. This result is in accord with our recent studies, which   currently underway in our laboratories to investigate these fascinating
indicate that desaturation of the THP to a DHP catalysed by the Rieske   biotransformations.
oxygenase AmbP occurs prior to formation of the C3-C7 THP ring40.
The results described herein indicate that the timing of the desatura-  Discussion
tion step can be as early as the PKS assembly stage.                The studies reported herein have led to the development of an efﬁ-
    The mechanism of formation of the cyclopropane ring moiety in   cient electroporation method for transforming foreign DNA into var-
ambruticin biosynthesis remains unknown. However, since the trun-   ious  Sorangium  cellulosum  strains,  enabling  effective  genetic
cated metabolite ambruticin G (6) contains an intact cyclopropane   engineering via double-crossover homologous recombination within a
ring, it is now apparent that the cyclopropane ring must be formed   single step in these genetically intractable myxobacteria. By using
prior to AmbG channelling the free carboxylic acid intermediate back   different antibiotic selection markers, we also achieved sequential
onto the assembly-line for additional PKS processing. The hydrolase   deletions in these organisms. Nevertheless, a potential limitation of
domain (H) and pyridoxal cofactor binding motif domain (Px) in the   our study is the current unavailability of a broader panel of Sorangium
AmbF module, along with the ﬂavin-dependent monooxygenase AmbI,   strains to comprehensively assess the generalisability of our electro-
are most likely to play pivotal roles in this process (Fig. 5b). Studies are   poration approach. While our method demonstrates high efﬁciency in



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7996                                                                                 7


[PDF physical page 8]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63441-y

        a





       b





Fig. 5 | Genetic engineering of S. cellulosum So ce10 leads to an updated pathway for ambruticin biosynthesis. a Previously proposed biosynthetic pathway of
ambruticin31. b Revised biosynthetic pathway of ambruticin based on this study.


Sorangium strains that grow in suspension, its applicability to strains   modiﬁcation. Building on these ﬁndings, we have proposed an upda-
exhibiting clumped or aggregated growth remains to be fully eval-   ted pathway for ambruticin biosynthesis (Fig. 5b), which lays the
uated. Our  preliminary experiments  with  the  recently  isolated   foundation for further investigations aimed at elucidating mechanistic
icumazole-producing strain Sorangium cellulosum MBD-1, which dis-   details of its unique enzymology, particularly the cyclopropyl ring
plays dense clumping during growth, suggest that transformation is   formation step.
still possible,  albeit with reduced efﬁciency. These observations       Despite myxobacteria being renowned for producing a wealth of
underscore the inﬂuence of morphological characteristics in trans-   structurally diverse and biologically active natural products, we are
formation outcomes and highlight the need for further strain-speciﬁc    still only beginning to uncover the full extent of their capabilities6. In
optimisation to extend the applicability of this method to a wider   future, using the tools to genetically manipulate Sorangium strains
range of Sorangium isolates.                                        reported herein will signiﬁcantly contribute to unlocking the vast and
    This method has been applied to genetic engineering in S. cellu-   largely untapped biosynthetic potential of myxobacteria. Such efforts
losum So ce10, leading to a greater understanding of the biosynthesis   hold immense promise for the creation of novel analogues with altered
of the antifungal polyketides, the ambruticins. Through a combination   chemical structures, potentially leading to compounds with enhanced
of targeted gene knockouts, whole-cell biotransformation, and feeding   or entirely new biological activities, such as improved antimicrobial,
experiments, we identiﬁed a truncated metabolite, ambruticin G (6),   anticancer, or antiviral properties. As we reﬁne these tools and gain
and revealed the role of the iterative PKS module AmbH in polyketide   deeper insights into the complex enzymology of these biosynthetic
backbone assembly of ambruticin biosynthesis. Furthermore, a pre-   pathways, we may also uncover entirely new classes of natural pro-
viously unknown epoxide hydrolase, AmbK, has been identiﬁed and   ducts, further expanding the chemical and biological diversity acces-
shown to be  crucial  for THP  ring formation during post-PKS   sible from myxobacteria.



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7996                                                                       8


[PDF physical page 9]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63441-y

Methods                                                             for 5–7 days. Knockout mutants were screened by PCR and further
General experimental                                      conﬁrmed by sequencing.
Strains of Sorangium cellulosum were purchased from the German       For conjugative transformation of plasmid pXZ-crtBKO into Sor-
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures (DSMZ) and main-  angium cellulosum, the plasmid was ﬁrst introduced into chemically
tained on HS agar (0.4% glucose, 0.15% Casein peptone, 0.1% KNO3,   competent E. coli S17.1 cells via heat shock. The resulting E. coli donor
0.1% MgSO4·7H2O, 0.008% NaFe-EDTA, 0.2% HEPES, 0.00625%   strain carrying pXZ-crtBKO was cultured overnight in LB medium
K2HPO4, 0.0075% CaCl2·2H2O, 1.5% agar, pH 7.2). Oligonucleotides for   containing kanamycin (50 µg/mL) at 37 °C. A 1% v/v inoculum was then
polymerase chain reactions (PCR) were purchased from Tsingke   transferred to 50 mL of fresh kanamycin-containing LB medium and
(China). PCR ampliﬁcation was performed using Phanta Flash Super-  grown to early exponential phase (OD600 ≈0.4–0.6), while the reci-
Fidelity DNA Polymerase (Vazyme, China). Plasmids were puriﬁed   pient Sorangium cultures were grown in 50 mL HS medium at 30 °C
using a HighPure Rapid Mini Plasmid Kit (Biomed, China), and PCR   until reaching an OD600 of 0.5. Both cell types were harvested by
products were puriﬁed with the HiPure Gel Pure DNA Mini Kit (Magen,   centrifugation and washed with LB and S42 medium31, respectively.
China). Restriction enzymes were purchased from New England Bio-  The Sorangium cells were resuspended and subjected to a 10-min heat
labs (Ipswich, MA, USA). DNA ligation was performed using ClonEx-   shock at 50 °C in pre-warmed S42 medium. Equal volumes (typically
press Ultra One Step Cloning Kit (Vazyme, China). Molecular biology   1 mL each) of donor and recipient were mixed, centrifuged, and
experiments were conducted following the manufacturer’s instruc-   resuspended in 200 μL of glucose-free S42 medium. The cell mixture
tions. Strains, plasmids, and oligonucleotides used in this study are  was spotted onto an antibiotic-free S42 agar plate and incubated at
listed in Supplementary Tables 7 and 8 and Supplementary Data 1.     30 °C for 48 h. The resulting mating puddle was resuspended in 0.5 mL
    LC-MS data were obtained on a SHIMADZU LC-MS system com-   S42 liquid medium and plated onto S42 agar supplemented with
prising a SIL-20AXR autosampler, LC-20ADXR liquid chromatograph,   appropriate concentrations of hygromycin and carbenicillin. Plates
SPD-M40 photodiode array detector, and SHIMADZU LCMS-2010 EV   were incubated at 30 °C for 7–10 days until Sorangium transformant
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. HPLC-grade H2O and   colonies emerge.
MeCN were added with 0.1% formic acid as the solvent system. Ana-
lytical LC-MS data were obtained using a Phenomenex Kinetex column   General fermentation procedure
(C18, 250 × 4.6 mm, 5 µm) at a ﬂow rate of 1 mL min-1. Column chro-   Wild-type or mutant strains of S. cellulosum So ce10 were inoculated
matographic separations were carried out using Sephadex LH-20  on HS agar plates and incubated at 30 °C for 3 days. Colonies from
(Cytiva) as packing materials. Preparative HPLC puriﬁcation was car-   these plates were scraped and used to inoculate 100 mL of liquid HS
ried  out  using  a  SilGreen  CH0525010C  18AQ  column  (C18,  medium in a 500 mL ﬂask. This seed culture was incubated at 30 °C,
250 × 10.0 mm, 5 µm) at a ﬂow rate of 4.7 mL min−1. High-resolution  200 rpm for 2–3 days. For production fermentation, 20% of the seed
electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry (HR-ESI-MS) was per-   culture was used to inoculate SF1-P medium (0.3% soy peptone, 0.6%
formed on a Waters ACQUITYI-Class PLUS/Xevo G2-XS Tof instrument.   fructose, 0.1% MgSO4·7H2O, 0.1% CaCl2·2H2O, 0.008% ferric citrate,
1H, 13C NMR and 2D NMR data were collected on a Bruker Avance Ⅲ  and 0.05 M HEPES, pH 7.6; ferric citrate and HEPES were ﬁlter ster-
500 MHz or Bruker Ascend 800 MHz NMR spectrometer.                 ilised and added after autoclaving). The culture was supplemented
                                                                 with 1 g L-1 of fructose every 24 h, starting on the second day, and
Genetic engineering of S. cellulosum                             incubated at 30 °C, 200 rpm for 7 days. The supernatant was
The upstream and downstream fragments of the target gene or region   extracted three times with ethyl acetate (EtOAc). The combined
were ampliﬁed from genomic DNA via PCR. Knockout plasmids were  EtOAc extracts were evaporated in vacuo to yield a crude extract,
constructed by inserting the hygromycin, tetracycline, or chlor-   which was then  analysed by LC-MS  or  subjected  to  further
amphenicol selection marker, ﬂanked by the upstream and down-   puriﬁcation.
stream homology arms, into the KpnI/HindIII-linearised pXZ vector.
These plasmids were introduced into Sorangium cells via electro-   Isolation and puriﬁcation of ambruticin J, ambruticin K and
poration, and double-crossover transformants were selected on HS   ambruticin G
agar supplemented with appropriate concentrations of hygromycin,  A 2.0 L scale fermentation of the ΔambJ mutant of S. cellulosum So ce10
tetracycline, or chloramphenicol. Sequences of the antibiotic resis-  was performed following the general fermentation procedure. The
tance genes and the working concentrations of antibiotics are shown   crude extract was initially puriﬁed using Sephadex LH-20 column
in Supplementary Data 2.                                       chromatography with MeOH as the eluent to give a crude fraction of
    For electrocompetent cells preparation, a 1% (v/v) inoculum from   ambruticin J. This fraction was further puriﬁed by HPLC eluting with a
mid-exponential phase preculture of S. cellulosum strain was inocu-   gradient elution of 40% to 95% acetonitrile in water over 20 min, with
lated into 100 mL HS broth, cultivated in shake ﬂasks at 30 °C,   ambruticin J eluting at ~85% acetonitrile, yielding 1.6 mg of the com-
200 rpm. Upon reaching an OD600 of 0.5 (approximately 30 hours   pound. Similarly, ambruticin K (eluting at ~70% acetonitrile) was iso-
after inoculation), cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4500 × g.   lated from the ΔambK mutant of S. cellulosum So ce10, following the
The pellet was then washed three times with 10 mL 10% (v/v) glycerol at  same puriﬁcation protocol, with a yield of 1.4 mg L−1. Ambruticin G
15,000 × g. The cell pellet was then resuspended in 10% glycerol to a   (eluting at approximately 90% acetonitrile) was obtained from the
ﬁnal volume of 900 μL and aliquoted into 90 µL/ EP tubes for storage  ΔambG mutant strain with a yield of 1 mg L−1. For HR-ESI-MS and NMR
at −80 °C.                                                         data of the compounds, see in Supplementary Tables 4 and 6 and
    For electroporation, the electrocompetent cells were thawed on   Supplementary Figs. 13–38.
ice, and 500 ng–5 µg of plasmid was mixed with 90 µL of competent
cells. The mixture was then transferred into a precooled 1 mm cuvette,  Chemical derivatisation of ambruticin K
and subjected to electroporation using a Bio-Rad MicroPulser, at a   For acetylation of ambruticin K, 4 was dissolved in 25 µL of pyridine
voltage of 15 kV/cm for 3 times. Immediately after pulsing, 500 µL of  and mixed with 25 µL of acetic anhydride. The reaction was stirred at
precooled liquid HS medium was added, followed by transferring into  room temperature overnight and then quenched with water. The
3 mL of liquid HS medium. Cells were allowed to recover at 30 °C and   reaction mixture was extracted with EtOAc, and the organic layer was
200 rpm for 2 days. Subsequently, cells were collected by centrifuga-   dried under vacuum to obtain a crude extract. This extract was then
tion and spread on HS agar plates supplemented with appropriate   puriﬁed using HPLC with a gradient elution of 5% to 95% MeCN in water
antibiotics. Transformants typically appear after incubation at 30 °C   over 20 min to yield compound 5.



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7996                                                                      9


[PDF physical page 10]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63441-y


    For preparation of the acetonides derivatives of ambruticin K and   2.   Atanasov, A. G. et al. Natural products in drug discovery: advances
their Mosher esters, see Supplementary Methods 1 and 2.                and opportunities. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 20, 200–216 (2021).
                                                                              3.  Hemmerling, F. & Piel, J. Strategies to access biosynthetic novelty in
Feeding studies of ambruticin G                                            bacterial genomes for drug discovery. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 21,
A 50 mL culture of the So ce10 ΔambA-I or So ce10 ΔambA-I/ΔambJ      359–378 (2022).
strain in SF1-P medium was incubated at 30 °C for 48 h. Subsequently,   4.  Weissman, K. J. & Müller, R. Myxobacterial secondary metabolites:
0.1 mg of ambruticin G dissolved in 10 μL of MeOH was added to each         bioactivities and modes-of-action. Nat. Prod. Rep. 27, 1276 (2010).
culture. For the So ce10 ΔambA-I strain, incubation continued at 30 °C   5.  Saggu, S. K., Nath, A. & Kumar, S. Myxobacteria: biology and
for an additional 30 min, while for the So ce10 ΔambA-I/ΔambJ strain,        bioactive secondary metabolites. Res. Microbiol. 174, 104079
0.1 mg of ambruticin G was added every 30 min, with a total incubation        (2023).
period of 6 h. Three volumes of EtOAc were used for extraction, and   6.  Wang, C. et al. Recent advances in discovery and biosynthesis of
the solvent was removed under vacuum. The dried samples were        natural products from myxobacteria: an overview from 2017 to
redissolved in 200 μL MeOH and analysed by LC-MS.                      2023. Nat. Prod. Rep. 41, 905–934 (2024).
                                                                                     7.   Gerth, K., Perlova, O. & Müller, R. Sorangium cellulosum. Myx-
Expression of AmbJ and AmbK in E. coli                                   obacteria: Multicellularity and Differentiation (ed. Whitworth, D. E.)
The ambJ and ambK genes were ampliﬁed by PCR from the genomic      329–348 (ASM Press, 2014).
DNA of S. cellulosum So ce10 using primers listed in Supplementary   8.  Höﬂe, G. et al. Epothilone A and B-novel 16-membered macrolides
Data 1. The resulting PCR products were introduced into pET151 and       with cytotoxic activity: isolation, crystal structure, and conforma-
pET28a vectors, respectively. For AmbJ expression, the pET151-ambJ        tion in solution. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 35, 1567–1569 (1996).
construct and pGro7 (expressing GroES-GroEL) were co-transformed   9.   Naini, A., Sasse, F. & Brönstrup, M. The intriguing chemistry and
into E. coli BL21(DE3) cells. The cells were grown overnight in 5 mL of       biology of soraphens. Nat. Prod. Rep. 36, 1394–1411 (2019).
lysogeny broth (LB) medium supplemented with 50 μg mL-1 carbeni-   10.  Lilic, M. et al. The antibiotic sorangicin A inhibits promoter DNA
cillin and 25 μg mL-1 chloramphenicol at 37 °C with shaking at 200 rpm.       unwinding in a Mycobacterium tuberculosis rifampicin-resistant
1 mL of this pre-culture was used to inoculate 100 mL of LB medium     RNA polymerase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117, 30423–30432
containing 50 μg mL-1 carbenicillin, 25 μg mL-1 chloramphenicol, and        (2020).
0.5 g L-1 L-arabinose. The culture was incubated at 37 °C with shaking at    11.  Fleta-Soriano, E. et al. The myxobacterial metabolite ratjadone A
200 rpm until the OD600 reached 0.5-0.6. Protein expression was         inhibits HIV infection by blocking the Rev/CRM1-mediated nuclear
induced by adding 0.1 mM isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside       export pathway. Microb. Cell. Fact. 13, 17 (2014).
(IPTG), and the cells were incubated overnight at 16 °C with shaking    12.  Schneiker, S. et al. Complete genome sequence of the myx-
at 120 rpm. For AmbK expression, the pET28a-ambK construct was       obacterium Sorangium cellulosum. Nat. Biotechnol. 25,
transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3). Protein expression followed similar       1281–1289 (2007).
procedure with LB medium supplemented with 50 μg mL-1 kanamycin.   13.  Han, K. et al. Extraordinary expansion of a Sorangium cellulosum
For co-expression of AmbJ and AmbK, the same procedure used for      genome from an alkaline milieu. Sci. Rep. 3, 2101 (2013).
AmbJ expression was followed, but with the LB medium supplemented   14.  Wenzel, S. C. & Müller, R. Myxobacterial natural product assembly
with 50 μg mL-1 carbenicillin, 50 μg mL-1 kanamycin, and 25 μg mL-1         lines: fascinating examples of curious biochemistry. Nat. Prod. Rep.
chloramphenicol.                                                        24, 1211 (2007).
                                                                                  15.  Julien, B. & Rodriguez, E. Genetic engineering of myxobacterial
Whole-cell biotransformation                                              natural product biosynthetic genes, Manual of Industrial Micro-
An overnight culture (50 mL) of E. coli BL21 (DE3) cells overexpressing       biology and Biotechnology (eds. Baltz, R. H. et al.) 426–437 (ASM
AmbJ or both AmbJ and AmbK was grown in LB medium. The cells were        Press, 2014).
centrifuged at 4 °C and 2400 × g for 5 min, and the pellets were   16.  Yue, X., Sheng, D., Zhuo, L. & Li, Y. Genetic manipulation and tools in
resuspended in 2 mL of 100 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.2)       myxobacteria for the exploitation of secondary metabolism. Eng.
containing 20 mM glucose. Subsequently, 0.5 mg of ambruticin J or        Microbiol. 3, 100075 (2023).
ambruticin K dissolved in 50 μL of MeOH was added. The mixtures    17.  Whitworth, D. E., Sydney, N. & Radford, E. J. Myxobacterial geno-
were incubated at 30 °C and 200 rpm for 12 h. Reactions were quen-       mics and post-genomics: a review of genome biology, genome
ched by adding three volumes of ethyl acetate, followed by vortexed       sequences and related ‘omics studies. Microorganisms 9,
and centrifugation. The ethyl acetate layer was dried under vacuum,       2143 (2021).
dissolved in 400 μL methanol, and subjected to LC-MS analysis.          18.  Jaoua, S., Neff, S. & Schupp, T. Transfer of mobilizable plasmids to
                                                                  Sorangium cellosum and evidence for their integration into the
Reporting summary                                             chromosome. Plasmid 28, 157–165 (1992).
Further information on research design is available in the Nature   19.  Pradella, S. et al. Characterisation, genome size and genetic
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.                         manipulation of the myxobacterium Sorangium cellulosum So
                                                                      ce56. Arch. Microbiol. 178, 484–492 (2002).
Data availability                                               20. Kopp, M. et al. Critical variations of conjugational DNA transfer into
Whole genome sequences of Sorangium cellulosum So ce10 and Sor-       secondary metabolite multiproducing Sorangium cellulosum
angium cellulosum So ce307 have been deposited at NCBI’s GenBank        strains So ce12 and So ce56: development of a mariner-based
under accession number CP162580 and CP162579, respectively. Other       transposon mutagenesis system. J. Biotechnol. 107, 29–40 (2004).
data supporting the ﬁndings of this study are available in the main text,    21.  Kopp, M., Irschik, H., Pradella, S. & Müller, R. Production of the
supplementary information and from corresponding author(s) upon        tubulin destabilizer disorazol in Sorangium cellulosum: biosynthetic
request. Source data are provided with this paper.                       machinery and regulatory genes. ChemBioChem 6, 1277–1286
                                                                            (2005).
References                                                           22.  Ringel, S. M. et al. Ambruticin (W7783), a new antifungal antibiotic.
1.  Newman, D. J. & Cragg, G. M. Natural products as sources of new           J. Antibiot. 30, 371–375 (1977).
    drugs over the nearly four decades from 01/1981 to 09/2019. J. Nat.   23. Connor, D. T., Greenough, R. C. & Von Strandtmann, M. W-7783, a
     Prod. 83, 770–803 (2020).                                         unique antifungal antibiotic. J. Org. Chem. 42, 3664–3669 (1977).



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7996                                                                              10


[PDF physical page 11]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63441-y


24. Knauth, P. & Reichenbach, H. On the mechanism of action of the    44. Wu, Y. et al. Dissecting the arginine and lysine biosynthetic path-
    myxobacterial fungicide ambruticin. J. Antibiot. 53, 1182–1190          ways and their relationship in haloarchaeon Natrinema gari J7-2 via
    (2000).                                                     endogenous CRISPR-Cas system-based genome editing. Microbiol.
25.  Shubitz, L. F. et al. Efﬁcacy of ambruticin analogs in a murine model of        Spectr. 11, e00288–23 (2023).
     coccidioidomycosis. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 50, 3467–3469   45. Hmelo, L. R. et al. Precision-engineering the Pseudomonas aerugi-
     (2006).                                                         nosa genome with two-step allelic exchange. Nat. Protoc. 10,
26. Vetcher, L. et al. The antifungal polyketide ambruticin targets the        1820–1841 (2015).
   HOG pathway. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 51, 3734–3736       46. Wang, L. et al. A Rieske oxygenase/epoxide hydrolase-catalysed
     (2007).                                                                 reaction cascade creates oxygen heterocycles in mupirocin bio-
27.  Masschelein, J., Jenner, M. & Challis, G. L. Antibiotics from Gram-         synthesis. Nat. Catal. 1, 968–976 (2018).
    negative bacteria: a comprehensive overview and selected bio-      47.  Tu, Q. et al. Room temperature electrocompetent bacterial cells
     synthetic highlights. Nat. Prod. Rep. 34, 712–783 (2017).                improve DNA transformation and recombineering efﬁciency. Sci.
28.  Marcos-Torres, F. J., Volz, C. & Müller, R. An ambruticin-sensing          Rep. 6, 24648 (2016).
    complex modulates Myxococcus xanthus development and med-    48. Bierman, M. et al. Plasmid cloning vectors for the conjugal transfer
     iates myxobacterial interspecies communication. Nat. Commun. 11,        of DNA from Escherichia coli to Streptomyces spp. Gene 116,
    5563 (2020).                                                43–49 (1992).
29. Hahn, F. & Guth, F. M. The ambruticins and jerangolids – chemistry,   49. Sun, Y. et al. Organization of the biosynthetic gene cluster in
    biology and chemoenzymatic synthesis of potent antifungal drug        Streptomyces sp. DSM 4137 for the novel neuroprotectant polyke-
    candidates. Nat. Prod. Rep. 37, 1300–1315 (2020).                          tide meridamycin. Microbiol 152, 3507–3515 (2006).
30. Ma, S., Mandalapu, D., Wang, S. & Zhang, Q. Biosynthesis of         50. Gemperlein, K. et al. Polyunsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis in
    cyclopropane in natural products. Nat. Prod. Rep. 39, 926–945          myxobacteria: different PUFA synthases and their product diversity.
     (2022).                                                   Chem. Sci. 5, 1733 (2014).
31.  Julien, B., Tian, Z., Reid, R. & Reeves, C. D. Analysis of the ambruticin   51.  Boldt, J. et al. Bursts in biosynthetic gene cluster transcription are
    and jerangolid gene clusters of Sorangium cellulosum reveals          accompanied by surges of natural compound production in the
    unusual mechanisms of polyketide biosynthesis. Chem. Biol. 13,         myxobacterium Sorangium sp. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 16,
    1277–1286 (2006).                                              1054–1068 (2023).
32.  Berkhan, G. & Hahn, F. A dehydratase domain in ambruticin bio-     52.  Xie, F. et al. Insights into the biosynthesis of icumazole, unveiling a
     synthesis displays additional activity as a pyran-forming cyclase.          distinctive family of crotonyl-CoA carboxylase/reductase. Cell Rep.
    Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 53, 14240–14244 (2014).                          Phys. Sci. 4, 101394 (2023).
33.  Friedrich, S. et al. Characterisation of the broadly-speciﬁc O-        53.  Shichijo, Y. et al. Epoxide hydrolase Lsd19 for polyether formation in
     methyl-transferase JerF from the late stages of jerangolid bio-           the biosynthesis of lasalocid A: direct experimental evidence on
     synthesis. Molecules 21, 1443 (2016).                                  polyene-polyepoxide hypothesis in polyether biosynthesis. J. Am.
34. Berkhan, G., Merten, C., Holec, C. & Hahn, F. The interplay between      Chem. Soc. 130, 12230–12231 (2008).
    a multifunctional dehydratase domain and a C-methyltransferase    54. Hotta, K. et al. Enzymatic catalysis of anti-Baldwin ring closure in
     effects oleﬁn shift in ambruticin biosynthesis. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.       polyether biosynthesis. Nature 483, 355–358 (2012).
    55, 13589–13592 (2016).                                           55. He, B. et al. Enzymatic pyran formation involved in xiamenmycin
35. Sung, K. H. et al. Insights into the dual activity of a bifunctional           biosynthesis. ACS Catal. 9, 5391–5399 (2019).
    dehydratase-cyclase domain. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 57,             56. Bowen, J. I., Wang, L., Crump, M. P. & Willis, C. L. Synthetic and
    343–347 (2018).                                                         biosynthetic methods for selective cyclisations of 4, 5-epoxy alco-
36. Lindner, F., Friedrich, S. & Hahn, F. Total synthesis of complex            hols to tetrahydropyrans. Org. Biomol. Chem. 20, 1150–1175 (2022).
     biosynthetic late-stage intermediates and bioconversion by a tai-     57. Hemmerling, F. & Hahn, F. Biosynthesis of oxygen and nitrogen-
     loring enzyme from jerangolid biosynthesis. J. Org. Chem. 83,           containing heterocycles in polyketides. Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 12,
    14091–14101 (2018).                                                 1512–1550 (2016).
37. Hemmerling, F., Lebe, K. E., Wunderlich, J. & Hahn, F. An unusual    58. Trentadue, K., Chang, C. F., Nalin, A. & Taylor, R. E. Enantioselective
     fatty acyl:adenylate ligase (FAAL)-acyl carrier protein (ACP) dido-          total synthesis of the putative biosynthetic intermediate ambruticin.
    main in ambruticin biosynthesis. ChemBioChem 19, 1006–1011                J. Chem. Eur. J. 27, 11126–11131 (2021).
     (2018).                                                           59. Bowen, J. I., Wang, L., Crump, M. P. & Willis, C. L. Ambruticins:
38. Guth, F. M. et al. Rieske oxygenase-catalyzed oxidative late-stage        tetrahydropyran ring formation and total synthesis. Org. Biomol.
     functionalization during complex antifungal polyketide biosynth-       Chem. 19, 6210–6215 (2021).
     esis. ACS Chem. Biol. 18, 2450–2456 (2023).                      60. Abramson, J. et al. Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular
39. Hollmann, T. et al. Biocatalysts from biosynthetic pathways:               interactions with AlphaFold3. Nature 630, 493–500 (2024).
    enabling stereoselective, enzymatic cycloether formation on a        61.  Hoye, T. R., Jeffrey, C. S. & Shao, F. Mosher ester analysis for the
    gram scale. ACS Catal. 10, 4973–4982 (2020).                          determination of absolute conﬁguration of stereogenic (chiral)
40. Bowen, J. I. et al. Combining total synthesis and genetic engineer-        carbinol carbons. Nat. Protoc. 2, 2451–2458 (2007).
    ing to probe dihydropyran formation in ambruticin biosynthesis.     62. Hertweck, C. The biosynthetic logic of polyketide diversity. Angew.
    Chem. Sci. 15, 5319–5326 (2024).                               Chem. Int. Ed. 48, 4688–4716 (2009).
41.  Liang, M., Zhu, J. & Jiang, J. Carotenoids biosynthesis and cleavage
     related genes from bacteria to plants. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 58,  Acknowledgements
    2314–2333 (2018).                                                   This work was supported by the National Key Research and Develop-
42. Du, K. et al. Reprogramming the endogenous type I CRISPR-Cas    ment Programme of China (2024YFC3407000 to L.W.), the National
    system for simultaneous gene regulation and editing in Haloarcula   Natural Science Foundation of China (32270083 to L.W.), the Strategic
     hispanica. mLife 1, 40–50 (2022).                                         Priority Research Programme of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
43. Wang, J., Wei, J., Li, H. & Li, Y. High-efﬁciency genome editing of an  (XDB0810000 to L.W.), and the Beijing Municipal Science & Technology
    extreme thermophile Thermus thermophilus using endogenous       Project, China (Z241100007724009 to L.W.). We are grateful to the
    type I and type III CRISPR-Cas systems. mLife 1, 412–427 (2022).



Nature Communications| (2025)16:7996                                                                                                          11


[PDF physical page 12]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63441-y


EPSRC Bristol Chemical Synthesis Centre for Doctoral Training (EP/       Reprints and permissions information is available at
L015366/1) for a studentship to J.I.B.                                   http://www.nature.com/reprints

Author contributions                                          Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
L.W. and C.L.W. conceptualised the project. X.Z., S.L., B.M., K.G., D.J.,     isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Y.H., H.C. and J.L. performed experiments. X.Z., S.L., J.I.B., M.P.C., C.L.W.
and L.W. analysed data. X.Z., S.L., M.P.C., C.L.W. and L.W. wrote the    Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
manuscript with contributions from all the authors. All authors dis-       Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
cussed and revised the manuscript.                                which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
                                                                    reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
Competing interests                                               credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
The authors declare no competing interests.                            Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed
                                                                            material. You do not have permission under this licence toshare adapted
Additional information                                         material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third
Supplementary information The online version contains                 party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
supplementary material available at                          Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-63441-y.                              material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
                                                                       licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to     exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
Christine L. Willis or Luoyi Wang.                                  from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
                                                                     creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Rolf Müller,
Kenji Watanabe and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their con-   © The Author(s) 2025
tribution to the peer review of this work. A peer review ﬁle is available.





Nature Communications| (2025)16:7996                                                                                       12