mycotoxins (Yang et al., 1996; Hranueli et al., 2001;
Walsh, 2004). Fungal polyketides are usually produced
by the type I polyketide synthases (PKSs), which consist
of
multiple
functional
domains
including
β-ketoacyl
synthase (KS), acyl transferase (AT), acyl carrier protein
(ACP), dehydratase (DH), β-ketoacyl reductase (KR) and
thioesterase (TE) domains (Khosla et al., 1999). A fungal
PKS gene generally forms a tandem gene cluster with
other tightly linked genes encoding transcription factors,
transporters and tailoring enzymes involved in the modiﬁ-
cation of the primary PKS product (Weissman, 2009). For
example, the biosynthesis of aﬂatoxins (AFs), a carcino-
genic secondary metabolite, produced by Aspergillus ﬂa-
vus and A. parasiticus is controlled by a 70 kb-long gene
cluster including a pksA and 24 other genes (Yu et al.,
1995; Bhatnagar et al., 2003). Bikaverin is a tetracyclic
nonaketide-derived metabolite in Fusarium fujikuroi. Its
biosynthesis is mediated by the nonreducing PKS gene
bik1, which is located in a cluster together with ﬁve other
bik genes (Linnemannstöns et al., 2002; Wiemann et al.,
2009). The aur gene cluster consisting of PKS12 and
11 other genes has been revealed to be responsible for
the biosynthesis of the red mycelium pigment aurofusarin
in F. graminearum (Malz et al., 2005). The synthesis of
the bibenzoquinone oosporein is regulated by an OpS
gene cluster in the ascomycetous insect pathogen Beau-
veria bassiana. In this cluster, the polyketide synthase
OpS1 catalyses to form the precursor orsellinic acid,
which is subject to OpS4 hydroxylation and OpS7 oxida-
tion to form benzenetetrol. Oosporein is generated from
benzenetetrol dimerization under the catalysis of the lac-
case OpS5. The gene cluster is transcriptionally regu-
lated by the transcription factor OpS3 (Feng et al., 2015).
Ustilaginoidins are the ﬁrst isolated and identiﬁed polyke-
tides in U. virens. Previous studies focused on the isolation,
characterization and biological activities of ustilaginoidins.
However, little is known about the genes responsible for the
biosynthesis of these metabolites. The recently-released
U. virens genome facilitates the prediction of the gene clus-
ter responsible for ustilaginoidin biosynthesis in U. virens
(Zhang et al., 2014). Since the core structures of ustilaginoi-
din and chaetochromin are highly similar, it is speculated
that ustilaginoidins are most likely generated by dimeriza-
tion of two nor-rubrofusarin molecules. Therefore, the gene
cluster containing UvPKS1 (UV_2086) was predicted to be
responsible for the biosynthesis and modiﬁcation of ustilagi-
noidins and for transcriptional regulation of the gene cluster
(Zhang et al., 2014).
In this study, multiple knockout mutants of the predicted
ustilaginoidin biosynthetic genes in U. virens were generated
and subsequently their ability to generate ustilaginoidins was
determined by high performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC). The polyketide synthase UvPKS1 was identiﬁed to
catalyse the formation of monomeric primary products for
ustilaginoidin biosynthesis. The intermediate products in the
ugsJ and ugsL knockout mutants were also identiﬁed to be
ustilaginoidins F/G/A and 3-methyl-dihydro-nor-rubrofusarin
using mass spectrometry (MS) and nuclear magnetic reso-
nance (NMR) spectra, respectively. Through these genetic
and biochemical studies, we conﬁrmed that the ugs gene
cluster containing UvPKS1 is responsible for ustilaginoidin
biosynthesis in U. virens and proposed a model for the ustila-
ginoidin biosynthetic pathway. These results lay a solid foun-
dation for further functional studies on ustilaginoidins in
U. virens physiology and virulence.
Results
Prediction of the PKS gene cluster
By analogy with the aur gene cluster in F. graminearum, the
UvPKS1 gene cluster was predicted to be responsible for
the biosynthesis of ustilaginoidins in U. virens (Zhang et al.,
2014). Gene annotations in this cluster were updated here
according to a new version of U. virens genome. The gene
cluster was renamed as ugs (for ustilaginoidins synthesis)
cluster (Fig. 1A). According to antiSMASH, the ugs gene
cluster spanning over 49.7 kb contains 14 genes including a
newly-annotated gene UV_2079.5. The aurF and aurL2
genes in F. graminearum are absent from the ugs gene clus-
ter, while ﬁve ugs genes are absent from the aur gene clus-
ter (Fig. 1A, Table 1). The UvPKS1 protein, a putative type I
polyketide synthase, carries the starter ACP transcylase
(SAT), KS, AT, ACP and TE domains arranged from N- to
C-termini (Fig. 1B). The synthase is predicted to be a nonre-
ducing PKS and lacks the enoyl reductase, DH and KR
domains responsible for reduction of a polyketide backbone
(Hertweck, 2009). Besides, the ugsT, ugsO, ugsJ and ugsL
genes in this cluster are predicted to encode major facilitator
superfamily (MFS) transporter, the catalytic enzymes oxido-
reductase, methyltransferase and laccase required for the
modiﬁcation of the primary PKS products, respectively
(Table 1).
Targeted gene replacement in the ugs gene cluster
To investigate the roles of these genes in ustilaginoidin bio-
synthesis, the gene replacement mutants were generated
via homologous recombination. The upstream and down-
stream ﬂanking sequences (~1 kb) of UvPKS1, ugsO, ugsJ,
ugsL and ugsR2 were PCR-ampliﬁed and were then sub-
cloned into the binary vector pGKO2-hyg after restriction
digestion (Khang et al., 2005) (Supporting Information
Fig. S1A). The plasmid constructs were introduced into
U. virens conidia via Agrobacterium tumafaciens-mediated
transformation (ATMT). The hygromycin B phosphotransfer-
ase (hph) and herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase
(HSVtk) genes in pGKO2-hyg are used for dual selection of
© 2019 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Environmental Microbiology, 21, 2629–2643
2630
Y. Li et al.
 14622920, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://enviromicro-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1462-2920.14572 by Ocean University Of China, Wiley Online Library on [17/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
