Discussion
As an important newly-emerging rice disease, false smut
causes severe mycotoxin contamination on rice grains,
which imposes a major health issue to human and animals.
The polyketide ustilaginoidins are one of major types of
mycotoxins produced by U. virens. The biosynthetic genes
and pathways for some polyketide-type mycotoxins in phy-
topathogenic fungi have been revealed. For instance, zeara-
lenones from F. graminearum, nonsteroidal estrogenic
mycotoxins associated with estrogenic syndromes in swine,
are synthesized by a 25 kb zearalenone biosynthetic gene
cluster (Kim et al., 2005; Gaffoor and Trail, 2006; Desjardins
and Proctor, 2007). The biosynthesis of the polyketide fumo-
nisins that induce cancer and neural tube defects in labora-
tory rodents is regulated by a gene cluster consisting of
15 contiguous genes in Fusarium (Desjardins et al., 1996;
Proctor et al., 2003; Proctor et al., 2006). Although the bio-
synthetic gene cluster for ustilaginoidins has been recently
predicted in U. virens (Zhang et al., 2014), we provided,
here, the ﬁrst experimental evidence to support that the ugs
gene cluster is responsible for ustilaginoidin biosynthesis.
In fungi, polyketides are generally produced by type I iter-
ative PKSs. These large multidomain enzymes iteratively
catalyse several rounds of condensation of coenzyme A
(CoA)-thioesteriﬁed carboxylic acids, usually acetate and
malonate (Fujii et al., 2004). The chemical structure of usti-
laginoidins suggests that the polyketide may be synthesized
through condensation catalysed by a nonreducing PKS, fol-
lowed by additional catalytic steps, such as methylation and
oxidation. In this study, neither ustilaginoidins nor the inter-
mediates were detected via HPLC in the ΔUvPKS1 mutant,
supporting the hypothesis that UvPKS1 catalyses the ﬁrst
step of ustilaginoidin biosynthesis in U. virens (Fig. 2A).
Since ustilaginoidin is structurally similar to chaetochromin
and aurofusarin, UvPKS1 may catalyse the condensation of
one acetyl-CoA and six manonyl-CoA units resulting in a lin-
ear heptaketide, followed by cyclization, to form the hepta-
ketide nor-rubrofusarin (Fig. 5) (Frandsen et al., 2006).
UgsO was predicted to be an FAD-binding domain con-
taining reductase. The higher ratios of dehydrogenated usti-
laginoidins N and M to hydrogenated derivatives E and D in
the ΔugsO mutant (Fig. 2B, Supporting Information Fig. S3)
suggest
that UgsO
may catalyse the
hydrogenation
between C-2 and C-3 of ustilaginoidins N and M to produce
ustilaginoidins E and D, respectively (Fig. 5). Besides, sig-
niﬁcantly reduced amount of ustilaginoidins in the ΔugsO
mutant implies that the UgsO-mediated hydrogenation is
somehow important for ustilaginoidin biosynthesis.
Fig. 5. The proposed model for the ustilaginoidin biosynthetic pathway.
Nor-rubrofusarin (a) is synthesized as a primary product from one molecule of acetyl-CoA and six molecules of malonyl-CoA under the catalyza-
tion of the polyketide synthase UvPKS1. Nor-rubrofusarin can be readily hydrogenated to generate dihydro-nor-rubrofusarin (b), which is then
subject to UgsJ-mediated methylation to form 3-methyl-dihydro-nor-rubrofusarin (c). Subsequently, the methylated and nonmethylated heptake-
tide derivatives are subjected to UgsL-catalysed oxidation and dimerization to generate different ustilaginoidin derivatives. Besides, some ustilagi-
noidin derivatives are further modiﬁed. For example, ustilaginoidins N (5), O (6) and M (8) are reversibly reduced to ustilaginoidins E (4) and
D (7), which is catalysed by UgsO.
© 2019 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Environmental Microbiology, 21, 2629–2643
2636
Y. Li et al.
 14622920, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://enviromicro-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1462-2920.14572 by Ocean University Of China, Wiley Online Library on [17/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
