Using the transporter classiﬁcation database (TCDB; http://
www.tcdb.org) (Saier and Ren, 2006), UgsT is predicted to be
a member in the drug: H+ antiporter efﬂux family of MFS trans-
porters with 13 predicted transmembrane domains. MgMfs1, a
MFS protein from the wheat pathogenic fungus Mycosphaer-
ella graminicola, was previously shown to export natural
mycotoxins and a variety of fungicides (Roohparvar et al.,
2007). The sequence similarity between UgsT and MgMfs1
(40.0% amino acid sequence identity) suggests that UgsT
may transport ustilaginoidins and/or its intermediates across
cell membrane. The hypothesis is supported by the fact that
the ΔugsT mutant almost lost the ability to produce ustilaginoi-
dins and its intermediates (Fig. 2C). Similarly, the deletion of
bik6 encoding an MFS transporter greatly reduces the ability
to generate bikaverins in F. fujikuroi (Wiemann et al., 2009). In
another case, the ΔaurT mutant in F. graminearum produces
less aurofusarin, but generates more amount of the intermedi-
ate rubrofusarin than the wild-type (Frandsen et al., 2011).
Therefore, UgsT is most likely responsible for the transport of
ustilaginoidins across the membrane and is essential for ustila-
ginoidin biosynthesis.
The C3/30-methylated ustilaginoidin derivatives were no
longer generated in the ugsJ mutant, instead C3/30-
nonmethylated ustilaginoidins F, G and A were accumulated
much more (Fig. 2D). These ﬁndings support the prediction
that UgsJ is a methyltransferase, which is responsible for
C3-methylation on monomeric precursors or dimerized
ustilaginoidins.
The ugsL mutant generated three novel metabolites, one
of which was identiﬁed as 3-methyl-dihydro-nor-rubrofusarin
according to its molecular formula and the NMR data
(Fig. 3, Supporting Information Fig. S5). The other two com-
pounds were speculated to be dihydro-nor-rubrofusarin and
a
chiral
molecule
of
3-methyl-dihydro-nor-rubrofusarin
according to the LC–MS data (Fig. 3B). Therefore, it is sug-
gested that nor-rubrofusarin is the primary UvPKS1 product
and may be further reduced to form its dihydro derivative
(Fig. 5). Ustilaginoidin D is almost identical to chaetochro-
min A in molecular formula except the absolute conﬁgura-
tion (Lu et al., 2014). Both chemicals are formed by
dimerization of heptaketides with the nor-rubrofusarin core
structure through a C9-C9 bond (Frandsen et al., 2006).
These types of dimerization are generally catalysed by dif-
ferent laccases that oxidize polyphenols, hydroquinones
and a considerable range of other compounds (Thurston,
1994). This type of oxidation generates free radicals that
react with each other and induces the dimerization of
monomers covalently coupled by C-C, C-O and C-N bonds
(Claus, 2004). Based on the high similarity of UgsL to cop-
per oxidase-like laccases (Table 1), we propose that this
protein is responsible for oxidizing monomeric intermedi-
ates to create free radicals, and that the oxidative coupling
of these monomeric naphtho-γ-pyrone radicals yields differ-
ent types of dimeric compounds (Fig. 5).
Collectively, the pathway for ustilaginoidin biosynthesis
is proposed based on our experimental results and is sum-
marized in Fig. 5. The condensation of one acetyl-CoA
and six malonyl-CoA molecules by UvPKS1, followed by
cyclization, forms the heptaketide nor-rubrofusarin. No
nor-rubrofusarin was detected in the ΔugsL mutant, indi-
cating that the primary product is readily reduced to give
its dihydro derivative. However, the reductase responsible
for the catalytic step needs to be revealed. As 3-methyl-
dihydro-nor-rubrofusarin can be detected in the ΔugsL
mutant, UgsJ-catalysed C3-methylation most likely occurs
prior to UgsL-mediated dimerization. Different types of
heptaketides
including
nor-rubrofusarin,
dihydro-nor-
rubrofusarin and 3-methyl-dihydro-nor-rubrofusarin could
be then oxidized and dimerized by UgsL to yield different
types of ustilaginoidins. Some derivatives, such as ustila-
ginoidins M and D, may be reversibly reduced or oxidized
by UgsO or unidentiﬁed enzymes.
In ﬁlamentous fungi, the biosynthesis genes for certain
secondary metabolite are often physically clustered in the
genome and coordinately regulated (Osbourn, 2010). The
synergetic and positional effects among the genes in the
ugs cluster might explain partial restoration of ustilaginoidin
biosynthesis in the complementary strains. Incomplete
complementation might be also caused by inefﬁcient pro-
tein translation and protein misfolding due to the fusion tag.
In the ugs cluster, ugsR1 and ugsR2 are predicted to
encode a transcription initiation factor and a MADS-box
type transcription factor. We showed that the deletion of
ugsR2 did not signiﬁcantly alter expression of the ana-
lysed genes in the ugs gene cluster and had no dramatic
effect on the biosynthesis and chemical proﬁles of ustilagi-
noidins (Fig. S8A and B). The results indicate that UgsR2
may be involved in ﬁne-tuning gene expression, rather
than a major regulator of the ugs cluster. Similarly, dele-
tion of aurR2 encoding a GAL4-like Zn2Cys6 transcription
factor in F. graminearum showed no detectable effect on
gene expression in the aur cluster. However, the ΔaurR2
mutant generates a higher rubrofusarin to aurofusarin ratio
compared with the wild type (Frandsen et al., 2006). In
addition, GIP2/aurR1 in F. graminearum, the counterpart
of ugsR1, is required for the transcription of the aur gene
cluster (Frandsen et al., 2006; Kim et al., 2006). Interest-
ingly, multiple attempts to generate the ΔugsR1 mutant
failed. Because ugsR1 is predicted to encode the tran-
scription initiation factor TFIID subunit 1 (TAF1), an essen-
tial component of TFIID complex, we speculate that
ugsR1 deletion may have a lethal effect to U. virens.
The biological signiﬁcance of the secondary metabo-
lite polyketides has been revealed in many fungi. In
F. graminearum, aurofusarin accumulation affects the
mycelial growth rate and conidiation (Malz et al., 2005).
The phenotypes in mycelial growth of the ugs mutants
indicate that different ustilaginoidin derivatives might
© 2019 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Environmental Microbiology, 21, 2629–2643
Ustilaginoidin biosynthesis in U. virens
2637
 14622920, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://enviromicro-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1462-2920.14572 by Ocean University Of China, Wiley Online Library on [17/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
