respectively. After being conﬁrmed via Southern blot ana-
lyses (Supporting Information Fig. S2B–E), the mutants were
used for subsequent studies.
To increase the efﬁciency of gene replacement, the
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR)/Cas9 system was then utilized here. In this
modiﬁed system, Cas9 speciﬁcally binds to the target
DNA under the direction of single guide RNA (sgRNA)
and creates double-strand breaks in nearby genomic
DNA (Sander and Joung, 2014). Double-strand breaks
will induce homologous recombination and thus enhance
the efﬁciency of gene replacement. The ugsT-speciﬁc
sgRNA oligos were designed and inserted into the BsmB
I-digested vector pCas9-tRp-gRNA after annealing (Liang
et al., 2018). The upstream and downstream ﬂanking
sequences (~1 kb) of ugsT were also ampliﬁed and fused
to 50- and 30-termini of the hph gene by fusion PCR,
respectively. The constructed plasmid and fusion PCR
products were introduced into the protoplasts isolated
from the wild-type strain P1. The events after homolo-
gous recombination were screened via PCR and the
gene-replacement mutants were conﬁrmed by Southern
blot analysis (Supporting Information Fig. S2F). The efﬁ-
ciency of ugsT replacement was greatly increased up to
15.7%. RT-PCR analyses further conﬁrmed that the six
genes UvPKS1, ugsO, ugsJ, ugsL, ugsT and ugsR2
were no longer transcribed in the respective mutants
(Supporting Information Fig. S8B).
UvPKS1 is the key enzyme responsible for the
biosynthesis of ustilaginoidins
The ability to generate ustilaginoidins of the wild-type,
mutant and complementary strains was assessed by
HPLC and MS. The wild-type, mutant and complementary
strains were all cultured on PSA medium plates and ustila-
ginoidin intermediates and derivatives were extracted from
the collected hyphae using ethyl acetate (EtOAc) (Meng
et al., 2015). The extracts were dissolved in methanol and
subjected to HPLC analysis. Eight peaks (compounds
1–8) were detected in the wild-type culture, which were
identiﬁed as ustilaginoidins A, D–G and ustilaginoidins
M–O, respectively (Lu et al., 2015) (Fig. 2).
The UvPKS1 gene consists of three exons separated by
two introns, with a total coding sequence of 6315 bp,
which encodes a protein of 2104 amino acids. Targeted
replacement of UvPKS1 resulted in a light yellow pheno-
type on the backside of the mutant culture while the
wild-type strain exhibited a brownish-yellow colony after
culturing on the PSA plates for 4 weeks. Neither ustilagi-
noidin derivatives nor other intermediates were detectable
in the ΔUvPKS1 strain via HPLC analysis (Fig. 2A). The
plasmid-based complementation with gene expression
driven by the RP27 promoter (Zhang et al., 2018) partially
restored the ability to produce ustilaginoidins (Fig. 2A).
The results indicate that UvPKS1 encodes a functional
polyketide synthase that catalyses the ﬁrst step of ustilagi-
noidin biosynthesis, in which acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA
are cyclized to form the primary PKS product.
UgsO is involved in the redox modiﬁcation of
ustilaginoidins
UgsO is predicted to generate a 1.8 kb transcript after
three putative introns are spliced, which encodes a puta-
tive FAD binding domain-containing oxidoreductase. Tar-
geted replacement of ugsO caused a signiﬁcant reduction
in ustilaginoidin production down to 25.3%  5.4% of the
wild-type level. Although, eight major ustilaginoidin deriva-
tives in the wild-type strain were all detected in the mutant,
the percentages of dehydrogenated ustilaginoidins N
(5) and M (8) were signiﬁcantly increased and the percent-
ages of hydrogenated ustilaginoidins E (4) and D (7) were
decreased compared with those in the wild type (Fig. 2B,
Supporting Information Fig. S3). The ability to produce
ustilaginoidins was largely restored up to 63.9%  10.4%
of the wild-type level and the ratios of dehydrogenated/hy-
drogenated ustilaginoidin derivatives N/E and M/D were
also restored in the complementary strain ΔugsO/ugsO
(Fig. 2B). The ﬁnding indicates that UgsO is involved in
redox modiﬁcation of ustilaginoidins.
UgsT is a major transporter responsible for ustilaginoidin
biosynthesis
The ΔugsT mutant exhibited a bleached-white colony on
the PSA plates. UgsT encodes a protein with 574 amino
acids,
which
includes
13
predicted
transmembrane
domains and shows high similarity to major facilitator
superfamily efﬂux pumps. HPLC proﬁles illustrated that
only a trace amount of ustilaginoidins were detected in the
ΔugsT mutant in comparison with the wild type, indicating
that targeted deletion of ugsT greatly disrupts the ability of
U. virens to produce ustilaginoidins (Fig. 2C). To further
conﬁrm the function of UgsT, the complementary strain
was constructed for the ΔugsT mutant. The plasmid-borne
ugsT with the native promoter partially recovered the abil-
ity to generate ustilaginoidins of the mutant strain. The
ustilaginoidin extracts from the complementary strain
showed the same HPLC proﬁles as those from the wild-
type strain, but were at a lower level compared with P1
(Fig. 2C).
UgsJ catalyses the methylation of ustilaginoidin
derivatives
In the gene cluster, ugsJ is predicted to encode a
513-amino-acid protein with a putative methyltransferase
© 2019 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Environmental Microbiology, 21, 2629–2643
2632
Y. Li et al.
 14622920, 2019, 8, Downloaded from https://enviromicro-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1462-2920.14572 by Ocean University Of China, Wiley Online Library on [17/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
