
[PDF physical page 1]
Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, 52 , 5478–5495
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkae314
Advance access publication date: 30 April 2024
Computational Biology


BGCFlow: systematic pangenome workflow for the
analysis of biosynthetic gene clusters across large genomic
datasets

Matin Nuhamunada  1 ,† , Omkar S. Mohite  1 ,† , Patrick V. Phaneuf  1 , Bernhard O. Palsson  1 , 2 , *                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded
and Tilmann Weber  1 , *                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        from
1 The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby 2800, Denmark
2 Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +45 24896132; Email: tiwe@biosustain.dtu.dk
Correspondence may also be addressed to Bernhard O. Palsson. Tel: +1 858 822 1144; Fax: +1 858 822 3120; Email: palsson@eng.ucsd.edu
† The first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors.


Abstract
Genome mining is revolutionizing natural products discovery efforts. The rapid increase in available genomes demands comprehensive com-
putational platforms to effectively extract biosynthetic knowledge encoded across bacterial pangenomes. Here, we present BGCFlow, a novel
systematic workflow integrating analytics for large-scale genome mining of bacterial pangenomes. BGCFlow incorporates several genome an-
alytics and mining tools grouped into five common stages of analysis such as:  (i) data selection,  (ii) functional annotation,  (iii) phylogenetic
analysis, (iv) genome mining, and (v) comparative analysis. Furthermore, BGCFlow provides easy configuration of different projects, parallel dis-
tribution, scheduled job monitoring, an interactive database to visualize tables, exploratory Jupyter Notebooks, and customized reports. Here,
we demonstrate the application of BGCFlow by investigating the phylogenetic distribution of various biosynthetic gene clusters detected across
42 genomes of the Saccharopolyspora genus, known to produce industrially important secondary / specialized metabolites. The BGCFlow-guided
analysis predicted more accurate dereplication of BGCs and guided the targeted comparative analysis of selected RiPPs. The scalable, interop-
erable, adaptable, re-entrant, and reproducible nature of the BGCFlow will provide an effective novel way to extract the biosynthetic knowledge
from the ever-growing genomic datasets of biotechnologically relevant bacterial species.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081
Graphical abstract
                                                                                                                                    by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 National
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Science
                                                                  &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Technology
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        user
                                                                                                                                    on
                                                                                                                                    16
Introduction                                                                across a particular species, with the first study appearing in
The number  of  available genome  sequences  in  public   2013 and subsequently, specific associated traits to phyloge-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             August
databases has exponentially increased for most  bacterial     netic groups within species ( 4–6 ). Pangenome analysis has
species over the last decade ( 1 ). These datasets are becoming   now reached the phylogenetic tree scale ( 3 ,4 ).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2024
crucial for extracting functional knowledge from the diversity       Several pangenome analyses include the investigation of
found across species pangenomes, the totality of genes found    biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) involved in producing im-
in available genomes of a species ( 2 ,3 ). Previous pangenome    portant natural products or secondary metabolites  ( 7–9 ).
studies have discovered many biological features common   Many known secondary metabolites, which also are referred



Received: June 29, 2023. Revised: March 22, 2024. Editorial Decision: April 5, 2024. Accepted: April 11, 2024
© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https: // creativecommons.org / licenses / by / 4.0 / ),
which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.


[PDF physical page 2]
Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10                                                                        5479


to as specialized metabolites, have bioactive properties, in-   Materials and methods
cluding antibiotic, antifungal, anticancer, insecticide, food                                                            Installing and running BGCFlow using the BGCFlow
preservatives, and biocontrol, with significant applications in                                              wrapper
medicinal, agriculture, and food biotechnology ( 10–12 ). Ad-
                                              BGCFlow  software environment  consists  of  three com-vances in genome mining have shown that most bacteria have
                                                              ponents:  (i) a snakemake workflow  ( https://github.com/significant genomic potential that may lead to the discovery of
                                                     NBChub/bgcflow ), (ii) a dbt pipeline for extraction of tabularnovel specialized / secondary metabolites with diverse bioac-
                                                            data ( https:// github.com/ NBChub/ bgcflow _ dbt-duckdb ) andtivities ( 13 ,14 ).
                                                                                              (iii) a python command line interface called bgcflow_wrapper  This biosynthetic potential varies within and across the
                                                                                     ( https:// github.com/ NBChub/ bgcflow _ wrapper ). The wrap-species, as demonstrated in prior large-scale genome mining
                                                             per can be installed using PIP directly from the Python Pack-studies ( 7 ,15–20 ). The pangenome-wide BGC comparisons
                                                           age Index (PyPI) ( pip install bgfcflow_wrapper ), and has theguide the selection of particular BGCs or strains for further                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Downloaded                                              command lines to access all of the features in BGCFlow. Thecharacterization. Several genome mining tools and databases
                                              BGCFlow WIKI  ( https:// github.com/ NBChub/ bgcflow/ wiki )like antiSMASH ( 21 ,22 ), antiSMASH-DB ( 23 ), MIBiG ( 24 ),                                                                                                                                                    from
                                                               contains information and documentation on installing, con-ARTS ( 25 ), BiG-SCAPE ( 26 ), BiG-SLICE ( 27 ), BiG-FAM ( 28 )
                                                                      figuring, and running BGCFlow.among others are routinely used to predict, search, and com-
prehensively analyze BGCs. However, each of these tools re-
mains limited based on its scope and the parameters used   Design of the Snak emak e rules for external
for accurate predictions of BGC functions or similarity across   software
BGCs. Thus, the integration of various phylogenomic, genome   As part of the Snakemake workflow, several external compu-
mining, and comparative genomics tools is becoming a cen-     tational tools were selected for different stages of the analy-
tral part of investigating secondary metabolite potential and      sis. In the first step, the installation guide from the individual
their evolutionary relations across different bacterial genome    software’s repository was followed to create a conda-based
datasets.                                                  environment using yaml files stored in the workflow / envs / di-
  The growth in genome mining tools and available resources     rectory. The version of all dependencies and the main software
poses a strong need for a standardized platform that allows    can be changed in these environment files. For a few cases, ad-
reproducible analyses and easy interoperability of the inputs     ditional rules were created for the installation, which typically
and outputs required by each genome mining and analysis tool    involved downloading additional resources and databases.
( 13 ). Advances in data science workflows have been transfor-    These additional resources are stored in the resources direc-
mational in processing sequence data, running standard an-     tory, and users can also provide the pre-downloaded resource
alytics pipelines, and readily accessing processed output re-     directories in the main configuration yaml file. A typical script
ports ( 29 ,30 ). For example, different workflow management     for the Snakemake rule includes paths to the conda environ-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081systems such as Snakemake ( 31 ), Nextflow ( 32 ), Cromwell    ment, inputs and outputs of the software in the interim di-
                                                                                                                                       by( 33 ) and others can assist in job scheduling, logging, and     rectory, along with the required parameters of the command
reporting of the key outputs ( 34 ). Further, these automated     line.
workflow managers can play a critical role in organizing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            National
the key results and data in a findable, accessible, interoper-                                               Customized Snak emak e rules data wrangling
able, and reproducible (FAIR) manner assisting researchers
                                                  To seamlessly run various software included in BGCFlow,in extracting the knowledge from the bacterial genomes ef-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Science                                               many customized rules were generated that make sure theficiently ( 35 ). Recently, workflow management systems were                                     &
                                                             formatting of input and output  files were interoperableapplied to efficiently run genome assembly, annotation, or
                                                                                     ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Such data wrangling typically in-pangenome analysis pipelines ( 29 ,36–38 ). However, end-to-
                                                            cluded rules that prepare the input formatting and processend large-scale investigation studies for secondary metabo-
                                                                the outputs in tabular interoperable format stored in the pro-lite biosynthetic potential  still require  significant domain                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Technology
                                                                cessed directory of each project. These data-wrangling rulesexpertise.
                                                              involved running custom Python scripts from the bgcflow  Here, we introduce BGCflow, a versatile Snakemake work-                                                       Python package directory. Many of the customized rules also                               Libraryflow aimed to aid large-scale genome mining studies to com-
                                                              involved additional downstream analysis of visualizing data.                  userprehensively analyze the secondary metabolite potential of se-
                                         On top of the main Snakemake workflow, BGCFlow also in-lected bacterial species. BGCflow integrates various genome                                                                          on
                                                                cludes several sub-workflows for in depth analysis such asanalytics tools for organizing sample metadata, data selection,                                                                          16
                                        BGC centric comparison, evolutionary and population geneticfunctional annotation, genome mining, phylogenetic place-
                                                                   analysis with lsaBGC ( 39 ), and other utility functions as de-ment, and comparative genomics. In particular, BGCFlow pro-                                                                 scribed in Supplementary Table S3 .                                                                                                        Augustvides customizable, easy-to-interpret reports, visualizations,
and an analytical database for downstream exploratory anal-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2024
ysis. Further, we demonstrate the  utility of BGCFlow by    Visualizing Jupyter Notebook reports
analyzing publicly available genomes in the genus Saccha-    Each of the major rules is supported with a templated Jupyter
ropolyspora , a rare actinomycete known to be distributed    Notebook for exploratory analysis of the results. These tem-
across diverse habitats producing industrially high-value nat-    plated notebooks can be run with the bgcflow build re-
ural products like spinosyns, erythromycins, and others. We    port command, which copies the template notebook from
show that the BGCFlow-guided interoperable knowledge    the workflow / notebooks directory to the processed directory
from different tools and databases can help in the targeted    of each project. These template notebooks are meant to be
discovery of novel BGCs and more accurate functional clus-    a starting point for exploratory analysis and thus can be
tering of BGCs.                                                 edited and expanded for each project. The notebooks are then


[PDF physical page 3]
5480                                                                                Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10


converted to MkDocs reports corresponding to each rule,   PEP definition for medium to high-quality Saccharopolospora
which can be served as interactive web server using the com-    genomes
mand bgcflow serve –project . The online server provides nav-   To demonstrate full-scale BGCFlow application, we selected
igation of the interactive reports for each rule. The reports   26 genomes from HQ and MQ categories as defined above
are also connected to the main results and tables, providing     in the second PEP configuration initiated with the project
options for downloads for downstream exploration. For ex-   name mq_saccharopolyspora (Data S2). For the BGCFlow
ample, the rules for antiSMASH, BiG-SCAPE, and BiG-SLICE    run of  this PEP, 19 out of the 20 available rules were
provide links to HTML reports provided by these individual     selected  for  analysis. The  results of each  rule are ana-
tools.                                                          lyzed using the custom Jupyter Notebooks stored in the
                                                                 directory data / processed / mq_saccharopolyspora / docs . The
                                                     autoMLST-based phylogenetic tree of all 26 genomes wasExporting results tables in OLAP database              used for downstream investigation including phylogenetic dis-                              Downloaded
Once      the BGCFlow                   run                                  is                           complete,                                                 all tables                                         from                                                             vari-     tribution                                                                         of BGCs                                                                                 using                                                                                          the                                                                                                ggtree                                                              R package                                                                                                                                                       ( 40 ).                                                                                               The            fromous pipelines              are stored                        as                      Apache                                 Parquet                                                          files for                                                             efficient                                                MASH-based                                                                                   clustering                                                                      was                                                                                    used                                                                                                 to group                                                                                                          the genomes                                                                                                                           into
data storage. The command bgcflow build database enables    seven phylogroups that were used across various visualiza-
the ability to extract, load, and transform the data into SQL     tions. The BGC comparative analysis was carried out by BiG-
databases through the use of Data Build Tools ( dbt ). Here, a   SLICE and BiG-SCAPE and the networks were further visual-
set of SQL schemas are generated to easily interconnect BGC    ized using Plotly (Figure 4 ).
and genome information with other analysis and metadata for
data queries ( Supplementary Figure S4 ). By default, BGCFlow   Enriched GCF network exploration
utilizes DuckDB, an embedded Online Analytical Processing                                                   The enriched similarity network of BGCs were built on top
(OLAP) database management system. Users can create addi-                                                                of the resulting BiG-SCAPE sequence similarity network by
tional data models and use other database management sys-                                                          adding nodes and edges from the result of ARTS, Known-
tems by modifying dbt profiles ( https:// github.com/ NBChub/                                                                   ClusterBlast, and query against BiG-FAM database using the
bgcflow _ dbt-duckdb ). For an interactive exploration of the                                                       python package networkx. MIBiG entries from KnownClus-
database, the command bgcflow serve –metabase will start up                                                                        terBlast, ARTS model, and BiG-FAM models were added as
a Metabase server, a popular business intelligence and visual-                                                             nodes, while new edges were created to connect BGC nodes
ization tool. The resulting database can then be synchronized                                                R
to Metabase using the command bgcflow sync .                 with the newly introduced nodes. Shannon Index (   p i ln p i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i = l
                                                                                     ) for each BiG-FAM models were calculated at the genus level,
                                                      where p i  is the proportion of the  i th genus in the model.Genome mining and comparative analysis of                                               BiG-FAM models 202087, 200946, 210179, 213140, 201682,                                                                                                                                                                     https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081Saccharopolyspora BGCs
                                                       201608, 205957, 215277, 201830 and 202082 were removed      by
This study incorporates several BGCFlow projects, defined
                                                      from the network based on the low percentage of the assigned
in the PEP formats (available at Zenodo: https:// doi.org/ 10.
                                                           top genus ( < 30%) and high Shannon Index. Clusters of con-
5281/zenodo.8018055 ) as follows:                                                             nected components were calculated using networkx but ignor-                        National
                                                                ing ARTS nodes. For clusters with n > 2 , a convex hull was
PEP definition for all quality Saccharopolospora genomes      drawn using the package scipy spatial.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Science
We searched for the Saccharopolyspora genus at NCBI Ref-                                    &
Seq with filters to include all assembly levels of the com-   Comparison of gene cluster families
plete genome, chromosome, scaffold, and contig on 25 Oc-     Sets of selected GCFs and BGCs were defined in a PEP for-
tober 2022, resulting in the  list of 42 accession IDs. The   mat and were run using a comparative BGC analysis sub-sample table with these 42 accession IDs was provided    workflow ( bgcflow run –snakefile workflow / BGC ) and fur-                              Technology
in the PEP configuration initiated with the project name    ther refined in Jupyter Notebook scripts ( https://github.com/
qc_saccharopolyspora , which aimed to carry out the qual-    NBChub/saccharopolyspora _ manuscript ). The sub-workflow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Library
ity check and taxonomic placement (Data S1). The selected    included specific tools for an in-depth comparison of the BGC
BGCFlow rules for this first example PEP included: checkm ,    structure of sequence alignments ( Supplementary Table S3 ).            user
gtdbtk , seqfu , and mash . The results of the run were inves-     Briefly, MMSeqs2 was used to build a protein sequence sim-      on
tigated using the Jupyter Notebooks for each rule provided     ilarity network of selected BGCs, which allowed us to clus-      16
in the directory data / processed / qc_saccharopolyspora / docs /     ter the coding sequences into candidate Clusters of Orthol-
and visualized with reports using bgcflow serve –project    ogous Groups of proteins (COGs) ( 41 ). A phylogenetic tree                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             August
qc_saccharopolyspora command. Based on the assembly qual-   was built by concatenated alignment of single-copy orthologs
ity, the genomes were categorized into three groups:  (i)    which are conserved across all selected BGCs using Seqkit            2024
HQ (high-quality genomes of complete genome or chromo-      ( 42 ) and IQTree ( 43 ). The resulting phylogenetic tree and
some level assembly as defined by NCBI RefSeq), (ii) MQ    sequence similarity network are then visualized using the R
(medium-quality genomes with < 50 contigs, N50 score higher    package GGGenomes ( https:// github.com/ thackl/ gggenomes )
than 100 kb) and (iii) LQ (remaining low-quality genomes)      ( 44 ) and GGTree ( 40 ). The gene comparison was enriched
( Supplementary Figure S6 , Figure 3 a). The generated GTDB    with CBlaster hits  ( 45 ) to a selected reference BGCs and
taxonomy definitions were used for the downstream analy-     links between genes are made using CLinker  ( 46 ). Multi-
sis. The MASH-distance calculation was used to group 42     ple sequence alignments of the candidate precursor peptides
genomes in 7 different clusters of genomes called phylogroups    are built using Clustal Omega ( 47 ) and visualized using the
in this study.                              GGMSA R package ( 48 ).


[PDF physical page 4]
Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10                                                                        5481


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              from





Figure 1. Overview of the BGCFlow components. Overview of the key stages involved in large-scale genome mining analysis supported by BGCFlow
commands. ( A ) Deployment of BGCFlow code along with various rules (command: bgcflow –deploy ). ( B ) BGCFlow organizes multiple projects and
samples met adat a using Port able Encapsulated Projects (PEPs) and a global Snakemake configuration file (.yaml) to select the set of rules to run in a
given project (command: bgcflow –init ). ( C ) BGCfFlow can automatically run all selected rules using Snakemake job scheduling that can be monitored in
live using panoptes (command: bgcflow –run –wms-monitor ). ( D ) The generated tables can be readily accessed for downstream analysis through an
OLAP database based on DuckDB and the data build tool (DBT) (command: bgcflow –build ). ( E ) Processed data is then reorganized per projects,
including interactive Jupyter Notebooks and markdown reports (command: bgcflow –serve ). Additional commands provided in BGCFlow include –rules,
–clone, etc. Details of different components can be found in Supplementary Figures S1 to S4 .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081
Results                                                        cessing the results. The main workflow of BGCFlow contains         by
                                                        about 70 Snakemake rules (Figure 2 B, Supplementary TableIntegrated components of BGCFlow present a
                                                     S2 ), whereas 20 ( Supplementary Table S1 ) of these can be se-novel platform to efficiently explore BGC potential                                                                    lected from the configuration to run any of the analyses.                                                      Nationalacross genomes
                                                                   Large-scale studies also include reanalyzing subsets of the
BGCFlow allows users to collect, organize, explore, and vi-                                                                               initial dataset with different pipelines, leading to multiple
sualize the BGC potential of a large set of genomes either                                                                   projects within a study. For example, when selecting a dataset                               Science
directly collected from the public database (e.g. NCBI ( 49 ),                                     &                                                                to build a pangenome, the size of genome samples in the
PATRIC ( 50 )) or custom-assembled genomes from internal                                                                  project may change after running the filtering stage based on
sources. The workflow consists of five different components:                                                   genome quality or taxonomic placements. To aid in manag-
(i) Snakemake workflow to manage the data files and integrate                                                                ing sample datasets across multiple projects or studies, wethe execution of the different bioinformatic tools for genome                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Technology                                                        adopted the Portable Encapsulated Project (PEP) specifica-
and BGC analysis, (ii) project management with efficient con-                                                                  tion ( 51 ) (Figure 1 B, Supplementary Figure S1 ). PEP enables
figuration of samples and rules, (iii) job scheduling and moni-                                                                 users to easily define the project and input configuration via                               Library
toring, (iv) analytics database for storing key information, and
                                                        human-readable ‘.yaml’ files for each project and subproject.                  user(v) Jupyter-based notebooks for reproducible reports, analy-                                       A typical project configuration includes a path to the table
sis, and visualization (Figure 1 ). These five components also                                                                          on                                                              containing a list of sample datasets (e.g. a list of NCBI ac-
represent the command line options provided in the BGCFlow                                                                          16                                                                 cession identifiers) as the input, a description of the project,
wrapper, such as deploy, init, run, build and serve .                                                                    selection of the pipelines to be run by setting the value into
  The main component of BGCFlow includes running a set of                                          TRUE or FALSE. The configuration also allows users to in-                          August
well-established genome mining and analysis tools allowing                                                              clude predefined taxonomic classification results from GTDB-
the integration of biosynthetic knowledge provided by differ-                                              Tk ( 52 ) and a list of well-curated GenBank annotations to im-                  2024
ent resources. These various existing genome and BGC anal-                                                          prove gene annotation while running Prokka ( 53 ). BGCFlow
ysis tools are packaged as configurable Snakemake rules that                                                        can then read multiple PEPs and efficiently assign appropri-
can select for commonly deployed stages of genome mining                                                                  ate computational resources to a selected list of jobs using the
studies (Figure 1 A). Additional customized rules were added                                                    Snakemake workflow manager ( 31 ). Following Snakemake’s
to create seamless interoperability across these various pro-                                                                  best practices, users can use the dry-run function to get an
grams. In general, the individual rules carry out functions such                                                          overview of the number of planned jobs in the current analysis
as input data curation, data wrangling, running external soft-                                                              before executing the workflow. The set threads for each rule
ware, managing interoperability between software, and pro-                                                        can be optimized and changed further by users through the


[PDF physical page 5]
5482                                                                                Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081
                                                                                                                                    by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 National
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Science
                                                                  &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Technology
Figure 2. BGCFlow supported rules to carry out common stages of large-scale genome mining studies. ( A ) Overview of the five main analysis stages                             Library
supported            in the              BGCFlow.                               Snakemake                                                  rulegraph of                                                    BGCFlow.                                                                         Input                                                                  nodes                                                                                    are                                                                                       colored                                                                                              green,                                                                                       nodes                                                                                                                                        utilizing                                                                                                    main                                                                                                                               bioinformatic                                            ( B ) Detailed
                                                                                                                                                tools are                usercolored blue,           and                the remaining                          custom                                          rules for interoperability                                                              are                                                                 colored                                                                              yellow.                                                                Nodes                                                                                             inside                                                                                     green                                                                                        boxes                                                                                        on                                                                                                         the right                                                                                                                      are endpoints                                                                                                                                                        for individual
pipelines that can be turned on and off by using configuration files. These end-point custom rules can be categorized into the five main analysis types:        on
(A1) Data Selection, (A2) Functional Annotation, (A3) Phylogenomic placement, (A4) Genome Mining and (A5) Comparative genomics. Numbers on each      16
node refer to Snakemake rules described in Supplementary Table S1 and S2 .                                                                                                                                                                                                              August
Snakemake profile configuration file. Once the Snakemake run      ( dbt )  ( https:// www.getdbt.com/ ) into a database of choice
is started, BGCFlow monitors the progress across various jobs    (Figure 1 D, Supplementary Figure S3 ). By default, BGCFlow                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2024
on a live server using Panoptes ( https:// github.com/ panoptes-     utilizes DuckDB as a database. DuckDB is an embedded on-
organization/panoptes ) (Figure 1 C, Supplementary Figure S2 ).     line analytical processing (OLAP) database suited to han-
 A major limitation of many bioinformatics workflows is     dle large volumes of data with complex queries ( 54 ). To al-
the lack of interoperability between different tools and anal-    low easy interaction with the database, users can leverage
yses. BGCFlow provides an effective solution for investigat-    Business Intelligence tools, such as Metabase ( https://www.
ing the BGCs spread across the dataset by integrating var-    metabase.com/), for exploratory data analysis and perform in-
ious bioinformatics tools for genomic analyses. After com-     teractive SQL queries. Such a platform provides a user-friendly
pleting all analysis pipelines, the essential data tables are ex-    graphical user interface (GUI) to query and visualize the out-
tracted, loaded, and transformed using the data build tool    put for downstream scientific investigation. Finally, BGCFlow


[PDF physical page 6]
Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10                                                                        5483


   A                       B


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              from





  C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081
                                                                                                                                       by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            National
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Science
                                                                    &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Technology
Figure 3. Overview of genomes and detected BGCs in the Saccharopolyspora genus. ( A ) Scatter plot representing the distribution of genome lengths
against GC content across the dataset of 42 genomes of all quality, where the colors represent phylogroup and shapes represent sequence quality (Data
S1). ( B ) Clustermap based on MASH-based genomic similarity classifying 26 genomes into eight phylogroups of species (P3, P4, P6 with one strain                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Library
each) (Data S2). ( C ) Phylogenetic tree calculated using autoMLST displaying the distribution of the number of BGCs. Tree node colors display
MASH-based phylogroup and shapes represent the sequence quality. The first stacked barplot represents the number of BGCs on the contig edge or                       user
complete. The second stacked bar represents BGCs of different classes as defined in the BiG-SCAPE.                                                  on
                                                                                                                                       16
provides reproducible Jupyter Notebooks for analyzing criti-    stage of the analysis for a selected subset of genomes and tools
cal results for each pipeline, enabling customizable data sto-     for more focused exploratory analysis.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     August
rytelling for users. Using MkDocs ( https:// www.mkdocs.org/ ),
the standard notebooks are then served as static HTML re-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2024
ports via markdown, inspired by other attempts at repro-   BGCFlow automates common analysis stages of
ducible reporting, such as the work of Yang et al. ( 55 ) and the    large-scale genome mining studies
reproducible reports with MkDocs blog from Tim Vink ( https:   A common aim in large-scale genome mining studies is to es-
// timvink.nl/ blog/ reproducible- reports- with- mkdocs/) (Figure    timate the biosynthetic potential of strain collection and sub-
1 E, Supplementary Figure S4 ). With these five components,    sequently prioritize strains or BGCs of interest. Such analy-
BGCFlow can significantly assist users in efficiently carrying     sis typically involves various stages, including data selection,
out large-scale end-to-end exploration of BGCs across bac-    functional annotation, genome mining, phylogenetic place-
terial species of interest. In particular, the adaptable and re-    ment, and comparative analysis. Here, we describe these
entrant nature of the workflow allows users to reenter any   common analysis stages and their automation using various


[PDF physical page 7]
5484                                                                                Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10


                                   B   A


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        from

                                   C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081
                                                                                                                                    by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 National

Figure 4. Integrating external BGC knowledgebases of MIBiG, BiG-FAM, and ARTS models. ( A ) Treemap distribution of the mapping of detected BGCs
across different databases such as MIBiG, BiG-FAM, and ARTS. BGCs are grouped in antiSMASH known or unknown categories based on > 80%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Science
similarity to MIBiG using KnownClusterBlast function of antiSMASH. Using BiG-SCAPE, BGCs are grouped in known or unknown if the GCF contains    &
MIBiG BGC with a 0.3 cutoff on a similarity metric. Using BiG-SLICE, BGCs have detected a match against BiG-FAM of over 1.2 M BGCs detected
across public genomes. Finally, the ARTS match represents whether a BGC contains resistance-related genes that can help in prioritization. ( B ) Scatter
plot representing the Shannon index against the size of the 130 GCF models detected in the BiG-FAM database. GCFs are given color if there are genera
that comprise 50% or more of the total members in that model. ( C ) BGCs with matches against genes from ARTS. Blue color represents detected BGCwhereas other colors represent functional classes of genes from ARTS. Highlighted in red circle were the 17 BGCs in proximity to ARTS profile                                                                   Technology
TIGR03997.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Library
BGCFlow           rules                (Figure                   2 ).                 We note                                     that                                         these                                                stages                                                    are not     pipelines                                                                 can then                                                                         be                                                                           run to                                                                                               give                                                                                 an overview                                                                                                             of                                                                                                                the genome
always linear            but                   typically                          involve                                      cyclic                                           logic                                               for                                                     analysis.                                                        sample quality.                                                               The                                                                                 seqfu                                                                                               rule                                                                                              of BGCFlow                                                                                                    runs                                                                                                     Seqfu2                                                                                                                                                               ( 56 )            user
                                                                to give a quick overview of assembly statistics such as total      on
Data selection based on genome quality and phylogenetic   genome length, number of contigs, and N50 score. Moreover,      16
placement                                                      the included checkm rule’s contamination and completeness
In comparative genome mining  analysis,  selecting  input     results are useful for filtering lower-quality genomes, espe-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             August
datasets based on assembly quality and the phylogenetic     cially if the study includes metagenome-assembled genomes
group is crucial. Many types of BGCs contain repetitive se-      ( 57–59 ). In a few cases, the number of BGCs detected on the            2024
quence elements, which makes them hard to assemble and    contig edge in antiSMASH can also be used as an additional
causes contig breaks. Thus, genome mining tools such as anti-    quality filter before running a comparative analysis of BGCs
SMASH have the best accuracy with high-quality genomes as     (this would require the antismash rule to have been executed).
an input to capture complete BGCs ( 21 ). The data selection     An appropriate selection of genomes within or across the
stage can be initiated by defining a starting dataset via PEP    phylogenetic clades is important in the comparative analy-
configuration ( Supplementary Figure S1 ), which is a  ‘ yaml’     sis of BGCs distributed across species or genera. BGCFlow
object file pointing to a sample table containing a list of user-    incorporates rules to retrieve taxonomic assignments from
provided genome fasta filenames or public NCBI / PATRIC   GTDB ( 60 ) for available genomes in the database. Whereas
accession identifiers (as  ‘ .csv ’ formatted table  file). Several    the GTDB-Tk ( 52 ) rule can also assign taxonomy locally for


[PDF physical page 8]
Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10                                                                        5485


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081
                                                                                                                                       by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            National

Figure 5. Enriched similarity network with additional connections to different BGC knowledge bases. ( A ) Example of BGC similarity network using
BiG-SCAPE 0.30 cutoff. ( B ) Examples of the same BGCs with additional connections made using known cluster blast predictions, BiG-SLICE query and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Science
ARTS against the databases of MIBiG, BiG-FAM, and ARTS model, respectively. ( C ) Overview of the similarity network of all 722 BGCs resulting in 330     &
connected components with 19 BGCs assigned to 5 known MIBiG entries and 209 singletons (Data S2). ( D ) Expanded network with information from
antiSMASH KnownClusterBlast and BiG-SLICE similarity to BiG-FAM models resulting in 206 connected components with 45 BGCs assigned to 5 MIBiG
entries, 89 BGCs assigned to 11 MIBiG entries with ≥80% similarity, and 51 singletons (Data S3). BiG-FAM models 202087, 200946, 210179, 213140,
201682, 201608, 205957, 215277, 201830 and 202082 were removed because the assigned top genus in the model is below 30%.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Technology

custom genomes. For more specific and customized group-      lar, the configuration also supports the option for a user-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Librarying of input genomes into different phylogroup estimates, we    provided  list of well-annotated reference genomes of spe-
provide the options to calculate MASH ( 61 ) and FastANI-      cific species as a priority to annotate while running Prokka.                 user
based  ( 62 ) genomic distances across the dataset. A typi-    This approach to  prioritizing well-annotated genomes  is                                                                                                                                       on
cal PEP for this stage includes a pipeline with the selected     useful for having better  species-specific annotations. The                                                                                                                                       16
rules from seqfu , gtdbtk , mash and fastani . In summary,   GenBank  files generated in BGCFlow also add metadata
BGCFlow enables users to iterate over the data selection   on the time of data generation and the BGCFlow versionprocess using different PEPs with different sample sizes and    used.                                                                                                                                                                                                  August
rules.                                                      For extensive functional annotation, BGCFlow can run                  2024                                                EggNOG-mapper ( 64 ) to predict ortholog groups based on
Consistent functional annotation of the genomes        HMM profiles. These extensive annotations include predicted
The consistent gene calling and annotation process across    orthologous genes from SEED ( 65 ), eggNOG ( 66 ), COG ( 67 ),
the project ensures that the data are comparable, espe-  GO ( 68 ), KEGG ( 69 ), and other databases. The classifica-
cially when combining data from multiple sources. Once the    tion of genes in COG categories is beneficial for assessing the
input dataset  is selected for a particular analysis project,    genomic distribution across biological subsystems. Using the
BGCFlow provides a custom annotation rule for Prokka   eggNOG rule in combination with Roary ( 70 ), which recon-
( 53 ) that uses prodigal  ( 63 ) for gene finding. In particu-     structs the pangenome, provides an overview of the functional


[PDF physical page 9]
5486                                                                                Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081
                                                                                                                                    by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 National
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Science
                                                                  &



Figure 6. Alignment of lanthipeptide BGCs similar to erythreapeptin. ( A ) Phylogenetic tree and distribution of GCFs of all lanthipeptide classes. ( B )
Connected graph with nodes from KnownClusterBlast, ARTS, BiG-FAM. Difference GCFs are highlighted with the same background colors as panel A.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Technology
( C ) Alignment of detected erythreapeptin-like BGCs using clinker, ordered phylogenetically (Data S6). ( D ) Sequence variation in precursor peptides
highlighting novel variants of erythreapeptin-like lanthipeptides in different phylogroups.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Library
content of the entire pangenome of the given species in the    Phylogenetic analysis                                                                                            user
project.                                         One of the common questions in genome mining studies is to      on
  The number of functional annotation tools is easily ex-     investigate the phylogenetic placement of the BGCs across or      16
pandable in the BGCFlow framework, as demonstrated by    within species. As described earlier, the data selection stage
the inclusion of a specialized deep learning-based transcrip-    also considers the taxonomic placement of genomes using                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Augusttion factor prediction rule for deepTFactor ( 71 ). Finally, us-   GTDB or custom phylogroup placement using MASH or Fas-
ing the cblaster rule, it is also possible to generate a nonre-   tANI ( 52 ,61 ,62 ). A more detailed phylogenetic tree can also be            2024
dundant DIAMOND database ( 72 ) of all gene sequences (nu-    reconstructed using autoMLST based on multi-locus sequence
cleotide or protein), which can then be used to query par-     analysis of a few conserved genes with functions (30 by default
ticular genes or gene clusters across the project ( 45 ). This    with a maximum of 100) ( 73 ). The autoMLST tree provides a
analysis stage can include a pipeline with the selected rules    reference for studying the BGC distribution across the project.
such as prokka , eggnog (or eggnog-roary ), deeptfactor (or   The template Jupyter Notebook provides basic tree visualiza-
deeptfactor-roary ), and cblaster-genome . Thus, BGCFlow en-    tion using ggtree ( 40 ) and a guide to extract tables for external
ables users to easily access the various functional annota-     visualization using iTOL ( 74 ). Users can always use the output
tions across all genomes to increase interoperability in the     in Newick format and various BGC metadata tables to visu-
analysis.                                                               alize the results in other tools. Alternatively, the pangenome


[PDF physical page 10]
Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10                                                                        5487


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081
                                                                                                                                       by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            National
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Science
Figure 7. Identification of mycofactocin-like BGCs in Saccharopolyspora through integrated genome mining with ARTS2. ( A ) Integration of antiSMASH     &
KnownClusterBlast, ARTS2, BiG-FAM hits and BiG-SCAPE sequence similarit y net works enables quick exploration and visualization for unknown BGCs
with potential bioactivities. The zoomed panel shows a group of Ranthipeptide BGCs with low KnownClusterBlast similarity score with hits to ARTS2
model (TIGR03997). ( B ) Cluster comparison of the putative mycofactocin BGCs (Data S7), classified as redox-cofactor type in antiSMASH, as described
in ( 97 ). Alignment shows conserved RS-SPASM (MftC) and mycofactocin RRE (MftB) signature, but missing TIGR03966 profile in Saccharopolyspora . ( C )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Technology
the proposed mycofactocin biosynthesis pathway in Mycobacterium tuberculosis, adapted from ( 100 ). ( D ) Mycofactocin precursor peptide (MftA)
comparison in Saccharopolyspora showed distinct conserved C-terminal residues (IDGMCGVY).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Library
rule of running Roary provides a tree based on the alignment     terBlast, allowing users to search for predicted similar BGCs                  user
of genes in the core genome ( 70 ). This analysis stage provides     in the antiSMASH-DB and the MIBiG database ( 23 ,75 ). As an
                                                                                                                                       on
essential data for studying the evolutionary relationships of     alternative, BGCFlow also incorporates GECCO for the iden-
                                                                                                                                       16
BGCs across species or genera.                                       tification of BGCs ( 76 ). This offers users the chance to utilize
                                                       machine learning-based approach to detect potential BGCsGenome mining and overview of BGCs                          that might not be detected with the antiSMASH detection                           August
                                                                         rules.                                                                     In addition,                                                                                   targeted                                                                        genome mining                                                                                                with                                                                              ARTS2This     pivotal             stage of               BGCFlow                               includes                                           rules                                             to identify                                              and                                                                                                         adds                  2024                                                            information                                                             on potential                                                                                               resistance                                                                                               genes                                                                                        and                                                                                                            other ARTSanalyze        the BGCs                  across                         the project.                           More                                       than                                       70 types                                                         of
BGCs can be detected using antiSMASH (version 6 or version    models present in close proximity to the BGCs ( 25 ). The pres-
7) for detailed investigation ( 21 ,22 ). In addition to running    ence of particular resistance genes within BGC can help pri-
antiSMASH on all genomes, we also provide summary tables     oritize BGC targets with potential bioactivities such as antibi-
that help get the overview of the BGCs across the dataset     otics. Another alternative reference that is available is the BiG-
assisting in several downstream analyses. With the help of   FAM database, which contains ∼1.2 million BGCs from pub-
BGCFlow reports, users can also access all of the antiSMASH      lic genomes that are grouped into different gene cluster fam-
results interactively on the MkDocs server. BGCFlow config-      ilies (GCFs) ( 28 ). Using the query BiG-SLICE rule, detected
ures the antismash rule to run ClusterBlast and KnownClus-   BGCs in the project can be mapped to GCFs in the large BiG-


[PDF physical page 11]
5488                                                                                Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10


FAM database ( 27 ). In general, this stage of BGCFlow allows   BGCFlow guided data selection and phylogenetic
the integration of the most popular genome mining tools and    analysis of Saccharopolyspora spp .
databases with interoperability between the results.           As a case study, we used BGCFlow to investigate the phylo-
                                                                  genetic distribution of BGCs across Saccharopolyspora spp .
                                                           Actinomycetes are an important family of bacteria composed
Comparative analysis of BGCs and pangenome                  of several well-known secondary metabolite producers. Sev-
When comparing a large dataset of BGCs, a common ap-     eral large-scale studies have revealed the diverse biosynthetic
proach is to dereplicate BGCs by grouping them into different     potential of various genera like Streptomyces ( 77 ,78 ), Amyco-
GCFs, which encode similar secondary metabolites. BGCFlow     latopsis ( 17 ), Salinispora ( 79 ) , and others. In this study, we se-
supports two commonly used tools, BiG-SCAPE ( 26 ) and BiG-     lected the Saccharopolyspora genus to demonstrate BGCFlow
SLICE ( 27 ), to predict GCFs in the given dataset. In addition    because of the following:  (i) many secondary metabolitesto the previously explained query feature, the BiG-SLICE also     like erythromycin, spinosyn, and others produced by Saccha-                              Downloaded
offers       fast           calculations                        for                 GCF                                  clustering                                             in a given                                                     dataset                                                            ropolyspora                                                                                   strains                                                                                   are of great                                                                                       importance                                                                                                           to the                                                                                                             medicinal
and is       usually             deployed                         for                     much                                     larger datasets.                                        The                                                 BiG-                                                               (erythromycin),                                                                                   agriculture                                                                                              (spinosyn),                                                                                    and food                                                                                                                       industry,                                                                                                                             for            from
SCAPE is typically slower but more accurate at identifying    example in Chinese liquors ( 80–84 ), (ii) there are no compre-
GCFs as it uses a combined distance metric based on the orga-    hensive studies on genome mining across this underexplored
nization of protein domains and sequence similarity. In several    genus ( 80 ,85 ), (iii) the size of the dataset was sufficiently large
cases, an optimal scenario is to do rapid GCF clustering using     for demonstrating all the steps of the BGCFlow.
BiG-SLICE followed by BiG-SCAPE on the GCFs subfamilies      Saccharopolyspora is a multi-spored actinomycete genus
for the BGCs of interest. The outputs, including similarity net-    that was first isolated from sugar cane bagasse in 1975 ( 86 ).
works, BGC, and genome metadata, can directly be imported    Over the years, Saccharopolyspora species have been isolated
into the network visualization tools such as Cytoscape, dis-    from various natural habitats like soil, desert, fodder, ma-
playing the diversity of GCFs present in the selected dataset.     rine sponges and tunicates, deep-sea sediments, salt lake, and
  On top of GCF calculation using multiple genome mining    stony corals ( 80 ). Currently, as many as 46 species ( https:
tools, BGCFlow provides the possibility to integrate informa-       // lpsn.dsmz.de/ genus/ saccharopolyspora ) and up to 74 strains
tion from different genome mining tools and databases like    are reported in the DSMZ databases ( 87 ). In this study, we
BiG-FAM, ARTS, and MIBiG. Such an integrated approach     selected 42 genomes from the NCBI RefSeq database on
can guide more accurate GCF definitions and targeted com-   25 October 2022 belonging to the Saccharopolyspora genus
parative analysis. For example, the sequence similarity net-    with all assembly qualities (Data S1). The number of Sac-
work from BiG-SCAPE can be enriched to provide an infor-    charopolyspora genomes has increased significantly from 3 in
mation graph where detected BGCs, MIBiG entries, BiG-FAM    2012, 13 in 2017, to 42 in 2022 ( Supplementary Figure S5 ).
GCF models, and ARTS model are inserted as nodes, and the    In the  first stage of data curation and selection, we cre-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081
edges represent the connections across these resources. By fol-    ated a PEP with rules checkm , gtdbtk , and seqfu to ac-
                                                                                                                                    by
lowing the provided guidelines, users can further expand this     cess the information on the quality of the genome assem-
network with other connections.                                    blies and phylogenetic classification (Data S1). Here, the
  In addition, the cblaster ( 45 ) rule provides a database of   42 genomes were classified into three categories based on                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 National
all genes in BGCs in the project, where users can then run   N50 and number of contigs: (a) 16 genomes of high-quality
a BLAST search of multiple profiles to find BGCs or genes   (N50 > 5 Mb), (b) 10 genomes of medium-quality (num-of interest. This is a handy approach for BGC prioritization    ber of contigs < 50) and (c) 16 genomes of low-quality                     Science
by querying for BGCs with specific profiles, such as PFAMs    (number of contigs ≥50) ( Supplementary Figure S5 ). The   &
or SMCoGs encoding for special enzymes that support the   CheckM analysis showed that most assemblies are over
modification of secondary metabolites. Finally, studying BGCs   99% complete and under 4% contaminated ( Supplementary
in the pangenome context can reveal interesting features of    Figure S5 ) ( 58 ). The GTDB-based taxonomic placement ledsecondary metabolites ( 7 ,9 ,77 ). BGCFlow can reconstruct the    to the reclassification of 42 genomes into > 22 species be-                              Technology
pangenome of the genomes in the project (usually for a par-    longing to three genera: Sacharopolyspora (27 genomes),
ticular species) using Roary, which clusters similar protein    Sacharopolyspora_C (8 genomes), and Sacharopolyspora_D                     Library
ORFs      as orthologous                    groups                        and                                provides basic                                       pangenome                                                                (7                                                          genomes)                                                                                                      ( Supplementary                                                                                           Figure                                                                                    S5 )(60).                                                                                      The                                                                                                                       species                                                                                                                                   as-            usercharacteristics,               including                       gene                             presence-absence                                            matrix                                                                         ( 70 ).                                                          signment                                                             from                                                        NCBI to GTDB                                                                           was updated                                                                                                               for                                                                                                  a few                                                                                                                                species;
As explained in the functional annotation stage, a combined     for example, S. endophytica , S. terrae and S. karakumensis      on
EggNOG and Roary rule assigns the COG category and other    were reclassified into one GTDB-species S. endophytica . A pre-      16
annotations to all genes detected in the pangenome. The ap-    vious study based on 16S rRNA genes assigned these three
proaches in this stage are valuable for analyzing GCF distribu-    as separate species while noting that they belong to a simi-                  August
tion and the pangenome of the dataset, providing a guide for     lar cluster ( 85 ). Reclassification of taxonomy based on GTDB
further prioritization of strains or BGCs. Further, we provide    provides a more structured basis for downstream comparative            2024
sub-workflows within BGCFlow that can take BGC samples     analysis.
as inputs to run this stage of analysis on a selected set of BGCs.      For the next PEP example, we chose the subset of 26
 A particular study can combine some of these stages by se-    genomes with medium to high-quality genomes (Data S2). As
lecting various rules in the PEP definition, where the results    the number of species defined using GTDB was still higher
can be integrated using DuckDB or Jupyter Notebooks for     for effective comparison, we used the MASH-based hierar-
exploratory analysis. In the next section, we will demonstrate     chical clustermap to group the genomes into eight phyloge-
how these stages can be easily carried out using BGCFlow for     netic groups (P1 to P8) with the lowest k-means distance
selected genomes of the Saccharopolyspora genus.                    ( Supplementary Figure S6 ). These phylogroups represented


[PDF physical page 12]
Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10                                                                        5489


optimal clustering at the level between genus and species and                R
                                                                the formula (   p i ln p i ), where p i  represents the propor-were used in downstream visualizations. The genomic prop-
                                                                                                                                                                                 i = l
erties such as genome length, GC content, and number of                                                                  tion of each genus relative to the total member included in the
BGCs were associated with the defined phylogroups (Figure                                               BiG-FAM GCF model. A high Shannon index in a GCF indi-
3 ). The genome length varied from 5.8 to 9.6 Mb with an av-                                                                   cates a diverse distribution of BGCs across different genera.
erage of 7.6 Mb, whereas the GC content varied from 68%                                                       Such GCFs might represent biosynthetic pathways that are
to 73% with an average of 70%. The phylogroup P7 with                                                   more universally utilized across various bacterial species, sug-
four genomes of S. spinosa and S. pogona had the largest                                                                  gesting a broad ecological or biochemical significance. Mean-
genomes and lowest GC content, along with a high num-                                                                 while, GCFs with a low Shannon index, indicating a concen-
ber of BGCs. Similarly, the phylogroup P6 of S. erythrea                                                                   tration in one or a few genera, which might represent special-
also had larger genomes with a high number of BGCs and                                                                  ized biosynthetic pathways that have evolved to confer specific
higher GC content. Saccharopolyspora hordei A54 isolated                                                           advantages or adaptations to those genera.                                                                                                                                       Downloaded
from fodder ( 88 ) had the minimum number of 13 BGCs in
                                                     The maximum theoretical Shannon index at the genus level,                 fromits ∼5.78 Mb-sized genome. Similarly, Saccharopolyspora rhi-                                                          based on the GTDB bacterial genus, is 9.86, calculated using
zosphaerae H219 isolated from rhizosphere soil ( 89 ) had only                                                                the natural logarithm of the number of genera in the database
14 BGCs in its ∼5.82 Mb-sized genome. A more detailed phy-                                                                                     ( 60 ). However, in practice, BiG-FAM models rarely exhibit a
logenetic tree was also constructed using autoMLST based                                                    Shannon index above 5. It is also important to highlight that
on 30 common genes, which generally matches with the phy-                                                                                            it is challenging to establish a cutoff that accurately groups
logroups as well. The number of BGCs across this phylo-                                                                  diverse BGCs in a way that reflects their chemical similarity.
genetic tree was quite diverse (Figure 3 ). Thus, the selected                                                       Given the understanding that most BGCs are inherited verti-
dataset of 26 genomes and the phylogenetic tree were used in                                                                       cally ( 18 ), one should consider the limitation of the clustering
more specific comparative analysis in the subsequent stages.                                                                  tool when analyzing GCFs with high Shannon values. Based
                                                   on these limitations, the study focuses on exploratory analy-
Integrated genome mining analysis reveals the            sis of BiG-FAM models with distribution in more than half of
biosynthetic potential of Saccharopolyspora spp.       the genera they include, as these better represent the biological
                                                                     diversity of BGCs.Here, various genome mining tools were used to predict BGCs
                                                  Of the 59 GCFs with positive Shannon index, 33 wereand their association with databases such as MIBiG, BiG-
                                                                highly distributed across many genera with a Shannon indexFAM, and ARTS. The predicted mappings of BGCs against
                                                                of greater than 2. The GCF_201888 with the lowest positivethese different databases were used to reconstruct a treemap
                                                    Shannon index ( ∼0.3) contained 12,444 BGCs distributeddistribution (Figure 4 A). Using antiSMASH, a total of 724
                                                                across 43 genera with the majority belonging to Staphylo-BGCs were predicted across 26 Saccharopolyspora genomes
                                                            coccus ( ∼94.2%) followed by Acinetobacter ( ∼4.2%) . Thewith a median of 25 BGCs per genome (Data S2). The                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081
                                               known BGC in the BiG-FAM GCF_201888 coded for theBGCs were distributed across various types such as Sac-                                                                          by
                                                                 biosynthesis of staphylobactin (also known as staphylofer-charides (8 BGCs), PKS-NRP_Hybrids (37 BGCs), PKSI (45
                                                                     rin B), which is a siderophore with a role in the virulenceBGCs), PKSother (60 BGCs), NRPS (82 BGCs), RiPPs (90                                                                of Staphylococcus aureus ( 90 ,91 ). The detailed comparative                                   NationalBGCs), Terpene (159 BGCs) and Others (243 BGCs). Based
                                                                   analysis of the predicted BGCs against the MIBiG entryon the antiSMASH KnownClusterBlast similarity of greater
                                                    showed that the Saccharopolypora genomes indeed possessthan 80%, a total of 122 BGCs were mapped to the 16                                                        a BGC that is very similar to the staphylobactin BGC from                               ScienceMIBiG database entries of characterized secondary metabo-
                                                            Staphylococcus aureus ( Supplementary Figure S7 , Data S4).    &lites. Most common hits were geosmin (31 BGCs), ectoine (26
                                                             Further population genetic analysis with lsaBGC showed me-BGCs), 2-methylisoborneol (15 BGCs), and erythreapeptin
                                                            dian beta-rd values below 1 for the two staphylobactin-(14 BGCs) which were found across multiple species. Whereas
                                                                         like GCFs in Saccharopolyspora , suggesting that these GCFserythromycin (5 BGCs), flaviolin (5 BGCs), erythrochelin (5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Technology                                                                are unlikely to be the result of horizontal gene transferBGCs), spinosyn (5 BGCs), and E-837 furanone (4 BGCs)
                                                                                     ( Supplementary Figure S10 ) ( 39 ). Co-phylogenetic distribu-were detected in specific species.                                                                  tion of the BGCs across representative taxa members of the                               Library  The comparison of BGCs against BiG-FAM can be used to
                                               BiG-FAM GCF_201888 were conducted by comparing theinvestigate if detected BGCs are widely spread across other                                                                                                                                                    user                                                   genome tree of the species with the BGC tree build using get-genomes from the public datasets. The BiG-SLICE-based                                                                                                                                       on                                                          phylo ( 92 ) . The analysis suggested that the BGCs appear toquery resulted in 391 BGCs having similarities against 131                                                                                                                                       16                                                        have been inherited early in the phylogenetic history of theseGCF models from the BiG-FAM database (Data S3). From
                                                                   species ( Supplementary Figure S11 ). The g etphylo picked upthe 131 detected GCFs, there were 72 BiG-FAM GCFs that                                                                the orthologs of the s bnA and s bnB for the phylogenetic tree                          Augustare specifically distributed in the genus Saccharopolyspora .
                                                                  building. These two genes are responsible for the biosynthe-Whereas several other GCFs included BGCs from different                                                                                sis of L-2,3-diaminopropionic acid (Dap), the main precur-                  2024genera such as Streptomyces (47 GCFs), Amycolatopsis (31
                                                                sor of staphyloferrin B ( 91 ). While Saccharopolyspora has notGCFs), Kitasatospora (29 GCFs), Nocardia (25 GCFs), Pseu-
                                                         been experimentally shown to produce staphyloferrin B, thedomonas_E (22 GCFs), and many others.
                                                              presence of these genes, along with reports of staphylofer-  We further calculated the Shannon diversity index (H) for
                                                                     rin B production in other genera like Ralstonia ( 93 ), suggestseach of the GCFs representing the distribution of BGCs across
                                                        a broader distribution of this biosynthetic pathway beyonddifferent genera (Figure 4 B). In this context, the Shannon in-
                                                              Staphylococcus.dex is used to measure the diversity of the taxa of the BGCs
                                                         Other than the BiG-FAM model GCF_201888, our anal-that belong to a certain BiG-FAM GCF. The Shannon diversity
                                                                         ysis also revealed several other GCFs that encompass BGCsindex is a metric for assessing biodiversity, calculated using


[PDF physical page 13]
5490                                                                                Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10


that are predominantly found in other genera. BiG-FAM mod-      tivities. Additionally, the different layers of knowledgebases
els like GCF_215691 (Shannon index: 0.35) , GCF_220008    enable a better explanation of the reason behind the cluster-
(Shannon index: 0.41) , and GCF_203048 (Shannon index:    ing of GCFs.
0.52) were found predominantly in genera such as Pseu-     The enriched network narrows down the 330 GCFs from
domonas_E (1,241 genomes), Mycobacterium (227 genomes) ,   BiG-SCAPE into 202 connected components with only 50 sin-
and Streptomyces (114 genomes), respectively (Figure 4 B).    gletons (previously 209) (Data S3). Using KnownClusterBlast
The occurrence of these BGCs in various genera, apart from      ( > 80% similarity) and matches to BiG-FAM models, we can
Saccharopolyspora , suggests a potential for broader distribu-    assign 134 BGCs to 16 MIBiG entries, covering all known
tion of these GCFs.                                          Saccharopolyspora BGCs and common BGCs such as geosmin
  Many BGCs coding for known antibiotics also contain    and hopene. This information was missed using only the BiG-
genes assisting in self-resistance. By looking for these re-   SCAPE network. One example of using this approach is high-sistance models, ARTS2 assists in prioritizing novel target     lighted by capturing the spinosyn GCF more accurately due                              Downloaded
screening with potential bioactivity. We detected 296 BGCs    to the connections from antiSMASH KnownClusterBlast hits,
that had hits against 599 (130 unique) gene profiles from the    which were missed in BiG-SCAPE due to the variable bound-            from
ARTS model (Figure 4 C, Data S3). The interaction network    ary of hybrid clusters (Figure 5 B, Supplementary Figure S1 ,
represented an overview of BGCs in proximity to the ARTS    Data S5). Another example included a more accurate def-
resistance gene models (19 unique) or the core genes models     inition and a deeper investigation erythreapeptin-like GCF,
(111 unique) from different functional categories (Figure 4 C).    which was spread across six different BiG-SCAPE GCFs (Fig-
We found that 102 BGCs had hits against resistance genes    ure 6 C). Overall, the enriched network can be used as a start-
and are more likely to have an antibiotic potential. We also    ing point for in-depth comparative analysis within specific
noted that 64 of the 102 BGCs had no similarity to known   GCFs as demonstrated in the next sections, where BGC com-
clusters (either from antiSMASH KnownClusterBlast or BiG-    parison tools are used on these smaller PEP projects of each
SCAPE results), thus representing underexplored biosynthetic    GCFs.
potential of the genus. This analysis further motivated an ex-
ploratory analysis of a set of BGCs of unknown function that
shared proximity to the same ARTS gene model (17 BGCs),    Distribution and sequence level variation across
as represented in the last section of mycofactocin-like BGCs    lanthipeptide GCFs
of this study.                                         As an example of in-depth comparative BGCs analysis, we
                                                                  investigated the distribution of BGCs belonging to different
                                                                types of lanthipeptides. Lanthipeptides consist of five diverse
Enrichment of the BGC network with                        classes of ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally
knowledgebases revealed more accurate detection     modified peptides (RiPPs) ( 94 ,95 ). Lanthipeptides are typi-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081and dereplication of GCFs                                      cally represented by peptides containing lanthionine bridges,
                                                                                                                                    by
In order to investigate the diverse biosynthetic potential, it    which are post-translationally synthesized by linking the Cys
is common to generate sequence-based similarity networks     thiol- and a dehydrated Ser hydroxy group. From the 121
of BGCs that help in identifying distinct gene cluster fam-    RiPPs detected in the Saccharopolyspora genome dataset, we                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 National
ilies (GCFs). Clustering of the detected BGCs in Saccha-     identified 58 BGCs of the various lanthipeptide classes namely
ropolyspora using BIG-SCAPE (0.3 cutoff on distance met-     class I (15 BGCs), class II (8 BGCs), class III (17 BGCs),ric) resulted in 330 GCFs. Among these GCFs, only 5 con-     class IV (17 BGCs) and class V (1 BGC) (Figure 6 A). We                     Science
tained known BGCs from the MIBiG database: erythromycin,    found that different classes of lanthipeptides were predomi-   &
spinosyn, antimycin, 2-methylisoborneol, and erythreapeptin    nant in specific phylogroups. For example, class II lanthipep-
(Figure 5 A, C). It is challenging to select an optimal cutoff for     tides were detected only in phylogroups P7 and P8. On the
defining the GCFs, and thus we evaluated 3 different cutoffs    other hand, class I lanthipeptides were detected in all the otherof 0.3, 0.4 and 0.5, respectively ( Supplementary Figure S8 ).    phylogroups except P7 and P8. The class IV lanthipeptides                              Technology
For this study, the selected cutoff is set to 0.3, which is conser-    were predominant in phylogroups P1 and P8. The class III lan-
vative enough to avoid misleading connections with unrelated    thipeptides were present in most but phylogroup P1 and P3.                     Library
BGCs     and        MIBiG references,                            as                            demonstrated                                               in                                                        less stringent                                                                        Interestingly,                                                                               these class                                                                                                                     III                                                                                             lanthipeptides                                                                                          were                                                                                                       spread                                                                                                                     across
cutoffs          ( Supplementary                      Figure                         S8                                               ). However, we                                           missed                                        many                                                                     six different GCFs                                                                                  as per                                                                      BiG-SCAPE                                                                                             but                                                                                           were                                                                                                              detected                                                                                                                       as a            user
of the known cluster hits due to reasons such as some clusters     single connected GCF based on the enriched network due to      on
being hybrid types or having unclear boundaries.              KnownClusterBlast similarity (Figure 6 B).                         16
  In this study, we leverage points of reference from available    We further carried out an in-depth exploratory analysis of
knowledgebases and tools to improve the dereplication accu-    the class III lanthipeptide GCF by defining a new PEP with                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             August
racy of the GCFs. Our approach proposed within BGCFlow   BGC snakefile that used the BGCs of this GCF as samples and
involved generating an extended graph where the BGCs were   BGC alignment tools such as clinker (Data S6). We noted that            2024
connected with additional nodes from external knowledge-    most BGCs of this GCF contained all of the known biosyn-
bases such as ARTS (gene profiles), antiSMASH KnownClus-     thetic genes for erythreapeptin (Figure 6 C), a known lantibi-
terBlast hits (MIBiG BGCs), and BiG-FAM (GCF models).     otic produced by Saccharapolyspora ( 96 ). The only excep-
The expanded network with information from antiSMASH    tion was a BGC in the phylogroup P6 which had the addi-
KnownClusterBlast and BiG-SLICE similarity to BiG-FAM     tional genes but was missing the core biosynthetic genes. We
models was used to define more accurate GCFs. The ARTS    note that the additional genes were different in different phy-
gene profiles were not used to define the GCFs but can be used    logroups and thus explain the different GCFs detected using
to navigate and prioritize GCFs with potentially similar bioac-    BiG-SCAPE. Finally, we also compared the amino acid se-


[PDF physical page 14]
Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10                                                                        5491


quence variations in the leader and the core peptides of the   Discussion
core gene eryS (Figure 6 D). We note that the core peptide                                               Genome mining tools like antiSMASH have revealed the
sequence is generally conserved across all phylogroups with                                                                       significantly higher biosynthetic potential of various bac-
some variations at specific positions. For example, the AA in                                                                         teria to produce novel secondary metabolites with  vari-
the position 11 of the core peptide was N in phylogroups P7                                                        ous applications in medicine and industrial biotechnology
and P8, A in P4, and Q or H in P2. We also note that the pre-                                                                                     ( 15 ). In recent years, the search for novel natural prod-
cursor peptide sequence also displayed variations across dif-                                                                  ucts with bioactivity is evolving from purely chemical and
ferent phylogroups. Further experimental studies are required                                                                       activity  screening-based approaches  to genome  analysis-
to assess if these variations will lead to lantibiotics with dif-                                                                     assisted discovery ( 14 ,101 ). This paradigm shift in the era
ferent activities.                                                                of pangenome availability will require scientists to deploy
                                                         comprehensive platforms to organize the large datasets, meta-Integrated genome mining leads to identification of     data, and results in a findable, accessible, interoperable, and                                            Downloaded
mycofactocin-like BGCs in Saccharopolyspora           reusable (FAIR) way. The data workflow management systems                  from
On top of known resistance gene models, ARTS2 reference set    and databases provide effective solutions to organize large
includes phylum-specific essential housekeeping genes (core   genome mining projects. Here, the BGCFlow demonstrates
models). Both models are checked for duplication, horizontal    the  first end-to-end analysis platform to unify large-scale
gene transfer and localization within a BGC, which signifies   BGC and genome data, increasing the support for FAIR data
potential bioactivity ( 25 ). In this section, we carried out ad-     principles.
ditional exploratory analysis for a selected subnetwork of 17       Currently,  workflows  such  as AQUAMIS,  ASA 3 P,
BGCs of ranthipeptide type with unknown functions. These   TORMES, Bactopia, and  others automate many  of  the
17 BGCs do not have a match through KnownClusterBlast     ‘generic’ assembly, annotation, and pangenome analysis soft-
and BiG-FAM, but all shared a hit against an ARTS2 core    ware ( 29 ,36–38 ), but provide no information on specialized
model TIGR03997 (Figure 7 A). The TIGR03997 model was    metabolite BGCs. Many of the genome mining tools like
identified as a mycofactocin system oxidoreductase, a related    antiSMASH, BiG-SCAPE and BiG-SLICE allow the detection
biosynthetic component of a known redox cofactor in My-    of BGCs and GCFs, whereas databases like antiSMASH-DB,
cobacterium tuberculosis ( 97 ). Even though this profile does   BiG-FAM, MIBiG provide precalculated BGCs, GCFs, or
not satisfy several ARTS criteria for self-resistance, it indicated    catalog of known BGCs  ( 21 ,26–28 ,75 ,102 ). With a  pri-
that the detected BGCs might code for mycofactocin-like re-   mary focus on integrating secondary / specialized metabolite
dox cofactors.                                        genome mining resources under one platform, BGCFlow
  We did a further investigation into these 17 candidate BGCs     assists in automating the computational analysis in scalable,
by creating a new PEP with BGC snakefile (Data S7) and com-    adaptable, reiterable fashion for various small to large-scaleparing the detected BGCs with a mycofactocin BGC from My-    customized projects.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081
cobacterium tuberculosis . We found that the majority of the        Particularly, any exploratory data analysis requires scien-         by
genes showed sequence similarities to at least six out of the      tists to dynamically change the dataset, adding or removing
seven genes involved in mycofactocin biosynthesis (Figure 7 B    samples and running different analytical tools as the investi-and C), with the exception of mftD . Multiple sequence align-    gation continues. The notebooks and the database provided                                   National
ment of the candidate precursor peptides ( mftA ) exhibited the    here would be a starting point for many users to expand the
characteristic C-terminal pattern (IDGMCGVY) associated    exploratory analysis for the design of the study. Inspired by thewith mycofactocin (Figure 7 D) ( 97 ). The missing gene signa-    cookiecutter data science project ( https://drivendata.github.                               Science
ture ( mftD ) encodes an oxidoreductase (TIGR03966) that is     io/cookiecutter- data- science ), BGCFlow data structure, com-    &
required for the synthesis of pre-mycofactocin through oxida-    bined with Snakemake, enables efficient re-use of data via in-
tive deamination of 3-amino-5-[(p-hydroxyphenyl)methyl]-    put re-entries. While the notebooks are meant for flexible ex-
4,4-dimethyl-2-pyrrolidinone (AHDP)  ( 97 ). The Sacchara-    ploratory analysis, it is recommended to utilize the combined                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Technology
polyspora BGCs contained a gene without signficant similarity   PEP configuration and Snakemake for reproducibility. On top
to mftD but a hit against the ARTS profile TIGR03997, which    of the main workflow, users can also utilize sub-workflows foris annotated as FadH / OYE family oxidoreductase with un-     direct comparison of BGCs (as demonstrated with examples                               Library
known function. Nevertheless, experimental evidence showed    of erythreapeptin and mycofactocin comparison) or write a                  user
that S. erythraea is able to produce a methylated variant of my-    custom pipeline.
                                                                                                                                       on
cofactocin ( 98 ). These findings strongly suggest that the inves-      Comparing BGCs and grouping them into functionally re-
                                                                                                                                       16
tigated BGCs may be responsible for producing a compound     lated GCFs remains a key challenge in genome mining studies
that closely resembles mycofactocin, instead of a ranthipep-      ( 26 ,27 ,39 ,103–105 ). A BGC can be defined as a set of chromo-tide as was initially discovered with the rule-based logic of    somally adjacent genes which encode the necessary enzymes,                          August
                                                                              proteins,                                                                     and                                                                                         transporters                                                                                                        for the production,antiSMASH.          The                    classification                              discrepancy                                  was                                                      likely                                             due                                                         to    regulatory                                                                                                                   pro-                  2024                                                                     cessing, and                                                                       export of                                                                                           specialized                                                                                                metabolites                                                                                                                                                 ( 106 ). In com-the absence of               the              TIGR03966                                          ( mftD ) profile                                                  in                                                 the                                                     candi-
date BGCs, which are required by the antiSMASH version    putational contexts, we define a BGC using the antiSMASH
6.1.1 rule to recognize redox cofactor BGCs. The missing     ‘region’ concept, which is a set of genes within the offset of
profile then registers the BGC region as ranthipeptide, even     cluster detection rules ( 107 ). On the other hand, a GCF com-
though the clusters don’t seem to indicate the six Cys in forty-     prises of BGCs sharing similar biosynthetic sequence profiles
five residues (SCIFF) pattern in the precursor peptides ( 99 ).    with the potential to produce similar compound or compound
Hence, the BGCFlow framework provides a global overview     classes ( 26 ). Nevertheless, the definition of a GCF is heavily
and guidelines for investigating BGCs and GCFs in finer detail    dependent on the clustering threshold set within sequence sim-
that can reveal more knowledge about the BGCs of interest.       ilarity comparison algorithms.


[PDF physical page 15]
5492                                                                                Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10


  The accuracy of such comparisons can be influenced by sev-    of BGCs at different scales of pangenome-level, BGC-level,
eral factors, depending on the scale and quality of the dataset.    and sequence-level. Thus, we expect that the BGCFlow will
(i) Relying solely on gene sequence similarity for comparisons    streamline the research process along with facilitating collab-
can lead to the grouping together of distinct BGCs that share    oration and knowledge sharing among researchers working in
repetitive sequences. (ii) Comparing hybrid regions of BGCs,    the genome mining field.
which may contain multiple independent BGCs, can impact
the assessment of similarity. (iii) The precise determination
of BGC boundaries for comparison purposes is challenging.   Data availability
(iv) Poor assembly quality frequently results in BGCs being   The   three  components   of   the  BGCFlow   software
fragmented. (v) Effectively navigating and identifying relevant    environment      ( bgcflow,    bgcflow_dbt-duckdb ,    and
GCFs from a vast number of clusters demands the implemen-    bgcflow_wrapper )  can  be  found  as  separate  reposito-tation of efficient prioritization strategies, as not all tools are     ries  in  GitHub  at   https:// github.com/ NBChub/ bgcflow ,                              Downloaded
equipped to handle larger datasets. By leveraging the knowl-     https:// github.com/ NBChub/ bgcflow _ dbt-duckdb ,     https://                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        fromedge extracted from antiSMASH KnownClusterBlast, MIBiG,    github.com/ NBChub/ bgcflow _ wrapper or in Zenodo at https:
BiG-SCAPE, BiG-FAM, and ARTS into an enriched sequence       // doi.org/ 10.5281/ zenodo.8084004 , https:// doi.org/ 10.5281/
similarity network, BGCFlow enables the more accurate defi-    zenodo.8086694 ,  https:// doi.org/ 10.5281/ zenodo.8086628 .
nition of GCFs and concise comparative analysis of BGCs.     An extended documentation of BGCFlow  is available in
  As a case study, we ran the BGCFlow on a set of pub-     https:// github.com/ NBChub/ bgcflow/ wiki . The Jupyter Note-
licly available genomes of Saccharopolyspora genus, which is    books for the data analysis are available on GitHub at
known to produce several industrially relevant natural prod-     https:// github.com/ NBChub/ saccharopolyspora _ manuscript
ucts with still underexplored bioactive potential ( 80 ). Various    or in Zenodo at  https:// doi.org/ 10.5281/ zenodo.8086714 .
steps of the analysis carried out on different subsets highlight   A demo  of  the  automated  report  can  be  found  in
the reiterable nature of BGCFlow analysis. The phylogenetic     https:// nbchub.github.io/ bgcflow _ report _ demo .
analysis provides a guideline for efficiently investigating the
distribution of different BGCs across phylogroups, for exam-
ple different classes of lanthipeptides. The calculated enriched   Supplementary data
similarity network of the BGCs with different genome min-                                                         Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online.
ing resources improved classification of BGCs and GCFs com-
pared to the individual tools. Our analysis revealed more ac-
curate identification of spinosyn-like, erythreapeptin-like, and  Acknowledgements
mycofactin-like GCFs through connections to KnownClus-
                                         We thank Kai Blin, Simon Shaw, Tue S. Jorgensen, EmreterBlast based MIBiG BGCs or ARTS profiles. For instance,                                                         Özdemir, Roberto S. Navarro, Matiss Maleckis, Lasse J. D.                                                                                                                                                                    https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081when classifying spinosyn-like BGCs using BiG-SCAPE with a
                                                                 Nielsen, Pernille K. Bech, Eva B. Sterndorff and Zhijie Yang      bycutoff of 0.3, we encountered challenges due to multiple BGCs
                                                                  for important discussion and feedback during the develop-residing in the same genomic region, resulting in their clas-
                                                    ment and testing of BGCFlow.sification into different GCFs. In another example, the inte-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 National
gration of knowledge from ARTS allowed us to re-evaluate
the antiSMASH rule-based classification of ranthipeptides.                                           Funding
Our analysis uncovered 17 ranthipeptide BGCs actually re-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Science
sembling mycofactocin biosynthesis, a redox-cofactor type   Novo  Nordisk  Foundation  [NNF20CC0035580,  NN   &
also recently identified to be produced by Saccharapolyspora   F16OC0021746   ];  Danish  National  Research  Founda-
( 98 ). These findings highlight the importance of not only in-    tion [CeMiSt, DNRF137]; M.N. was supported by  the
tegration but also the need to carefully evaluate accuracy   Novo Nordisk Foundation Copenhagen  Bioscience PhDof each predicted GCF as per the case. While literature cu-    program [NNF20SA0035588]. Funding  for open  access                              Technology
rated databases like MIBIG are valuable resources, they may    charge: Novo Nordisk Foundation.
still contain incomplete entries and significant gaps to current                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Library
knowledge, especially considering the ever-growing volume of
                                                    Conflict of interest statement                                                         userpublications in the natural product field.
  Despite several advances in genome mining tools over   None declared.                                                    on
the last decade,  it  is important to note that many of the                                                                       16
BGC related analyses and predictions still require experimen-
tal validations. Therefore,  it  is crucial to exercise caution   References                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             August
and critically interpret the data-driven predictions. Neverthe-        1. Fullam,A., Letunic,I., Schmidt,T.S.B., Ducarmon,Q.R.,
less, analyzing large genomic datasets such as the BiG-FAM          Karcher,N., Khedkar,S., Kuhn,M., Larralde,M.,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2024
database, even with domain knowledge expertise, presents         Maistrenko,O.M., Malfertheiner,L., et al. (2022) proGenomes3:
challenges due to variations in data quality, software ver-         approaching one million accurately and consistently annotated
sions, and database inconsistencies. To address these issues,          high-quality prokaryotic genomes. Nucleic Acids Res., 51 ,
BGCFlow aims to provide a scalable, explorable and repro-        D760–D766.
                                                                                 2. Doron,S., Melamed,S., Ofir,G., Leavitt,A., Lopatina,A., Keren,M.,
ducible platform for integrated genome mining analysis. By
                                                                            Amitai,G. and Sorek,R. (2018) Systematic discovery of antiphage
following workflow standards and incorporating data engi-                                                                             defense systems in the microbial pangenome. Science , 359 ,
neering best practices, BGCFlow provides a dynamic envi-         eaar4120.
ronment that facilitates not only the execution of various        3. Zhang,Y., Zhang,H., Zhang,Z., Qian,Q., Zhang,Z. and Xiao,J.
analysis tools but also enables critical exploratory analysis         (2022) ProPan: A comprehensive database for profiling


[PDF physical page 16]
Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10                                                                        5493


     prokaryotic pan-genome dynamics. Nucleic Acids Res., 51 ,            21. Blin,K., Shaw,S., Kloosterman,A.M., Charlop-Powers,Z., van
    D767–D776.                                                          Wezel,G.P., Medema,M.H. and Weber,T. (2021) antiSMASH 6.0:
   4. Hyun,J.C., Monk,J.M. and Palsson,B.O. (2022) Comparative             improving cluster detection and comparison capabilities. Nucleic
     pangenomics: analysis of 12 microbial pathogen pangenomes             Acids Res., 49 , W29–W35.
     reveals conserved global structures of genetic and functional           22. Blin,K., Shaw,S., Augustijn,H.E., Reitz,Z.L., Biermann,F.,
      diversity. BMC Genomics , 23 , 7.                                          Alanjary,M., Fetter,A., Terlouw,B.R., Metcalf,W.W.,
   5. Abram,K., Udaondo,Z., Bleker,C., Wanchai,V., Wassenaar,T.M.,            Helfrich,E.J.N., et al. (2023) antiSMASH 7.0: new and improved
    Robeson,M.S. 2nd and Ussery,D.W. (2021) Mash-based analyses           predictions for detection, regulation, chemical structures and
     of Escherichia coli genomes reveal 14 distinct phylogroups.                  visualisation. Nucleic Acids Res., 51 , W46–W50.
    Commun. Biol., 4 , 117.                                             23. Blin,K., Medema,M.H., Kottmann,R., Lee,S.Y. and Weber,T.
   6. Mageiros,L., Méric,G., Bayliss,S.C., Pensar,J., Pascoe,B.,                  (2017) The antiSMASH database, a comprehensive database of
    Mourkas,E., Calland,J.K., Yahara,K., Murray,S., Wilkinson,T.S.,           microbial secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters.
      et al. (2021) Genome evolution and the emergence of                    Nucleic Acids Res., 45 , D555–D559.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Downloaded
     pathogenicity in avian Escherichia coli. Nat. Commun., 12 , 765.       24. Kautsar,S.A., Blin,K., Shaw,S., Navarro-Muñoz,J.C.,
   7. Mohite,O.S., Lloyd,C.J., Monk,J.M., Weber,T. and Palsson,B.O.           Terlouw,B.R., van der Hooft,J.J.J., van Santen,J.A., Tracanna,V.,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              from
     (2022) Pangenome analysis of Enterobacteria reveals richness of           Suarez Duran,H.G., Pascal Andreu,V., et al. (2020) MIBiG 2.0: A
     secondary metabolite gene clusters and their associated gene sets.          repository for biosynthetic gene clusters of known function.
     Synth. Syst. Biotechnol., 7 , 900–910.                                    Nucleic Acids Res., 48 , D454–D458.
   8. Shi,Y.-M., Hirschmann,M., Shi,Y.-N., Ahmed,S., Abebew,D.,           25. Mungan,M.D., Alanjary,M., Blin,K., Weber,T., Medema,M.H.
     Tobias,N.J., Grün,P., Crames,J.J., Pöschel,L., Kuttenlochner,W.,           and Ziemert,N. (2020) ARTS 2.0: feature updates and expansion
      et al. (2022) Global analysis of biosynthetic gene clusters reveals          of the Antibiotic Resistant Target Seeker for comparative genome
     conserved and unique natural products in entomopathogenic              mining. Nucleic Acids Res., 48 , W546–W552.
     nematode-symbiotic bacteria. Nat. Chem., 14 , 701–712.               26. Navarro-Muñoz,J.C., Selem-Mojica,N., Mullowney,M.W.,
   9. Kloosterman,A.M., Cimermancic,P., Elsayed,S.S., Du,C.,                   Kautsar,S.A., Tryon,J.H., Parkinson,E.I., De Los Santos,E.L.C.,
     Hadjithomas,M., Donia,M.S., Fischbach,M.A., van Wezel,G.P.            Yeong,M., Cruz-Morales,P., Abubucker,S., et al. (2020) A
    and Medema,M.H. (2020) Expansion of RiPP biosynthetic space          computational framework to explore large-scale biosynthetic
     through integration of pan-genomics and machine learning                  diversity. Nat. Chem. Biol., 16 , 60–68.
     uncovers a novel class of lanthipeptides. PLoS Biol., 18 ,               27. Kautsar,S.A., van der Hooft,J.J.J., de Ridder,D. and
    e3001026.                                                Medema,M.H. (2021) BiG-SLiCE: a highly scalable tool maps
 10. Wright,G.D. (2017) Opportunities for natural products in 21st             the diversity of 1.2 million biosynthetic gene clusters.
     century antibiotic discovery. Nat. Prod. Rep., 34 , 694–701.               Gigascience , 10 , giaa154.
 11. Huang,M., Lu,J.-J. and Ding,J. (2021) Natural products in cancer      28. Kautsar,S.A., Blin,K., Shaw,S., Weber,T. and Medema,M.H.
     therapy: past, present and future. Nat. Prod. Bioprospect., 11 ,            (2021) BiG-FAM: the biosynthetic gene cluster families database.
     5–13.                                                                 Nucleic Acids Res., 49 , D490–D497.
 12. International Natural Product Sciences Taskforce,                     29. Petit,R.A. 3rd and Read,T.D. (2020) Bactopia: a flexible pipeline     Atanasov,A.G., Zotchev,S.B., Dirsch,V.M. and Supuran,C.T.                for complete analysis of bacterial genomes. Msystems , 5 ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081
     (2021) Natural products in drug discovery: advances and                e00190-20.                                                       by
     opportunities. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov., 20 , 200–216.                  30. Cornwell,M., Vangala,M., Taing,L., Herbert,Z., Köster,J., Li,B.,
 13. Medema,M.H. (2021) The year 2020 in natural product                  Sun,H., Li,T., Zhang,J., Qiu,X., et al. (2018) VIPER:
     bioinformatics: an overview of the latest tools and databases.              Visualization Pipeline for RNA-seq, a Snakemake workflow for                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            National
     Nat. Prod. Rep., 38 , 301–306.                                                    efficient and complete RNA-seq analysis. BMC Bioinf., 19 , 135.
 14. Ziemert,N., Alanjary,M. and Weber,T. (2016) The evolution of        31. Köster,J. and Rahmann,S. (2012) Snakemake—a scalable
    genome mining in microbes - a review. Nat. Prod. Rep., 33 ,                bioinformatics workflow engine. Bioinformatics , 28 , 2520–2522.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Science
    988–1005.                                                         32. Di Tommaso,P., Chatzou,M., Floden,E.W., Barja,P.P., Palumbo,E.     &
 15. Gavriilidou,A., Kautsar,S.A., Zaburannyi,N., Krug,D., Müller,R.,         and Notredame,C. (2017) Nextflow enables reproducible
    Medema,M.H. and Ziemert,N. (2022) Compendium of                  computational workflows. Nat. Biotechnol., 35 , 316–319.
     specialized metabolite biosynthetic diversity encoded in bacterial       33. Voss,K., Van der Auwera,G. and Gentry,J. (2017) Full-stack
    genomes. Nat. Microbiol., 7 , 726–735.                                genomics pipelining with GATK4 + WDL + Cromwell. ISCB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Technology
 16. Steinke,K., Mohite,O.S., Weber,T. and Kovács,Á.T. (2021)           Comm J , 6 , 1–4.
     Phylogenetic distribution of secondary metabolites in the Bacillus      34. Wratten,L., Wilm,A. and Göke,J. (2021) Reproducible, scalable,      subtilis species complex. Msystems , 6 , e00057-21.                     and shareable analysis pipelines with bioinformatics workflow                                        Library
 17. Adamek,          M.                          , Alanjary,                  M., Sales-Ortells,                                   H., Goodfellow,                                         M.,                                                                        managers.                                                                                 Nat. Methods                                                                                                                                                                    , 18 , 1161–1168.
      Bull,A.T.,              Winkler,                     A., Wibberg,                               D., Kalinowski,                                                                     J. and Ziemert,                                                    N.       35.                                                                               Chevrette,M.G.                                                                              and Handelsman,                                                                                                                                                          J. (2021) Needles in haystacks:                   user
     (2018) Comparative genomics reveals phylogenetic distribution            reevaluating old paradigms for the discovery of bacterial                on
     patterns of secondary metabolites in Amycolatopsis species.              secondary metabolites. Nat. Prod. Rep., 38 , 2083–2099.                 16
   BMC Genomics , 19 , 426.                                           36. Deneke,C., Brendebach,H., Uelze,L., Borowiak,M., Malorny,B.
 18. Chase,A.B., Sweeney,D., Muskat,M.N., Guillén-Matus,D.G. and          and Tausch,S.H. (2021) Species-specific quality control, assembly     Jensen,P.R. (2021) Vertical inheritance facilitates interspecies            and contamination detection in microbial isolate sequences with                              August
      diversification                     in biosynthetic                               gene clusters and specialized                                                        AQUAMIS.                                                                           Genes                                                                                                                                                          , 12                                                                                                                                                                , 644.
     metabolites. mBio                                    , 12 , e0270021.                                                                        37.                                                                         Schwengers,O.                                                                                                                                                    , Hoek,                                                                                         A.                                                                                                                                                                   , Fritzenwanker,M., Falgenhauer,L.,                           2024
 19. Medema,M.H., Cimermancic,P., Sali,A., Takano,E. and                   Hain,T., Chakraborty,T. and Goesmann,A. (2020) ASA3P: An
     Fischbach,M.A. (2014) A systematic computational analysis of            automatic and scalable pipeline for the assembly, annotation and
     biosynthetic gene cluster evolution: lessons for engineering                  higher-level analysis of closely related bacterial isolates. PLoS
     biosynthesis. PLoS Comput. Biol., 10 , e1004016.                     Comput. Biol., 16 , e1007134.
 20. Donia,M.S., Cimermancic,P., Schulze,C.J., Wieland Brown,L.C.,        38. Quijada,N.M., Rodríguez-Lázaro,D., Eiros,J.M. and
     Martin,J., Mitreva,M., Clardy,J., Linington,R.G. and                    Hernández,M. (2019) TORMES: an automated pipeline for
     Fischbach,M.A. (2014) A systematic analysis of biosynthetic gene         whole bacterial genome analysis. Bioinformatics , 35 , 4207–4212.
      clusters in the human microbiome reveals a common family of         39. Salamzade,R., Cheong,J.Z.A., Sandstrom,S., Swaney,M.H.,
      antibiotics. Cell , 158 , 1402–1414.                                       Stubbendieck,R.M., Starr,N.L., Currie,C.R., Singh,A.M. and


[PDF physical page 17]
5494                                                                                Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10


     Kalan,L.R. (2023) Evolutionary investigations of the biosynthetic         gene clusters in a complex microbial activated sludge ecosystem.
     diversity in the skin microbiome using lsaBGC. Microb.                Msystems , 7 , e0063222.
    Genomics , 9 , mgen000988.                                         58. Parks,D.H., Imelfort,M., Skennerton,C.T., Hugenholtz,P. and
 40. Yu,G., Smith,D.K., Zhu,H., Guan,Y. and Lam,T.T.-Y. (2017)              Tyson,G.W. (2015) CheckM: assessing the quality of microbial
     Ggtree : An r package for visualization and annotation of               genomes recovered from isolates, single cells, and metagenomes.
     phylogenetic trees with their covariates and other associated           Genome Res., 25 , 1043–1055.
     data. Methods Ecol. Evol., 8 , 28–36.                                 59. Bowers,R.M., Kyrpides,N.C., Stepanauskas,R.,
 41. Steinegger,M. and Söding,J. (2018) Clustering huge protein              Harmon-Smith,M., Doud,D., Reddy,T.B.K., Schulz,F., Jarett,J.,
     sequence sets in linear time. Nat. Commun., 9 , 2542.                       Rivers,A.R., Eloe-Fadrosh,E.A., et al. (2017) Minimum
 42. Shen,W., Le,S., Li,Y. and Hu,F. (2016) SeqKit: a cross-platform            information about a single amplified genome (MISAG) and a
    and ultrafast toolkit for FASTA / Q file manipulation. PLoS One ,          metagenome-assembled genome (MIMAG) of bacteria and
    11 , e0163962.                                                           archaea. Nat. Biotechnol., 35 , 725–731.
 43. Nguyen,L.-T., Schmidt,H.A., von Haeseler,A. and Minh,B.Q.          60. Parks,D.H., Chuvochina,M., Rinke,C., Mussig,A.J.,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded
     (2015) IQ-TREE: A fast and effective stochastic algorithm for            Chaumeil,P.-A. and Hugenholtz,P. (2022) GTDB: an ongoing
     estimating maximum-likelihood phylogenies. Mol. Biol. Evol.,             census of bacterial and archaeal diversity through a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        from
    32 , 268–274.                                                              phylogenetically consistent, rank normalized and complete
 44. Hackl,T., Duponchel,S., Barenhoff,K., Weinmann,A. and                 genome-based taxonomy. Nucleic Acids Res., 50 , D785–D794.
     Fischer,M.G. (2021) Virophages and retrotransposons colonize        61. Ondov,B.D., Treangen,T.J., Melsted,P., Mallonee,A.B.,
     the genomes of a heterotrophic flagellate. eLife , 10 , e72674.             Bergman,N.H., Koren,S. and Phillippy,A.M. (2016) Mash: fast
 45. Gilchrist,C.L.M., Booth,T.J., van Wersch,B., van Grieken,L., H           genome and metagenome distance estimation using MinHash.
    Medema,M. and Chooi,Y.-H. (2021) cblaster: A remote search         Genome Biol., 17 , 132.
     tool for rapid identification and visualization of homologous          62. Jain,C., Rodriguez-R,L.M., Phillippy,A.M., Konstantinidis,K.T.
     gene clusters. Bioinform. Adv., 1 , vbab016.                          and Aluru,S. (2018) High throughput ANI analysis of 90K
 46. Gilchrist,C.L.M. and Chooi,Y.-H. (2021) clinker &                       prokaryotic genomes reveals clear species boundaries. Nat.
     clustermap.js: automatic generation of gene cluster comparison         Commun., 9 , 5114.
      figures. Bioinformatics , 37 , 2473–2475.                              63. Hyatt,D., Chen,G.-L., LoCascio,P.F., Land,M.L., Larimer,F.W. and
 47. Sievers,F., Wilm,A., Dineen,D., Gibson,T.J., Karplus,K., Li,W.,              Hauser,L.J. (2010) Prodigal: prokaryotic gene recognition and
     Lopez,R., McWilliam,H., Remmert,M., Söding,J., et al. (2011)              translation initiation site identification. BMC Bioinf., 11 , 119.
     Fast, scalable generation of high-quality protein multiple              64. Cantalapiedra,C.P., Hernández-Plaza,A., Letunic,I., Bork,P. and
     sequence alignments using Clustal Omega. Mol. Syst. Biol., 7 ,             Huerta-Cepas,J. (2021) eggNOG-mapper v2: functional
     539.                                                                    annotation, orthology assignments, and domain prediction at the
 48. Zhou,L., Feng,T., Xu,S., Gao,F., Lam,T.T., Wang,Q., Wu,T.,              metagenomic scale. Mol. Biol. Evol., 38 , 5825–5829.
    Huang,H., Zhan,L., Li,L., et al. (2022) ggmsa: A visual               65. Devoid,S., Overbeek,R., DeJongh,M., Vonstein,V., Best,A.A. and
     exploration tool for multiple sequence alignment and associated          Henry,C. (2013) Automated genome annotation and metabolic
     data. Brief. Bioinform., 23 , bbac222.                               model reconstruction in the SEED and Model SEED. Methods 49. Sayers,E.W., Bolton,E.E., Brister,J.R., Canese,K., Chan,J.,                Mol. Biol., 985 , 17–45.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081
    Comeau,D.C., Farrell,C.M., Feldgarden,M., Fine,A.M., Funk,K.,       66. Hernández-Plaza,A., Szklarczyk,D., Botas,J., Cantalapiedra,C.P.,        by
      et al. (2023) Database resources of the National Center for               Giner-Lamia,J., Mende,D.R., Kirsch,R., Rattei,T., Letunic,I.,
     Biotechnology Information in 2023. Nucleic Acids Res., 51 ,                Jensen,L.J., et al. (2023) eggNOG 6.0: enabling comparative
    D29–D38.                                                        genomics across 12 535 organisms. Nucleic Acids Res., 51 ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 National
 50. Wattam,A.R., Abraham,D., Dalay,O., Disz,T.L., Driscoll,T.,             D389–D394.
    Gabbard,J.L., Gillespie,J.J., Gough,R., Hix,D., Kenyon,R., et al.        67. Galperin,M.Y., Wolf,Y.I., Makarova,K.S., Vera Alvarez,R.,
     (2014) PATRIC, the bacterial bioinformatics database and              Landsman,D. and Koonin,E.V. (2021) COG database update:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Science
     analysis resource. Nucleic Acids Res., 42 , D581–D591.                    focus on microbial diversity, model organisms, and widespread    &
 51. Sheffield,N.C., Stolarczyk,M., Reuter,V.P. and Rendeiro,A.F.               pathogens. Nucleic Acids Res., 49 , D274–D281.
     (2021) Linking big biomedical datasets to modular analysis with       68. (2021) The Gene Ontology resource: enriching a GOld mine.
     Portable Encapsulated Projects. Gigascience , 10 , giab077.                 Nucleic Acids Res., 49 , D325–D334.
 52. Chaumeil,P.-A., Mussig,A.J., Hugenholtz,P. and Parks,D.H.            69. Kanehisa,M., Furumichi,M., Sato,Y., Kawashima,M. and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Technology
     (2019) GTDB-Tk: a toolkit to classify genomes with the Genome         Ishiguro-Watanabe,M. (2023) KEGG for taxonomy-based
    Taxonomy Database. Bioinformatics , 36 , 1925–1927.                      analysis of pathways and genomes. Nucleic Acids Res., 51 , 53. Seemann,T. (2014) Prokka: rapid prokaryotic genome                 D587–D592.                                                                                                                                                                                   Library
     annotation.                Bioinformatics                                                  , 30                                                        , 2068–2069.                                                                        70. Page,                                                                                          A.J.                                                                                                                                           , Cummins,                                                                                       C.A.                                                                                                                                                                    , Hunt,                                                                            M.,                                                                                          Wong,                                                                                                                  V.K.                                                                                                                                                                                                      , Reuter,                                                                                                                                                       S.,
 54.     Raasveldt,M.               and Mühleisen,                           H.                                  (2019) DuckDB: an embeddable                                                                      Holden,                                                                         M.T.G.                                                                                                                                                     , Fookes,                                                                       M.                                                                                                                                                                       , Falush,                                                                                                    D.                                                                                                                                                                                        , Keane,                                                                                                                                     J.A.                                                                                                         and Parkhill,                                                                                                                                                                                                 J.              user
     analytical database. In: Proceedings of the 2019 International             (2015) Roary: rapid large-scale prokaryote pan genome analysis.       on
     Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD ’19 . Association          Bioinformatics , 31 , 3691–3693.                                   16
     for Computing Machinery, NY, pp. 1981–1984.                      71. Kim,G.B., Gao,Y., Palsson,B.O. and Lee,S.Y. (2021) DeepTFactor:
 55. Yang,J., Liu,Y., Shang,J., Huang,Y., Yu,Y., Li,Z., Shi,L. and Ran,Z.      A deep learning-based tool for the prediction of transcription     (2022) BioVisReport: A Markdown-based lightweight website              factors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 118 , e2021171118.                                       August
     builder             for reproducible                        and interactive                                               visualization                                                         of results                                                                        72. Buchfink,                                                                                        B.,                                                                                         Reuter,                                                                                       K. and                                                                                                       Drost,                                                                                                   H.-G.                                                                                                            (2021) Sensitive                                                                                                                                     protein
    from peer-reviewed                         publications.                              Comput.                                                   Struct. Biotechnol.                                                                                                  J.,                                                                           alignments                                                                                                at                                                                                                             tree-of-life                                                                                                               scale                                                                                                         using                                                                         DIAMOND.                                                                                                                    Nat. Methods                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,              2024
    20 , 3133–3139.                                              18 , 366–368.
 56. Telatin,A., Fariselli,P. and Birolo,G. (2021) SeqFu: a suite of           73. Alanjary,M., Steinke,K. and Ziemert,N. (2019) AutoMLST: an
      utilities for the robust and reproducible manipulation of                automated web server for generating multi-locus species trees
     sequence files. Bioengineering (Basel) , 8 , 59.                                highlighting natural product potential. Nucleic Acids Res., 47 ,
 57. Sánchez-Navarro,R., Nuhamunada,M., Mohite,O.S.,                W276–W282.
    Wasmund,K., Albertsen,M., Gram,L., Nielsen,P.H., Weber,T. and       74. Letunic,I. and Bork,P. (2019) Interactive Tree Of Life (iTOL) v4:
     Singleton,C.M. (2022) Long-read metagenome-assembled                  recent updates and new developments. Nucleic Acids Res., 47 ,
    genomes improve identification of novel complete biosynthetic         W256–W259.


[PDF physical page 18]
Nucleic Acids Research , 2024, Vol. 52, No. 10                                                                        5495


 75. Terlouw,B.R., Blin,K., Navarro-Muñoz,J.C., Avalon,N.E.,                  biosynthesis in Staphylococcus aureus. Mol. Microbiol., 74 ,
     Chevrette,M.G., Egbert,S., Lee,S., Meijer,D., Recchia,M.J.J.,              594–608.
     Reitz,Z.L., et al. (2022) MIBiG 3.0: A community-driven effort        92. Booth,T.J., Shaw,S. and Weber,T. (2023) getphylo: rapid and
     to annotate experimentally validated biosynthetic gene clusters.           automatic generation of multi-locus phylogenetic trees. bioRxiv
     Nucleic Acids Res., 51 , gkac1049.                                           doi: https:// doi.org/ 10.1101/ 2023.07.26.550493 , 31 July 2023,
 76. Carroll,L.M., Larralde,M., Fleck,J.S., Ponnudurai,R., Milanese,A.,          preprint: not peer reviewed.
     Cappio,E. and Zeller,G. (2021) Accurate de novo identification        93. Bhatt,G. and Denny,T.P. (2004) Ralstonia solanacearum iron
     of biosynthetic gene clusters with GECCO. bioRxiv doi:                  scavenging by the siderophore staphyloferrin B is controlled by
      https:// doi.org/ 10.1101/ 2021.05.03.442509 , 04 May 2021,              PhcA, the global virulence regulator. J. Bacteriol., 186 ,
     preprint: not peer reviewed.                                        7896–7904.
 77. Caicedo-Montoya,C., Manzo-Ruiz,M. and Ríos-Estepa,R. (2021)      94. Repka,L.M., Chekan,J.R., Nair,S.K. and van der Donk,W.A.
    Pan-genome of the genus Streptomyces and prioritization of              (2017) Mechanistic Understanding of Lanthipeptide Biosynthetic
     biosynthetic gene clusters with potential to produce antibiotic            Enzymes. Chem. Rev., 117 , 5457–5520.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Downloaded
    compounds. Front. Microbiol., 12 , 677558.                          95. Xu,M., Zhang,F., Cheng,Z., Bashiri,G., Wang,J., Hong,J.,
 78. Otani,H., Udwary,D.W. and Mouncey,N.J. (2022) Comparative          Wang,Y., Xu,L., Chen,X., Huang,S.-X., et al. (2020) Functional                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              from
    and pangenomic analysis of the genus Streptomyces. Sci. Rep.,           genome mining reveals a class V lanthipeptide containing a
    12 , 18909.                                                      d-amino acid introduced by an F420 H2 -dependent reductase.
 79. Letzel,A.-C., Li,J., Amos,G.C.A., Millán-Aguiñaga,N., Ginigini,J.,         Angew. Chem. Int. Ed Engl., 59 , 18029–18035.
    Abdelmohsen,U.R., Gaudêncio,S.P., Ziemert,N., Moore,B.S. and        96. Völler,G.H., Krawczyk,J.M., Pesic,A., Krawczyk,B., Nachtigall,J.
     Jensen,P.R. (2017) Genomic insights into specialized metabolism         and Süssmuth,R.D. (2012) Characterization of new class III
     in the marine actinomycete Salinispora. Environ. Microbiol., 19 ,            lantibiotics–erythreapeptin, avermipeptin and griseopeptin from
    3660–3673.                                                         Saccharopolyspora erythraea, Streptomyces avermitilis and
 80. Sayed,A.M., Abdel-Wahab,N.M., Hassan,H.M. and                      Streptomyces griseus demonstrates stepwise N-terminal leader
    Abdelmohsen,U.R. (2020) Saccharopolyspora: an underexplored           processing. ChemBioChem , 13 , 1174–1183.
     source for bioactive natural products. J. Appl. Microbiol., 128 ,         97. Ayikpoe,R., Govindarajan,V. and Latham,J.A. (2019)
    314–329.                                                            Occurrence, function, and biosynthesis of mycofactocin. Appl.
 81. Ma,D., Liu,S., Liu,H., Nan,M., Xu,Y., Han,X. and Mao,J. (2022)           Microbiol. Biotechnol., 103 , 2903–2912.
     Developing an innovative raw wheat Qu inoculated with              98. Ellerhorst,M., Barth,S.A., Graça,A.P., Al-Jammal,W.K.,
     Saccharopolyspora and its application in Huangjiu. J. Sci. Food            Peña-Ortiz,L., Vilotijevic,I. and Lackner,G. (2022)
     Agric., 102 , 7301–7312.                                              S-Adenosylmethionine (SAM)-dependent methyltransferase
 82. Garrod,L.P. (1957) The erythromycin group of antibiotics. Br.         MftM is responsible for methylation of the redox cofactor
    Med. J., 2 , 57–63.                                                      mycofactocin. ACS Chem. Biol., 17 , 3207–3217.
 83. Kirst,H.A., Michel,K.H., Martin,J.W., Creemer,L.C., Chio,E.H.,        99. Hudson,G.A., Burkhart,B.J., DiCaprio,A.J., Schwalen,C.J.,
     Yao,R.C., Nakatsukasa,W.M., Boeck,L.D., Occolowitz,J.L.,                   Kille,B., Pogorelov,T.V. and Mitchell,D.A. (2019) Bioinformatic
     Paschal,J.W., et al. (1991) A83543A-D, unique                       mapping of radical S-adenosylmethionine-dependent ribosomally     fermentation-derived tetracyclic macrolides. Tetrahedron Lett.,             synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides identifies                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/10/5478/7660081
    32 , 4839–4842.                                            new C α, C β, and C γ-linked thioether-containing peptides. J. Am.         by
 84. Sparks,T.C., Crouse,G.D. and Durst,G. (2001) Natural products         Chem. Soc., 141 , 8228–8238.
     as insecticides: the biology, biochemistry and quantitative            100. Peña-Ortiz,L., Graça,A.P., Guo,H., Braga,D., Köllner,T.G.,
     structure–activity relationships of spinosyns and spinosoids. Pest           Regestein,L., Beemelmanns,C. and Lackner,G. (2020) Structure                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            National
    Manag. Sci., 57 , 896–905.                                                 elucidation of the redox cofactor mycofactocin reveals
 85. Saygin,H., Ay,H., Guven,K., Inan-Bektas,K., Cetin,D. and                   oligo-glycosylation by MftF. Chem. Sci., 11 , 5182–5190.
     Sahin,N. (2021) Saccharopolyspora karakumensis sp. nov.,          101. Baltz,R.H. (2021) Genome mining for drug discovery: progress at                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Science
     Saccharopolyspora elongata sp. nov., Saccharopolyspora aridisoli          the front end. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 48 , kuab044.        &
     sp. nov., Saccharopolyspora terrae sp. nov. and their                102. Blin,K., Shaw,S., Kautsar,S.A., Medema,M.H. and Weber,T.
     biotechnological potential revealed by genome analysis. Syst.             (2021) The antiSMASH database version 3: increased taxonomic
     Appl. Microbiol., 44 , 126270.                                          coverage and new query features for modular enzymes. Nucleic
 86. Lacey,J., Goodfellow,M., Lacy,J. and Goodfellow,M. (1975) A            Acids Res., 49 , D639–D643.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Technology
     novel actinomycete from sugar-cane bagasse: Saccharopolyspora     103. Ziemert,N., Lechner,A., Wietz,M., Millán-Aguiñaga,N.,
     hirsuta gen. et. sp. nov. J. Gen. Microbiol., 88 , 75–85.                     Chavarria,K.L. and Jensen,P.R. (2014) Diversity and evolution of 87. Reimer,L.C., Sardà Carbasse,J., Koblitz,J., Ebeling,C.,                    secondary metabolism in the marine actinomycete genus                                                          Library
    Podstawka,              A. and                   Overmann,                                               J. (2022)                                      BacDive                                                       in 2022:                                                             the                                                                                   Salinispora.                                                                                        Proc.                                                                                                Natl. Acad.                                                                                                                                Sci.                                                                                                                  U.S.A.,                                                                                               111                                                                                                                                                                                                     , E1130–E1139.
    knowledge base                      for                        standardized                                        bacterial                                       and archaeal                                                             data.                                                                   104.                                                                      Cimermancic,                                                                                                                    P., Medema,                                                                             M.H.                                                                                                                                                                              , Claesen,                                                                                                                                                                   J.                                                                                                                                                                                               , Kurita,                                                                                                                 K., Wieland                       user
     Nucleic Acids Res., 50 , D741–D746.                                Brown,L.C., Mavrommatis,K., Pati,A., Godfrey,P.A.,                    on
 88. Goodfellow,M., Lacey,J., Athalye,M., Embley,T.M. and Bowen,T.          Koehrsen,M., Clardy,J., et al. (2014) Insights into secondary             16
     (1989) Saccharopolyspora gregorii and Saccharopolyspora               metabolism from a global analysis of prokaryotic biosynthetic
     hordei: two new Actinomycete species from fodder.                     gene clusters. Cell , 158 , 412–421.     Microbiology , 135 , 2125–2139.                                  105. Doroghazi,J.R., Albright,J.C., Goering,A.W., Ju,K.-S.,                                                           August
 89. Intra,          B., Euanorasetr,                                    J., Také,A.,                                     Inahashi,                                               Y.                                                                            , Mori,M.,                    Haines,                                                                            R.R.                                                                                                                                                ,                                                                                     Tchalukov,                                                                                           K.A., Labeda,                                                                                                                        D.P., Kelleher,                                                                                                                   N.L.
                                                                                                               and                         2024     Panbangred,             W. and Matsumoto,                                A.                                    (2019)                                           Saccharopolyspora                                                                     Metcalf,W                                                              .W                                                                                                                                                  .                                                                                     (2014) A roadmap                                                                                                                    for natural                                                                                                                product                                                                                                                                 discovery
     rhizosphaerae sp. nov., an actinomycete isolated from rhizosphere         based on large-scale genomics and metabolomics. Nat. Chem.
      soil in Thailand. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol., 69 , 1299–1305.                Biol., 10 , 963–968.
 90. Dale,S.E., Doherty-Kirby,A., Lajoie,G. and Heinrichs,D.E. (2004)     106. Medema,M.H. and Fischbach,M.A. (2015) Computational
    Role of siderophore biosynthesis in virulence of Staphylococcus           approaches to natural product discovery. Nat. Chem. Biol., 11 ,
     aureus: identification and characterization of genes involved in           639–648.
     production of a siderophore. Infect. Immun., 72 , 29–37.             107. Blin,K., Shaw,S., Steinke,K., Villebro,R., Ziemert,N., Lee,S.Y.,
 91. Cheung,J., Beasley,F.C., Liu,S., Lajoie,G.A. and Heinrichs,D.E.          Medema,M.H. and Weber,T. (2019) antiSMASH 5.0: updates to
     (2009) Molecular characterization of staphyloferrin B                     the secondary metabolite genome mining pipeline. Nucleic Acids
                                                                                    Res., 47 , W81–W87.

Received: June 29, 2023. Revised: March 22, 2024. Editorial Decision: April 5, 2024. Accepted: April 11, 2024
© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https: // creativecommons.org / licenses / by / 4.0 / ), which permits unrestricted reuse,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.