                            Taxus NPF transporter involved in the uptake of 10-deacetylbaccatin III  7 of 16


report, the existence of a Taxus-speciﬁc clade was found in      acetoacetyl, and butyryl. These results suggest that these
the BAHD acyltransferase family (Kusano et al., 2019), and     two BAHD members are functional in yeast to convert 10-
we then focused on the BAHD acyltransferase family to    DAB with a broader spectrum of acyl donors than DBAT.
ﬁnd a new BAHD member relevant to paclitaxel biosynthe-
sis. Using the optimal culture conditions described above,     DISCUSSION
we screened for novel BAHD acyltransferase genes. To
                                                      Metabolomic and transcriptomic dynamics in Taxus cell
obtain full-length cDNA contigs, we assembled RNA-seq
                                                                 culture
reads from the time course transcriptome data using Trin-
ity (Grabherr et al., 2011) and merged them using CD-hit     The time-lapse animation of the LC–MS chromatogram
(Fu et al., 2012) to exclude redundant entries with a 95%      revealed by GrassHopper suggests a shift in compound
identity criterion. The source data size of each assembly      composition from hydrophobic to more hydrophilic sub-
process was more than 12 GB for one assembly batch, and      stances over the culture period (Movie 1). The order of the
a total of 17 k contigs were obtained without redundancy.      accumulating compounds was not completely identical to
From the library, we isolated several contig hits in the      the order of the biosynthetic reaction steps of paclitaxel, so
tBLASTn search to authorised BAHD proteins as queries.          it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd a simple explanation for these dynam-
Among these, we found one contig corresponding to a       ics in the metabolite proﬁles. Serendipitously, the metabo-
gene in a local cluster of DBAT-like genes in chromosome      lomics  analysis  succeeded  in  adjusting  the  culture
10 (Figure 8a) of the Taxus chinensis genome (Xiong      conditions   of  yew  TxN16-1   cells   to  produce   9-
et al., 2021). In this cluster, ﬁve out of six genes are intron-      dihydrobaccatin III by reducing the dose of methyl jasmo-
less genes (Figure 8a). Of these, one gene showed high      nate inducer compared with the conventional procedure.
identity to our two cDNA contigs. One contig was previ-      After sufﬁcient culture time, 9-dihydrobaccatin III secreted
ously isolated as BAHD acyltransferase-like 22 (Kusano      into the medium could be puriﬁed into a simpliﬁed fraction
et al., 2019), which is referred to as BAHD #22 in this article     by water re-extraction. The combination of high-resolution
(Accession No. MK585542). The other contig had 18 base    MS and NMR data conﬁrmed the structural identity of 9-
differences  in the coding  region, corresponding to 13      dihydrobaccatin III (Figure 4; Figure S1).
amino acid substitutions to BAHD #22 and is designated as         Our co-occurrence analysis revealed that the 9-keto
BAHD #6-13 (Accession No. LC773267). To conﬁrm this in      structure co-occurred with residues, such as 5,20-epoxy
the Taxus x media  data, we generated approximately      (oxetane ring), 1-hydroxy, and 7-hydroxy structures that
30 GB of genomic DNA reads from the TxN16-1 cells using     appear in the proposed paclitaxel pathway, in which 9-
a long-read sequencer (available under project number      dihydrobaccatin III is an intermediate of paclitaxel (Figure 1;
PRJDB15908).  In a BLASTn  analysis,  the two  contigs      Figure S2). In contrast, the 9-acetyl group co-occurred with
showed the highest identity to the same long-read geno-    many residue types, such as 1-acetyl, 13-keto, and 7-acetyl
mic reads, suggesting that these two genes were alleles at       structures, which are absent from the paclitaxel pathway.
one locus.                                               Throughout the pathway, there appear to be two branch
   We used our yeast bioconversion system, optimised      points, one being whether acetylation at the 10-hydroxy res-
for the combination of TmNPF2.1 and DBAT, to investigate      idue occurs prior to DBAT, represented by circle number 1
these BAHD acyltransferases by replacing DBAT with these       in  Figure  1,  while  the more  critical branch  point  is
BAHD members. As a result, two yeast strains containing      highlighted by circle number 2. When 9- and 13-acetylation
BAHD#22 and BAHD#6-13 exhibited 10-DAB conversion      occur, biosynthesis proceeds towards a shunt pathway such
activity (Figure 8b). Both acyltransferases showed a lower      as taxusin formation, whereas without acetylation of these
conversion ratio of 10-DAB to baccatin III than DBAT under      positions, biosynthesis proceeds via 9-dihydrobaccatin III to
optimal conditions for DBAT with 100 lM substrate. Com-       paclitaxel. Acetylation at position 10 also occurs in 10-DAB.
pared with BAHD#22, the novel BAHD#6-13 showed a    A recent publication used a combination of transcriptomics,
slightly  higher  activity  in  this  experimental  condition       cell biology, metabolomics, and pathway reconstitution to
(Figure 8b). A clear difference to DBAT was the generation     ﬁnd a minimal gene set for paclitaxel formation in N.
of six additional product peaks in the LC–MS chromato-     benthamiana as a host, in which the oxetane ring is success-
gram  for both BAHD#22 and BAHD#6-13  (Figure  8b).       fully formed (Zhang et al., 2023). Our results presented in
Among these products, most of the MS/MS fragment ions       this study will help to ﬁnd further paralogues involved in
were identical to 10-DAB and baccatin  III, suggesting that      the biosynthetic pathway of paclitaxel (Figure 5b).
these products share a common substructure (Figure S5).
                                                          Involvement of an NPF in the biosynthetic pathway of
We estimated the acyl ester groups present in the products
                                                                    paclitaxel
from the m/z values that were unique to each product
(Figure 8c; Figure S5). The residues were short chain acyl          It is noteworthy that paclitaxel intermediates are abundantly
structures with or without oxidation, such as propionyl,      detected in the culture medium, and also that some taxane

  2025 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal (2025) 122 e70146