                            Taxus NPF transporter involved in the uptake of 10-deacetylbaccatin III  3 of 16


RESULTS                                                 (Ketchum, Tandon, et al., 1999; Zamir et al., 1992, 1995)
                                                    and those of the available standards of analogous taxane
Dynamics of the taxane metabolome in Taxus cell culture
                                                  compounds (Figure 4).
We used cultured Taxus x media cells (derived from the         Most of the paclitaxel residues formed local networks
TxN16-1 cell line), which produce a signiﬁcant amount of      near the 9-keto residue in co-occurrence analysis, in con-
taxane compounds,  including  paclitaxel  (Tabata,  2004;       trast to many branch products that have an acetyl group on
Yukimune  et  al.,  1996).  Paclitaxel  production can be      the 9-carbon (Figure 1; Figure S2). As 9-dihydrobaccatin III
induced by the addition of methyl jasmonate to the cell     has a hydroxyl group at the 9-position, this compound may
cultures. The culture medium of Taxus cell cultures was      serve as a precursor of baccatin  III leading to paclitaxel.
analysed by  liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry     Another paclitaxel intermediate, 10-DAB, was also strongly
(LC–MS) using a standard C18 column over a time course      excreted  into  the medium  in  a  similar  pattern  to
of approximately 50 days  after induction with  0.1 mM      9-dihydrobaccatin  III. It should be noted that secretion of
methyl jasmonate. The dynamics of taxane accumulation      9-dihydrobaccatin III ceased between 10 and 20 days after
were monitored as a time-lapse animation of a 3D chro-      induction by methyl jasmonate, where the production of
matogram analysed using Proteowizard and GrassHopper     downstream compounds such as baccatin III and paclitaxel
(see “Materials and Methods” section for details) (Figure 2;      began. Clearer examples were observed for taxusin and
Movie 1). Major taxane products were identiﬁed by com-      hexaacetoxytaxadiene, which were produced rapidly after
parison of retention time and MS spectrum with authentic      induction and declined rapidly, followed by the onset of
standards, or annotated by MS spectrum proﬁle when      production   of  downstream  compounds   such   as
standards were not available. This time course experiment      1-hydroxybaccatin  I and baccatin  I (Figure 3). These data
revealed a dynamic change in the compounds detected in      strongly suggest that the biosynthesis of taxane com-
the culture medium. Figure 3 shows the accumulation pro-     pounds in Taxus cell cultures proceeds via excretion and
ﬁles of representative taxane compounds detected in the      uptake of biosynthetic intermediates. In this context, the
culture medium, revealing strong changes in the amount      uptake transporter for biosynthetic intermediates is essen-
of each compound during the culture period.                           tial to complete the paclitaxel structure as acyl donors are
    The main products identiﬁed in the different culture      localised inside cells. To identify transporters involved in
stages were: taxusin (~3 days after induction); baccatin  I       paclitaxel biosynthesis, we exploited the inducible nature of
(~10 days  after  induction);  baccatin   III  (~20 days  after       paclitaxel production by methyl jasmonate and performed
induction); 10-deacetylbaccatin III (10-DAB) and an uniden-      co-expression analysis with time course transcriptome.
tiﬁed compound 1 (~40 days after induction) (Figures 1 and
                                                           Transcriptome-based co-expression analysis
3). On the other hand, we noticed a striking difference in
the compound production proﬁles under the administra-    We analysed the transcriptome of cultured Taxus cells by
tion of a much lower ﬁnal concentration of methyl jasmo-     RNA-seq from 0 to 34 days after induction with 0.1 mM
nate  at 1 lM  than  in  previous  publications  (0.1 mM)     methyl jasmonate compared with the untreated control;
(Tabata, 2004; Yukimune et al., 1996). Compound 1, with a       additionally, the 14-day sample after induction with 1 lM
peak at m/z 529, was found to be the major product from     methyl jasmonate was analysed. Of the 265 738 contigs
the early stage of culture, and its proportional abundance      assembled, 49 069 were annotated. Euclidean distances
gradually increased during the culture period. Simpliﬁed     between annotated contigs were calculated from expres-
fractionation of the ethyl acetate-extracted products by      sion patterns in units of TPM value (Patro et al., 2017). A
re-extraction with water yielded the water-soluble fractions       local co-expression network contained 516 contigs around
containing a major product accompanied by a few other      the seven contigs encoding proteins homologous to taxa-
peaks in the LC analysis (Figure S1). In particular, the LC–      diene  synthase  (GenBank  accession number  U48796)
MS/UV proﬁle of the water-soluble fraction obtained after      (Figure 5a; Figure S3). This local network contained some
47 days of culture showed that compound 1 gave almost a      contigs annotated with  paclitaxel biosynthetic enzymes
single peak.                                           and membrane transporters with a high enrichment ratio
    Although the mass spectrometry data suggested that      with reliable statistical probability. The enrichment ratio of
compound 1 was 9-dihydrobaccatin  III, its authentic stan-      the GO term  indicating  that NITRATE TRANSPORTER
dard was not available. We therefore isolated this com-     1/PEPTIDE TRANSPORTER FAMILY  (NPF)-type  proteins
pound from the culture medium and analysed its chemical     were highlighted among all GOs was 28-fold higher than
structure using the heteronuclear single quantum correla-       that of the background 49 069 contigs (Figure 5b).
tion (HSQC) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrum.
                                                            Function of NPFs by paclitaxel sensitivity test
Consequently,  we  conﬁrmed  this  main  product  as
9-dihydrobaccatin  III by comparing the HSQC signal pat-     NPF is a large family of transporters that have typically 12
terns with the reported NMR data of 9-dihydrobaccatin  III     transmembrane alpha helices. NPF members recognise a

  2025 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal (2025) 122 e70146