                            Taxus NPF transporter involved in the uptake of 10-deacetylbaccatin III  9 of 16





Figure 5. Co-expression network in the transcriptome around taxadiene synthase.
(a) A local part of the co-expression network probed with a homologous contig of taxadiene synthase (yellow circle, accession number U48796). The full-scale
image is shown in Figure S3. Light pink circles indicate transcriptome contigs with membrane transporter-like annotations, and the NPF transporters are
highlighted with dark pink. The light blue circle indicates genes related to paclitaxel biosynthesis. Labels indicate contig IDs.
(b) GO enrichment analysis of the extracted contigs in the co-expression network. GO terms in the molecular function category with more than ﬁvefold enrich-
ment are shown. GOs indicating NPF transporters, membrane transporters, paclitaxel pathway, and taxadiene synthases are highlighted in dark pink, light pink,
light blue, and yellow, respectively. Grey bars represent the P-value.



membrane in the cells. Consistent with this ﬁnding, NPF fam-      vinblastine in Catharanthus roseus (Payne et al., 2017). The
ily genes showed the highest enrichment ratio in the co-     tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) NPF transporter GORKY
expression analysis with taxadiene synthase.                      transports the steroidal glycoalkaloid ɑ-tomatine and  is
    The NPF family consists of a group of transporters      responsible for its conversion to non-bitter derivatives dur-
involved in secondary transport using the proton gradient      ing fruit ripening (Kazachkova et al., 2021). Plant hormones
across the membrane as an energy source. NPF was ﬁrst     such as  gibberellin and  abscisic acid have also been
identiﬁed as being responsible for nitrate uptake (Tsay      reported as  transport  substrates  of NPFs (Binenbaum
et  al.,  1993),  while some  other members have been       et al., 2023). To the best of our knowledge, the TmNPF2.1
reported to mediate the transport of peptides and many     shown in this study is the ﬁrst NPF transporter to recog-
other substances (Kanstrup & Nour-Eldin, 2022). The basic      nise paclitaxel and related metabolites in Taxus and  is
transport function of NPF members is proton symport, that      thought to be responsible for the inward movement of tax-
is, the transport direction is from the proton-rich domain     ane compounds at the plasma membrane.
to the other side. Since the pH value of the apoplast and
                                                   TmNPF2.1 facilitates bioconversion of taxane compounds
vacuolar matrix is generally lower than that of the cytosol,
                                                                      in yeast
the direction of substrate transport by NPF is uptake when
the NPF protein  is localised at the plasma membrane,       In our yeast culture experiments, the introduction of DBAT
whereas it is towards the cytosol from the vacuolar matrix      alone was not sufﬁcient to convert 10-DAB to baccatin III,
when an NPF member is localised at the tonoplast. The     and co-expression of TmNPF2.1, which mediates substrate
speciﬁcity of the transport substrate may depend on the     movement across the plasma membrane, was required to
NPF molecule, but those with broad speciﬁcity have been     complete baccatin  III formation (Figure 7). In the optimal
reported.                                                         culture medium adjusted to pH 5.3, yeast completely con-
   Some secondary metabolites are also known to be      verted 100 lM  substrate 10-DAB  to  baccatin   III.  This
transport  substrates  of  NPF.  Examples  of  secondary     TmNPF2.1-mediated bioconversion system of yeast also
metabolites recognised by NPFs include glucosinolates in      allowed us to isolate two new functional BAHD acyltrans-
Arabidopsis, which  are transported inward by plasma      ferase genes. These genes enabled yeast to produce six
membrane-localised NPFs (Jørgensen et al., 2017), while      additional products using a signiﬁcantly broader spectrum
vacuole-localised NPF is responsible for the mobilisation      of acyl donors than DBAT. These results suggest that the
of the monoterpene indole alkaloid strictosidine, which is a     NPF transporter identiﬁed in this study facilitates yeast
key intermediate in the biosynthesis of vincristine and       strain engineering and gene discovery studies.



  2025 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal (2025) 122 e70146