10 of 16  Hiroaki Kusano et al.





Figure 6. Paclitaxel sensitivity of yeast expressing Taxus NPF transporter genes.
Paclitaxel-sensitive yeast strain MGY2150 was transformed with yew NPF transporter genes, and growth was examined in YPD plate (a) and liquid medium (b)
containing 1 lM paclitaxel.
(a) Colony growth was more suppressed in TmNPF2.1, TmNPF2.2, and TmNPF2.3 expressing strains than in controls. Strain MGY1872 has a normal tubulin
gene, which is tolerant to paclitaxel. Bar represents 1 cm.
(b) The TmNPF2.1-expressing strain showed suppressed growth in YPD liquid medium containing 1 lM paclitaxel (PTX), but the TmNPF2.2- and TmNPF2.3-
expressing strains did not, probably due to the control. Orange and blue plots show growth curves in YPD medium with and without 1 lM paclitaxel. Due to the
OD monitor’s speciﬁcation, any measurement beyond 8.88 is recorded as the limit value.




                                                        found a cluster of ﬁve BAHD genes without introns. Endo-
Single-exon genes
                                                                        cytic microorganisms have been shown to catabolise tax-
We have previously reported the local expansion of gene     ane compounds (Soilman et al., 2015). We speculate that
families in plant genomes and the generation of single-      the single-exon gene structure is advantageous for molec-
exon genes in the evolution of specialised plant metabo-       ular evolution with frequent gene transfer between Taxus
lism (Kusano et al., 2019). In this work, we identiﬁed the      spp. and microorganisms, driving the rapid evolution of
BAHD genes that encode enzymes with acyltransferase      the secondary metabolism of phytochemicals with a higher
activity in yeast. These genes corresponded to a single-      reproduction rate of microorganisms than tree plants (Choi
exon gene locus in the T. chinensis genome. We also       et  al., 2016; Li et  al., 1998). From our results with this


                                                   2025 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
                                                                       The Plant Journal (2025) 122 e70146