2 of 16  Hiroaki Kusano et al.





Figure 1. Biosynthetic pathway of paclitaxel and related taxane compounds.
The mainstream towards paclitaxel is shown with a light yellow background. Compounds transiently accumulated in the early culture phase (1–3 days after
induction) of Taxus cell suspension cultures are highlighted with green and a single asterisk. Compounds accumulated in the middle to late culture phase (later
than 10 days) are highlighted with orange and double asterisks. Each biosynthetic step is shown in red letters in a simpliﬁed name (AT acetylation; BzT, benzoyl-
transferase; DBAT, 10-DAB 10-acetyltransferase; NDPPT, N-debenzoylpaclitaxel pentanoyltransferase; OH, hydroxylation; PTT, NDPTT, N-debenzoylpaclitaxel
tigloyltransferase). Two key branching points are indicated with circled numbers. Solid arrows show the reaction step in which the biosynthetic enzymes are
reported, and  dotted  arrows  are  putative  conversion  steps.  *Position  of  acetoxy  residues  of  hexaacetoxytaxadiene,  deacetylbaccatin  IV, and  1-
hydroxydeacetylbaccatin I is an example.




is comparable to conventional plant cell culture systems.      ring has been reported by three independent groups in
In yeast, the ﬁrst successful approach for the early steps      succession  (Lei  et  al., 2024; Zhang  et  al., 2023; Zhao
was reported by Stephanopoulos’s group (Zhou et  al.,       et al., 2024; Gou et al., 2024). The metabolites related to
2015). The taxane 13a-hydroxylating enzyme was identiﬁed       paclitaxel are called taxane compounds, and the structures
as a P450 by a differential display cloning followed by the      of more than 600 compounds have been determined.
functional expression via a baculovirus-based system (Jen-     While paclitaxel is produced with a minimal gene set in the
newein et al., 2001). These early successes provided some      host Nicotiana benthamiana as a host (Zhang et al., 2023),
of  the  missing  biosynthetic  steps   for  engineering     knowledge of the enzymatic process is still limited in the
microorganism-mediated paclitaxel production. To date,      overall atlas of the taxane biosynthetic pathway in Taxus
optimisation of the multistep biosynthesis has resulted in      species (Lange & Conner, 2021).
the production of total taxanes of around 361 mg L 1 with          Cultured Taxus cells are known to accumulate large
approximately 38.1 mg L 1 taxadiene 5a-ol in yeast (Now-     amounts of taxane compounds in the medium (Ketchum,
rouzi et al., 2022).                                            Gibson, et al., 1999). This suggests that membrane trans-
    However, the authentic biosynthetic pathway is much      porters may play a critical role in the operation of the cellular
more complex, involving more than 17 reaction steps from      biosynthetic factory of the complex pathway, including the
geranylgeranyl  diphosphate   to   paclitaxel  (Mutanda     exchange of biosynthetic intermediates between the intracel-
et al., 2021). It involves multiple hydroxylation and acyla-       lular and extracellular spaces. Here, we identiﬁed a new NPF
tion steps after the formation of the diterpenoid backbone      transporter gene in Taxus and investigated its transport func-
taxadiene. To date, gene discovery studies have succeeded       tion, complementing an application to facilitate the biocon-
in covering most of the enzyme genes responsible for the      version of taxane compounds in yeast culture. Moreover, the
paclitaxel  biosynthetic  pathway  (Figure  1),  and  very      yeast system was used to identify a new acyltransferase gene
recently, a key reaction for the formation of the oxetane       in Taxus involved in the production of paclitaxel.


                                                   2025 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
                                                                       The Plant Journal (2025) 122 e70146