                           Taxus NPF transporter involved in the uptake of 10-deacetylbaccatin III  11 of 16





Figure 7. Conversion of 10-DAB to baccatin III in yeast culture.
(a) Baccatin III production in yeast culture analysed by LC–MS. The DBAT gene was introduced into a yeast strain W303-1A in the presence (top) or absence
(middle) of TmNRT2.1 in the plasmid vector pESC-URA carrying the constitutive promoters TEF and PMA. The bottom panel shows a negative control using the
W303-1A without plasmid. The arrows indicate the substrate 10-DAB and the product baccatin III.
(b) Baccatin III production under variable pH conditions.
(c, d) Time course analysis of decreasing 10-DAB substrate (c) and accumulating baccatin III (d) in the culture with variable initial substrate. The concentration of
10-DAB was 12.5–200 lM. MS signals at m/z 545.2 at Rt 6.1 min and 587.2 at Rt 7.0 min peak were counted as speciﬁc signals of 10-DAB and baccatin III, respec-
tively. Bars represent the standard deviation of ﬁvefold (b) and fourfold (c, d) biological replicates.




speculation, we believe that the characteristic of the single-       activity of the DBAT was found in E. coli cells (Loncaric
exon gene may provide a useful clue, although not univer-       et al., 2006), similar to our results with the novel BAHD
sal, to discover unknown secondary metabolism genes     member. DBAT also showed deacetylation activity in the
involved in the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway.                   alkaline growth environment of E. coli (Wang et al., 2021).
                                                    Such metabolic  plasticity has also been reported from
                                                         recombinant studies that have achieved productivity gains
Broader spectrum of acyl donor speciﬁcity of BAHD
                                                            with single amino acid substitutions in vitro and in the de
acyltransferase
                                                    novo E. coli environment (Huang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2018).
We observed several reaction products from the yeast cul-          If deacetylbaccatin  IV, which was found in the culture
ture expressing novel BAHD members using 10-DAB as     medium together with 1-hydroxydeacetylbaccatin  I and 1-
substrate. The character of these novel BAHD acyltrans-      hydroxybaccatin I, can be deacetylated, it can enter the pac-
ferases was very different from that of the DBAT. The DBAT       litaxel synthesis pathway (dotted grey arrow in Figure 1).
produced baccatin III speciﬁcally in the same environment,     The discovery of natural variation in taxane BAHDs may
but previous studies have reported that the DBAT may      provide new opportunities to update the biosynthetic path-
show a broader substrate speciﬁcity for acyl donors in dif-     way and also contribute as new molecular tools for meta-
ferent environments. The propyonylation and butyrylation       bolic engineering approaches.

  2025 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
The Plant Journal (2025) 122 e70146