12 of 16  Hiroaki Kusano et al.





Figure 8. Single-exon BAHD gene clusters and the 10-DAB conversion activity in yeast using TmNPF2.1.
(a) Genomic structure of the DBAT-like BAHD genes in Taxus chinensis analysed by tBLASTn with an e-value <10e-10. A BLAST library was constructed from T.
chinensis chromosomes aliquoted into 100 fragments with an average length of 0.8 Gb. The hash indicates the responsible chromosome, and the aliquot num-
ber is probably ch(00-12)-(00-99). Red arrowheads indicate single-exon genes with full-length CDS in a single HSP. Green and blue arrowheads indicate the 50
and 30 parts of the split CDS. The block arrow indicates the BAHD gene, which corresponds to two genes analysed in this study.
(b) Extracted ion chromatogram (m/z 527.2) in LC–MS analysis of the bioconversion product of yeast cultures. The top panel shows the LC–MS analysis of DBAT
yeast culture as a positive control. Peaks for substrate 10-DAB and product Baccatin III are indicated. The next two panels show LC–MS analysis of yeast cultures
containing BAHD alleles with visible product peaks in yeast. In these two chromatograms, six product peaks were found in addition to 10-DAB and baccatin III.
The bottom panel shows a negative control using pESC-ura empty vector instead of co-expression vectors of NPF2.1 and BAHD genes. For more detail, see
Figure S5.
(c) Expected acyl residue structure. For the six product types, the formula is one of the possible structures estimated from the measured m/z.



    Synthetic biology has recently become a very active     MATERIALS AND METHODS
area of research. For the production of plant secondary
                                                           Yeast strain and mediametabolites, it is not uncommon for more than 15 genes
to be introduced into a microorganism to complete the      Yeast strains W303-1A and MGY2150 (Table S1) were used for the
biosynthesis of the target compound of interest. An alter-      bioconversion experiments and the paclitaxel sensitivity assay,
native approach is the co-cultivation of microorganisms       respectively. These strains were grown at 28°C in a standard yeast
                                                                     extract–peptone–dextrose (YPD) medium containing 10 g L 1 yeast
in which a smaller number of biosynthetic genes are                          1                          1
                                                                                extract, 20 g L   peptone, and 20 g L   glucose, and the pH was
transformed to establish the complete biosynthetic path-
                                                                     adjusted to 5.3 for 10-DAB bioconversion unless otherwise stated.
way. In this approach, uptake transporters of intermedi-        In the paclitaxel sensitivity test, yeast growth curve in the liquid cul-
ates  are  key  to  success.  The  NPF-type  transporter       ture was determined for 5 days using an OD monitor C/T system
demonstrated in this study will provide a powerful tool       (Taitech, Tokyo, Japan) in 5 mL medium and a 16.5 mm wide tube
                                                                 angled 30° at 180 rpm with reciprocal shaking. Paclitaxel was pre-for the production of desired taxane compounds such as
                                                                pared as a 1 mM stock solution in dimethylsulfoxide and diluted to
paclitaxel.

                                                   2025 Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
                                                                       The Plant Journal (2025) 122 e70146