
[PDF physical page 1]
       Article                                                                                       https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y
  Merging the computational design of
   chimeric type I polyketide synthases with
  enzymatic pathways for chemical
   biosynthesis



        Received: 1 November 2024             Yash Chainani1,2,3,4, Jacob Diaz3,4, Margaret Guilarte-Silva1,2, Vincent Blay   3,4,
                                    Quan Zhang    1, William Sprague    1, Keith E. J. Tyo    1,2, Linda J. Broadbelt1,2,3,4,
       Accepted: 15 June 2025
                                                  Aindrila Mukhopadhyay   3,4, Jay D. Keasling   3,4,5,6,7,8,
                                           Hector Garcia Martin   3,4,9,10 & Tyler W. H. Backman   3,4


          Check for updates1234567890():,;                 1234567890():,;
                                             Synthetic biology offers the promise of manufacturing chemicals more sus-
                                               tainably than petrochemistry. Yet, both the rate at which biomanufacturing
                                        can synthesize these molecules and the net chemical accessible space are
                                               limited by existing pathway discovery methods, which can often rely on
                                        arduous literature searches. Here, we introduce BioPKS pipeline, an auto-
                                     mated retrobiosynthesis tool combining multifunctional type I polyketide
                                            synthases (PKSs) and monofunctional enzymes via two complementary tools:
                                          RetroTide and DORAnet. Monofunctional enzymes are valuable for carefully
                                            decorating a substrate’s carbon backbone while PKSs are unique in their ability
                                            to iteratively catalyze carbon-carbon bond formation reactions, thereby
                                        expanding carbon backbones in a predictable fashion. We evaluate the per-
                                       formance of BioPKS pipeline using a previously reported set of 155 biomanu-
                                               facturing candidates, achieving exact synthetic designs for 93 compounds and
                                            generating chemically similar pathways for most remaining targets. Further-
                                        more, BioPKS pipeline can propose pathways for the complex therapeutic
                                               natural products cryptofolione and basidalin.



      An increasing concern regarding climate change has led to growing   achieve sustainability in manufacturing while reducing carbon emis-
         public and private interest in synthetic biology to enable the bioma-   sions to mitigate rising global temperatures7,8.
        nufacturing of a wide array of commodity chemicals1–5. In 2022, the       Despite this increasing interest, the design of biosynthetic path-
        United States’ government signed an executive order to invest 2 billion   ways to produce key commodity chemicals without known biosynth-
         dollars into the U.S. bioeconomy to divert chemical manufacturing   esis pathways remains a  bottleneck9–11. Long and cumbersome
       away from pollutive fossil-fuel based processes and towards envir-   literature searches can be common in piecing together known or
        onmentally benign bioengineered ones6. Further, the overall demand   potentially promiscuous enzymatic reactions that may eventually lead
         for renewable products has also been solidifying, driven by the need to   to a target product from simple precursors and intermediates. Such



         1Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA. 2Center for Synthetic Biology, Evanston, IL, USA. 3Joint
         BioEnergy Institute, Emeryville, CA, USA. 4Biological Systems and Engineering Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA. 5QB3,
          University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. 6Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. 7Department
          of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. 8Center for Biosustainability, Danish Technical University, Lynby, Denmark. 9BCAM, Basque
         Center for Applied Mathematics, Bilbao, Spain. 10DOE Agile BioFoundry, Emeryville, CA, USA.    e-mail: tbackman@lbl.gov



        Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                                                         1


[PDF physical page 2]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y


manual pathway discovery methods diminish the rate at which bio-   incorporation of such atypical acyl-CoA units into polyketide products.
manufacturing can replace the ~3500 or so high-volume, petroleum-   In particular, the use of the highly promiscuous mammalian malonyl
derived chemicals currently in circulation12,13.                            acetyltransferase (MAT) has further broadened the range of possible
     In addition to this slow rate of access, the net chemical space   extender units for PKS engineering46. Alongside performing AT
that existing methods can reach is also limited by the customarily  domain swaps, the oxidation state and functionalization of each
exclusive use of monofunctional enzymes. Monofunctional enzymes   extender unit added to the growing carbon backbone can be tuned
catalyze individual reactions only and, to date, comprise a majority   further by swapping or modifying the PKS reductive loop47–49, which
of engineered pathways4,14,15. While such enzymes are valuable for the   comprises the ketoreductase (KR), dehydratase (DH), and enoylre-
precise modiﬁcation of functional groups on a substrate’s carbon   ductase (ER) domains. Moreover, since a PKS substrate is always
backbone, they offer few chances to increase the length of the   tethered to its synthase, the likelihood of intermediate loss can be
backbone  itself. Consequently, relying exclusively on monofunc-   lower with PKSs than in engineered metabolic pathways wherein
tional enzymes often restricts the achievable carbon chain length of   intermediates may be funneled into different pathways altogether
target products to about that of the original carbon source. Meta-   while being shuttled around individual enzymes in the cell50. Such
bolic maps of bio-based chemicals in the literature highlight that   derailments can lead to unexpected51–56, or even toxic57 byproducts.
pathways beginning from pyruvate and other central carbon meta-   Given the predictable deterministic logic of Type I PKSs, however, one
bolites yield C3-C8 products only16,17. Such short backbones render it   can expect the ﬁnal product to be directly correlated with the domains
difﬁcult for synthetic biology to compete with the longer hydro-  and acyl-CoA units involved26.
carbons (>C10) present in petrochemical feedstocks18, especially       This modular and predictable, yet tunable, nature of multi-
when making products that are more structurally complex than lin-   functional PKSs makes them an attractive platform for biomanu-
ear carbon chains.                                                        facturing. While PKSs have historically been challenging to engineer
     In fact, attempting to synthesize molecules solely using mono-  and are characterized by low turnover rates33,45, ongoing research has
functional enzymes overlooks how nature synthesizes many valuable   only further conﬁrmed their capacity for structural derivatization:
and complex natural products: by combining multifunctional and   recently, several researchers have engineered the deoxyerythronolide
monofunctional  enzymes  for  complementary  purposes.  Multi-   synthase (DEBS) involved in erythromycin’s biosynthesis to accept
functional enzymes (which catalyze multiple reactions) are used by   ﬂuorinated acyl-CoA units so as to regioselectively incorporate ﬂuor-
these natural pathways, genetically encoded in the biosynthetic gene   ine into the erythromycin scaffold58,59. This has also been achieved with
clusters (BGCs) of several microbes, plants, and fungi, to ﬁrst construct   other PKS products as well46, which is crucial since an increasing
elongated carbon scaffolds. Only after the construction of such scaf-  number of approved drugs today contain ﬂuorine atoms60,61. Because
folds are monofunctional enzymes used for structural ﬁne-tuning19–22.   PKSs follow a modular deterministic logic, an engineered PKS provides
A  particularly  interesting and  valuable  class  of  multifunctional   a straightforward path to create a large library of chemical analogs that
enzymes are polyketide synthases (PKSs), which can catalyze the   can be explored for improved properties via domain and module
expansion of carbon backbones23–25. PKSs are responsible for the   engineering44. We believe that combining the versatility and scaffold-
synthesis of many medicinally relevant and structurally diverse mole-   ing ability of PKSs with the precision of monofunctional enzymes,
cules, from macrocyclic antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin26) to long ali-   thereby mimicking the biosynthesis of natural products, can ultimately
phatic anticancer therapeutics (e.g., gephyronic acid27,28). PKSs broadly   unlock a wider space of chemicals for biomanufacturing than would be
fall into one of three categories: type I, II, and III23. Type II and III PKSs   accessible with either type of enzyme alone. While several in silico
consist of discrete, unlinked enzymes operating independently29,30   retrobiosynthesis   tools   already   exist   for   monofunctional
while type  I PKSs comprise several covalently linked enzymatic    enzymes10,11,62–74, to our knowledge, none exist for designing chimeric
domains working together as an assembly line to synthesize large   multifunctional enzymes, and especially not for the combination of the
polyketides from simple building blocks31. These building blocks are   two. Existing tools75,76 and databases77–79 for multifunctional enzymes
typically acyl-coenzyme A (acyl-CoA) derivatives, such as acetyl-CoA or   are valuable in matching known natural product structures to known
malonyl-CoA23,25.  Through  decarboxylative  Claisen  condensation   BGCs, but do not suggest unnatural PKS chimeras.
reactions performed by their ketosynthase (KS) domain, PKSs are able        In this work, we present BioPKS pipeline, an automated retro-
to iteratively add 2–3 carbon atoms from such acyl-CoA units onto a   biosynthesis software that seamlessly integrates the design of multi-
previously loaded acyl-CoA substrate23,25. Over the course of several   functional chimeric type I PKSs with that of monofunctional enzymatic
modules, each of which minimally contains a KS, an AT, and an acyl   pathways (Fig. 1). By ﬁrst generating a carbon scaffold with a PKS-
carrier protein (ACP) domain, PKSs can extend the initial substrate   speciﬁc retrobiosynthesis algorithm (RetroTide), and then tailoring
from just 2–6 carbon atoms to over 20 in length23,25. This unique ability   PKSs with monofunctional enzyme retrobiosynthesis (DORAnet),
of PKSs to catalyze C-C bond formation reactions is immensely bene-   BioPKS pipeline accesses a much larger and more complex chemical
ﬁcial for biomanufacturing and could be repurposed towards the   space than either method alone. Post-PKS steps designed with DOR-
synthesis of chemicals, such as biofuels, for which carbon chain length   Anet also include reaction feasibility prediction and thermodynamics
correlates positively with fuel efﬁciency32.                                   calculations80,81. BioPKS pipeline is able to construct a complete carbon
    Beyond constructing elongated backbones, PKSs also allow for   scaffold for 15 test compounds, fully design pathways for over 60% of a
the incorporation of diverse side chains and varying the level of   155 compound library, and produce pathways for the therapeutic
reduction of the synthesized molecule33–38. While AT domains pri-   natural products cryptofolione82 and basidalin83. Altogether, our work
marily function to extend the carbon chain arising from the previous   represents an in silico demonstration of combining PKSs and mono-
module by selecting common acyl-CoA units, such as malonyl-CoA or   functional enzymes to engineer a broad range of molecules—from
methylmalonyl-CoA, there is a large diversity of α-substituted starter   simple commodities to complex natural products.
and extender acyl-CoA units that can be selected by AT domains38–40.
For instance, when designing monomers, terminal alkene groups  Results
(useful for polymerization) may be included through unsaturated units   Architecture of BioPKS pipeline
such as allylmalonyl-CoA41,42. Meanwhile, aromatic rings, a key struc-   BioPKS pipeline is an automated retrobiosynthesis tool with two key
tural component of many monomers and polymers, can be added via   rule-based components  (Fig.  2): RetroTide (presented here) and
aromatic units such as cinnamoyl-CoA43. Recent advances in engi-  DORAnet (https://github.com/wsprague-nu/doranet). When a target
neering strategies for AT domain swapping44,45 have enabled the   chemical is input, the BioPKS pipeline ﬁrst attempts to synthesize this



Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                            2


[PDF physical page 3]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y





Fig. 1 | BioPKS pipeline reaches target molecules in silico by ﬁrst constructing    structure, RetroTide ﬁrst suggests chimeric PKS designs to synthesize the carbon
their carbon backbone and then performing structural reﬁnements. BioPKS     backbone of this target. DORAnet then performs enzymatic post-PKS decorations
pipeline uses both multifunctional type I polyketide synthases (PKSs) and mono-    of the PKS product to reach the target chemical. If an integrated PKS and post-PKS
functional enzymes for chemical biosynthesis. Our platform is built upon two key   pathway design is found, the user can collect this design from BioPKS pipeline for
rule-based components – RetroTide and DORAnet. When a user inputs a target      future experimental synthesis in the laboratory.





Fig. 2 | BioPKS pipeline combinatorially designs novel, chimeric PKSs from      target can be synthesized solely with PKSs, BioPKS pipeline stops, and users can
existing PKSs to produce intermediates structurally similar to the target        search the ClusterCAD 2.0 database for closely matched PKSs. If the target cannot
molecule. When a target molecule is input, BioPKS pipeline ﬁrst calls upon Ret-    be synthesized by PKSs, then BioPKS pipeline calls upon DORAnet to modify the
roTide to suggest chimeric PKS designs by combinatorially mixing domains from    top-ranked PKS product with monofunctional enzymes, whose activities are digi-
existing PKSs, such as rapamycin synthase or 6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase        tally encoded as reaction rules. The post-PKS pathways generated can then be
(DEBS). Here, each color represents a domain from a distinct known PKS. Retro-    ranked with thermodynamics and/or pathway feasibility analyses. If the top-ranked
Tide’s PKS designs are output in descending order of chemical similarity as mea-   PKS product does not lead to the ﬁnal target through post-PKS modiﬁcations, then
sured between the corresponding PKS product and the target chemical. If the        alternate PKS designs are considered.



molecule and its carbon skeleton using only PKSs via RetroTide, which   provided by RetroTide (see Methods for the different similarity
in turn explores different combinations of known PKS domains and   metrics available to users). If a target can be synthesized by PKSs alone,
organizes them into modules. Each domain has a single reaction rule   BioPKS pipeline terminates and users can search our previously
associated with it based on its known enzymatic function. Over the   released ClusterCAD 2.0 database84 (https://clustercad.jbei.org) for
course of a single module, the application of reaction rules associated   natural PKS designs closely matched with the predicted chimera. This
with each constituent domain always results in the carbon-chain   search will indicate the genetic edits, such as domain swaps, insertions,
elongation of the product arising from the previous module as well as   and/or truncations needed to produce the chimera from the closest
any further modiﬁcations due to the presence of either the KR, DH,  matched natural PKS and the BGCs encoding for such a PKS. Clus-
and/or ER domains. PKS designs ranked by the chemical similarity of   terCAD 2.084 is a database of naturally-occurring type I PKSs, non-
the corresponding PKS product in comparison to the target are then   ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs), as well as PKS-NRPS hybrids,



Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                        3


[PDF physical page 4]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y


annotated and searchable to guide selection of parts for PKS engi-   considered is a hyperparameter that can be tuned by users, but is set to
neering. Crucially, ClusterCAD 2.0 supports domain architecture,   5 by default to limit computational expense. The second alternative
chemical structure, as well as protein sequence searches such that   involves working backwards from the desired chemical target with
users can extract the most similar natural megasynthase to their query  DORAnet to identify alternative precursors that can lead to this target
in terms of  either domain  architecture, chemical  similarity, or   (Supplementary Fig. 1). These intermediates can then be tested with
sequence similarity. If the desired target cannot be produced by PKSs   RetroTide to see if they can be synthesized exactly by a PKS. This
alone, however, then enzymatic post-PKS modiﬁcations via DORAnet   alternative approach can identify PKS precursors initially rejected by
are attempted on the PKS products that are most chemically similar to   RetroTide, due to low overall chemical similarity to the ﬁnal product.
the target molecule.                                            These contingencies and our primary algorithm driving the BioPKS
   DORAnet is a metabolic network expansion tool that then per-   pipeline ensure that the space of combined pathways has been ade-
forms these post-PKS modiﬁcations by recursively expanding upon   quately explored. The default conﬁgurations for the BioPKS pipeline
the PKS product from RetroTide using our previously published   produce results in just minutes on standard personal computers, but
reaction rules, which encode for the potential promiscuities of   can be scaled to explore a larger chemical space on more powerful
known enzymes85,86. Each reaction rule within DORAnet is associated  computer systems. Runtime performance statistics for DORAnet are
with a list of enzymes that follow the same reaction pattern. When   provided in Supplementary Table 1.
creating reaction networks with DORAnet, users can choose between
our set of 1224 generalized reaction rules (JN1224MIN85) or our set of   Selection of starter and extender acyl-CoA derivatives by
3604  intermediate  rules  (JN3604IMT86). Our  generalized  rules   RetroTide
assume a high level of promiscuity across all enzymes by focusing   Acyl-CoA derivatives are the key building blocks through which PKSs
only on the potential reaction centers within substrates that could   synthesize polyketide products (Fig. 3). All type I PKSs begin their
directly participate in a predicted reaction85. Meanwhile, our inter-   assembly line synthesis of polyketides by ﬁrst loading an acyl-CoA or
mediate rules assume a lower level of promiscuity by considering not   acyl-ACP derivative via their loading module. In this work, we refer to
only such reaction centers within substrates, but also the surround-   this initial acyl-CoA unit as a starter unit, while an acyl-CoA used by a
ing chemical context within which these reaction centers exist86.  downstream extension module is referred to as an extender unit. The
Both of our rulesets were extracted from the publicly available   loading module of a given PKS can often contain a ketosynthase-like
MetaCyc database87 and more information on their coverage of   (KSq) domain, which if present, loads a dicarboxylic acid wherein one
biochemistry reported within other databases88,89 can be found in the   of the acid groups has been acylated by CoA (e.g., malonyl-CoA). If this
Methods section “Performing post-PKS modiﬁcations on RetroTide  KSq domain is absent in the loading module, then PKSs load a mono-
products with DORAnet”. The recursive application of reaction rules   carboxylic acid wherein the single acid group has already been CoA-
by both RetroTide and DORAnet as well as the passing of the poly-   acylated (e.g., propionyl-CoA or acetyl-CoA).
ketide product output by RetroTide into DORAnet is completely        In order to compile a list of starter units for RetroTide, starter
automated by BioPKS pipeline and does not require any manual   units from canonical type I PKSs documented within the ClusterCAD
intervention from the user.                                               2.084 database were ﬁrst considered. This list was then expanded fur-
    Regardless of the reaction ruleset chosen by the user, depending   ther with more unusual starter units that have either previously been
on the number of post-PKS modiﬁcation steps speciﬁed, DORAnet  shown to be type I PKS starters or extenders that could potentially be
may enumerate far more post-PKS pathways than can practically be   converted into starters via domain or module engineering91. Certain
manually analyzed. Thus, to elucidate the most feasible pathway   starter units from type II or type III PKSs were also included so as to
chemistries for experimentation, our previously released DORA-  expand the chemical space of molecules that can be reached. The
XGB90 reaction  feasibility  classiﬁer has been incorporated into   complete list of 30 starter units available within RetroTide and their
BioPKS pipeline to rank post-PKS reactions by their feasibility. DORA-  SMILES strings are provided within Supplementary Data 1. We aimed
XGB90 (https://github.com/tyo-nu/DORA_XGB) scores the feasibility   to include an expansive set of rare and hypothetical starters (30 total)
of a given enzymatic reaction between 0 and 1, wherein a higher  and extenders (11 total; Supplementary Data 2) that can be pared
score represents a more feasible reaction. DORA-XGB was trained by  down by users as appropriate, rather than limiting the chemical space
ﬁrst dividing reported reactions from publicly available metabolic  by only including the most common PKS substrates. Note that in these
databases into sets of thermodynamically downhill (positive) and   starter and extender chemical structures, [S] is used as a placeholder
uphill (negative) reactions. From the set of downhill reactions,   for the substrates attachment to a CoA or ACP. Many substrates may
additional negative reactions were synthetically generated by con-   exist in both ACP and CoA forms, and are included only once in Ret-
sidering alternate reaction sites that an enzyme could have trans-   roTide, but the resulting designs can be interpreted as suitable for
formed, but were  still not experimentally observed to undergo   either substrate. RetroTide also does not simulate KSq decarboxyla-
catalysis. Consequently, DORA-XGB’s score reﬂects both the ther-   tion, so to include designs which use both carboxylated and dec-
modynamic  feasibility of a reaction under typical physiological   arboxylated starters, both variants must be included in the starter
conditions in the cell as well as the likelihood that a speciﬁc func-   database.
tional group on a substrate would undergo catalysis. A lower scoring     We emphasize that users also have the option to either add to or
DORAnet reaction then indicates either that a proposed reaction is   trim the list of starters and extenders that RetroTide has access to,
thermodynamically uphill or that the suggested reaction site  is   depending on the experimental feasibility of working with a given
unlikely to undergo catalysis by known enzymes, signifying the need   starter or extender in the laboratory. Constraining the list of starters
for some form of enzyme engineering.                          and extenders can enable the BioPKS pipeline to converge to a path-
     In the event that post-PKS modiﬁcations of the top PKS product  way design faster for a given target, but this may be accompanied by
cannot yield the ﬁnal target molecule, BioPKS pipeline pursues two   the tradeoff of reaching a smaller chemical space. Further, RetroTide
alternatives to further attempt to synthesize this product. Firstly,   builds chimeric PKSs using well-characterized domains with known
alternate, lower-ranked PKS designs and their corresponding PKS   enzymatic function - namely, the KS, AT, DH, ER, KR, ACP, and TE
products from RetroTide are considered (Fig. 2). This is because a  domains—but the speciﬁc combinations of domains within a module,
structurally dissimilar PKS intermediate may actually prove to be more   as well as the starter or extender substrate used, may not have pre-
amenable to the enzymatic modiﬁcations required to reach the ﬁnal   viously been observed in nature. This is intentional because it enables
target molecule. The maximum number of alternate PKS designs   RetroTide to not only recapitulate existing PKS modules found in



Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                     4


[PDF physical page 5]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y





Fig. 3 | RetroTide builds polyketide products in silico using a large and cus-     already been acylated by CoA (e.g., propionyl-CoA or acetyl-CoA). Meanwhile, the
tomizable set of starter and extender acyl-CoA derivatives. PKSs use acyl-CoA    ketosynthase (KS) domains in downstream extension modules use only CoA-
derivatives as building blocks for synthesizing complex and functionally diverse     acylated dicarboxylic acids as extension units. By considering a large and custo-
polyketides. The loading module of PKSs can often contain a ketosynthase-like      mizable set of acyl-CoA derivatives as starter and extender units within these
(KSq) domain, which if present, loads dicarboxylic acids wherein one of the acid     constraints, RetroTide can build polyketide products that are as structurally similar
groups has been acylated by CoA (e.g., malonyl-CoA). If this KSq domain is absent,   to the ﬁnal target product as possible.
however, then PKSs load monocarboxylic acids wherein the single acid group has





Fig. 4 | Demonstrated biosynthesis of 4-hydroxybutyric acid and 2-pentanone    terminates. b Conversely, when 2-pentanone is input as a target structure, the top
with BioPKS pipeline. a When 4-hydroxybutyric acid is input as a target structure   PKS design from RetroTide reaches only as far as 5-ketohexanoic acid. DORAnet
into BioPKS pipeline, the top PKS design from RetroTide synthesizes               subsequently takes over and suggests a thermodynamically favorable decarbox-
4-hydroxybutyric acid completely in just two modules. Hydroxymalonyl-CoA is       ylation reaction to synthesize 2-pentanone. This decarboxylation step is also pre-
recommended as a starter unit while malonyl-CoA is recommended as an extender   dicted to be highly feasible with an enzymatic reaction feasibility score of 0.896.
unit. Since any additional post-PKS modiﬁcations are not required, BioPKS pipeline   Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.



nature but to also suggest module designs that aren’t known to exist   intermediate in the downstream production of various C4 chemicals
naturally, but may be possible to engineer. We recognize that not all of  and for which bioengineered pathways currently exist93–95.
these suggested designs may necessarily be experimentally viable but     When 4-hydroxybutyric acid is input as a target into BioPKS
given recent advances in PKS engineering44,45–49,92, we thought it best to   pipeline,  the  top  PKS  design  from  RetroTide  synthesizes
explore as wide a space of polyketides as possible.                    4-hydroxybutyric acid completely (Fig. 4a). This predicted chimera
                                                                       features one loading module and one extension module. RetroTide
Showcasing BioPKS pipeline through the biosynthesis of two     suggests that the loading module should load hydroxymalonyl-CoA as
simple molecules                                               a  starter  unit to account  for the  terminal hydroxyl group  in
We report here two use-cases that exemplify, with simple molecules,   4-hydroxybutyric acid while the extension module should load
the two complementary approaches used in BioPKS pipeline (Fig. 4).   malonyl-CoA as an extender unit to complete the C4 backbone of
The ﬁrst involves the biosynthesis of 4-hydroxybutyric acid, a key   4-hydroxybutyric acid. Note that this may not be a naturally occurring



Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                          5


[PDF physical page 6]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y





Fig. 5 | A structurally diverse set of 15 molecules were curated for the proto-    were included in our set and amongst the aliphatic molecules, carbon backbones
typing of BioPKS pipeline. Fifteen molecules of varying carbon chain lengths and   with as little as 3 (acrylic acid) and as many as 19 (nonadecene) carbon atoms were
complexity were chosen as an initial prototyping set for BioPKS pipeline to inves-   chosen to test the versatility of BioPKS pipeline in constructing scaffolds of dif-
tigate if chimeric PKSs suggested by RetroTide would be able to construct the       ferent lengths.
carbon backbones for each of these molecules. Both cyclic and aliphatic molecules



PKS starter (please see the section “Selection of starter and extender   ketone synthases have previously demonstrated decarboxylation
acyl-CoA derivatives by RetroTide” for our rationale in including it   activity on keto-acids97,98, 3-ketohexanoic acid may also be a useful
anyways). The domain architecture of this extension module features a   intermediate in the synthesis of 2-pentanone.
fully reducing DH-ER-KR loop that reduces the acetyl group in        In these two simple use cases, PKSs are shown to be valuable in
hydroxymalonyl-CoA to produce the fully reduced C4 backbone of   synthesizing the carbon backbones of user-speciﬁed targets from
4-hydroxybutyric acid. Since the target molecule is reached here with   simple acyl-CoA derivatives while post-PKS modiﬁcations are useful for
the top PKS design, BioPKS pipeline terminates and does not need to   structural reﬁnements of the PKS product to reach the ﬁnal target. For
attempt any post-PKS modiﬁcations.                           more complex targets, users may wish to allow longer post-PKS
   When 2-pentanone is input as a target into BioPKS pipeline,   pathways, though this may sometimes be accompanied with the tra-
however, the top-ranked PKS design only takes the user as far as   deoff of  potentially more  infeasible or thermodynamically bot-
5-ketohexanoic acid, and needs completion through the use of DOR-   tlenecked post-PKS reactions. If post-PKS pathways spanning more
Anet (Fig. 4b). The PKS design involves two extension modules in   than one reaction step are used, then BioPKS pipeline ranks post-PKS
addition to the loading module, and malonyl-CoA is used throughout   pathways generated by DORAnet on the basis of each pathway’s net
as both a starter and an extender unit. Since the ﬁnal 2-pentanone    feasibility score. This net score is in turn computed by taking the
target has not been reached, BioPKS pipeline attempts to modify the   product of each constituent reaction’s DORA-XGB feasibility score
5-ketohexanoic acid PKS product by calling on DORAnet. A thermo-   within a single pathway.
dynamically downhill decarboxylation reaction is subsequently sug-
gested for transforming 5-ketohexanoic acid into 2-pentanone. We   Testing BioPKS pipeline against a curated set of ﬁfteen struc-
have used the open-source package eQuilibrator 3.080 to compute   turally diverse molecules
reaction thermodynamics here, but the code for BioPKS pipeline has   In order to ascertain the general utility of PKSs in synthesizing a variety
been modularized such  that other open-source  tools, such as   of carbon backbones and to investigate the utility of considering
dGPredictor81, may easily be used as well. The suggested decarbox-   lower-ranked PKS designs, we prototyped BioPKS pipeline against 15
ylation reaction also receives a high predicted feasibility score of 0.896   molecules that we curated for their structural diversity (Fig. 5 and
by DORA-XGB90. Searching our intermediate reaction rules database   Supplementary Fig. 4). These consist of 2 cyclic (caprolactone and γ-
for potentially promiscuous enzymes that may be able to catalyze this   butyrolactone) and 13 aliphatic (tiglic acid, acrylic acid, levulinic acid,
reaction reveals 39 enzymes associated with the rule governing this   adipic acid, heptane, aminobutyric acid, 1,4-butanediol, butanone,
decarboxylation. By comparing the chemical similarity of each sug-   maleic acid, muconic acid, nonadecene, sphingosine, and limonene)
gested enzyme’s native substrate to that of 5-ketohexanoic acid, the   molecules with various functional groups. While several of these
enzyme acetoacetate decarboxylase emerges as a promising candidate  compounds have known biosynthetic pathways, we selected them as a
(Supplementary Fig. 2). This enzyme has also previously been shown   test to evaluate our system’s ability to both create previously unob-
to be sufﬁciently promiscuous to decarboxylate levulinic acid to   served PKS-centric pathways and reproduce known PKS-based path-
produce 2-butanone96. Levulinic acid shares a similar structure to   ways. For each of these 15 molecules, 5 alternate PKS designs were
5-ketohexanoic acid with just one less carbon atom present in its   considered beyond the top-ranked PKS design. For testing, we con-
backbone between the ketone and acid groups. Alternatively, another   strained the number of alternate PKS designs to 5 to limit the com-
PKS design suggested by RetroTide produces 3-ketohexanoic acid. In   putational complexity of networks that may be generated with each
this PKS design, the fully reducing DH-ER-KR loop appears in the ﬁrst   post-PKS product. This, however, is a user selectable parameter that
extension module while the second extension module features only   can be increased to potentially improve designs, though it may also
the KS, AT, and ACP domains (Supplementary Fig. 3). Given that methyl   increase computational demands. Further, only a single post-PKS



Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                      6


[PDF physical page 7]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y





Fig. 6 | BioPKS pipeline successfully constructs the carbon backbones of all 15    acid, adipic acid, 1,4-butanediol, and maleic acid can be reached by a single-step
curated molecules and synthesizes 12 molecules completely. For 3 molecules    modiﬁcation of the top-ranked PKS design’s product while butanone, heptane, and
out of the total 15 in our curated prototyping set (i.e., tiglic acid, caprolactone, γ-   nonadecene can only be reached by starting with a PKS product that is more
butyrolactone), BioPKS pipeline synthesizes these molecules completely with the    structurally dissimilar with respect to the target molecule than the top-ranked PKS
top-ranked type I polyketide synthase (PKS) design and does not require any fur-    product. There exist 3 molecules out of the 15 total (limonene, aminobutyric acid,
ther post-PKS modiﬁcations. For 9 molecules (acrylic acid, muconic acid, levulinic   and sphingosine) that cannot be synthesized at all by BioPKS pipeline within just
acid, adipic acid, butanone, heptane, 1,4-butanediol, maleic acid, and nonadecene),   one post-PKS step even after considering ﬁve alternate PKSdesigns. Source data are
BioPKS pipeline synthesizes these molecules completely using a single post-PKS     provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
modiﬁcation step. Out of these 9 molecules, acrylic acid, muconic acid, levulinic


modiﬁcation step was used for two reasons. First, to conﬁrm that   products into the ﬁnal targets (Fig. 6). Here, we calculate chemical
chimeric PKSs designed by RetroTide can reach the desired number of   similarity by ﬁrst computing the maximum common substructure
carbon atoms in commodity chemicals (from as little as 3 in acrylic acid  (MCS) between a given (either PKS or post-PKS) product and the target
to as many as 19 nonadecene) from just simple acyl-CoA building   chemical and then calculating the ratio of atoms in the MCS to the total
blocks, and without having to provide carbon atoms through mono-  number of unique atoms between both molecules, e.g., the MCS
functional enzymes. Second, from an experimental perspective, fewer   Tanimoto similarity. Finally, for limonene, aminobutyric acid, and
post-PKS modiﬁcation steps minimize the likelihood of intermediate   sphingosine, the BioPKS pipeline was not able to reach these targets
loss: while the enzymatic domains of type I PKSs are covalently con-   across all 6 PKS designs considered with a single monofunctional
nected and the growing carbon chain substrate is always tethered to a  enzyme step. PKS designs for all successful and unsuccessful syntheses
given module’s ACP domain through the ACP’s phosphopantetheinyl   mentioned here can be found in Supplementary Figs. 5–12.
arm25, regular monofunctional enzymes do not enjoy such physical
proximity in the cell50,99. In fact, it is common for engineered metabolic   Validating BioPKS pipeline against a large set of valuable bio-
pathways to become disrupted when their intermediates are siphoned  manufacturing targets
off into other pathways valuable for primary metabolism, ultimately   In order to validate the BioPKS pipeline against a larger, unbiased
resulting in low ﬁnal product titers50–57. If successfully engineered,   collection of realistic biomanufacturing targets, and investigate the
chimeric PKSs are less susceptible to such derailments. Recently, the   effect on target diversity of allowing extra post-PKS steps, we turned to
unfolded protein linkers that covalently bind the catalytic domains of   a previously published set of 209 chemicals to be potentially produced
type I PKSs together have even been used to fuse together mono-   via biomanufacturing13. Of these 209 chemicals, we ﬁltered out C1
functional enzymes in engineered metabolic pathways, leading to   metabolites, cofactors, charged targets, as well as any chlorinated or
more than double the product titer in some cases100. Given such high   sulfonated species so as to yield a ﬁnal validation set of 155 molecules.
substrate  concentrations  localized  around  individual  catalytic  The chemical diversity of these 155 molecules is shown in Supple-
domains rather than globally dispersed around the cell, PKSs also have   mentary Fig. 13. Cofactors were removed as target molecules because
the potential to force through reactions that may be thermo-   these would be consumed by DORAnet and C1 metabolites were also
dynamically uphill and would otherwise remain uncatalyzed by reg-  removed because their carbon backbone is too short for a PKS. Our
ular, monofunctional enzymes.                                        reaction rules do not work on charged ions so these were removed as
    RetroTide was able to synthesize a carbon scaffold with at least as   well. Of these 155 targets, 94 were non-aromatics while 61 were aro-
many carbon atoms as the ﬁnal target for all 15 targets. Interestingly,   matics. We then prompted the BioPKS pipeline to synthesize all 155
for tiglic acid, caprolactone, and γ-butyrolactone, the top chimeric PKS   chemicals with up to 2 post-PKS modiﬁcation steps. For the 94 non-
designs were not only able to build the carbon backbones of these   aromatic targets, we constrained the BioPKS pipeline to only using the
products but also accomplish the structural decorations necessary to   aliphatic units of malonyl-CoA, methylmalonyl-CoA, hydroxyacetyl-
synthesize all three targets completely (Fig. 6 and Supplementary   CoA, methoxymalonyl-CoA, and allylmalonyl-CoA as starters and
Fig. 5). For the remaining 12 molecules, since PKSs did not synthesize   extenders, while for the 61 aromatic targets we allowed for all starters
the ﬁnal target, a single-step post-PKS modiﬁcation reaction was used  and extenders to be used. Note that not all of these substrates are
with DORAnet. Amongst these 12 molecules, for acrylic acid, muconic   naturally occurring in the positions used (e.g., as starters or extenders;
acid, levulinic acid, adipic acid, 1,4-butanediol, and maleic acid, the   see the section “Selection of starter and extender acyl-CoA derivatives
top-PKS product serves as an excellent precursor for post-PKS mod-  by RetroTide” for our rationale on including them). In attempting to
iﬁcations and these targets can be synthesized completely in a single   synthesize these molecules, stereochemical information was not con-
post-PKS tailoring step (Fig. 6). For butanone, heptane, and non-   sidered, and 5 alternate PKS designs beyond the top-ranked PKS design
adecene, however, the top PKS product does not lead to the target   were considered.
molecule after a single post-PKS modiﬁcation step. Surprisingly, in      BioPKS pipeline successfully proposed designs to synthesize 93
these cases, a lower-ranked PKS design leading to a more structurally   molecules out of our total of 155, translating to a success rate of 60%
dissimilar intermediate actually serves as a better launchpad for the    (Fig. 7a). Of these 93 molecules, chimeric PKS-only designs from Ret-
post-PKS modiﬁcations required to transform the corresponding PKS   roTide could synthesize only 3 molecules exactly (Fig. 7a). Still, the



Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                                 7


[PDF physical page 8]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y





Fig. 7 | BioPKS pipeline successfully suggests integrated biosynthetic pathways   these 62 target molecules that could not be synthesized. The box plots encom-
to 93 biomanufacturing candidates. a When BioPKS pipeline is prompted to      passed within the violin plots here reﬂect the distribution (n = 62) of chemical
synthesize the validation set of 155 molecules that would be potential candidates     similarity scores of the ﬁnal product that is most chemically similar to the target.
for biomanufacturing, it achieves an overall hit-rate of 60% (i.e., 93/155). Of the 93   The white bar in each box plot reﬂects the median chemical similarity. Meanwhile,
molecules that can be synthesized exactly, 3 are synthesized solely by PKSs while 46   the lower and upper bounds of each box plot represent the 25th and 75th per-
more molecules can be synthesized with just one post-PKS tailoring step from the    centiles of the distribution of chemical similarities, respectively. The lower and
PKS product. After a second post-PKS step, 44 more molecules can be synthesized,   upper whiskers represent the minimum and maximum chemical similarity,
bringing the total number of molecules synthesized by BioPKS pipeline to 93.        respectively. Across all of these statistical metrics, the chemical similarity of the
b Although the remaining 62 molecules out of 155 cannot be synthesized by BioPKS   ﬁnal product reached with respect to its corresponding target is observed to
pipeline, post-PKS modiﬁcation steps are shown to improve the chemical similarity    increase with each post-PKS modiﬁcation. Source data are provided as a Source
between the PKS product and the post-PKS product with respect to the target for   Data ﬁle.



carbon scaffolds of PKS products proved to be very valuable pre-   ﬁlters to build post-PKS synthesis trees that are as deep or as shallow as
cursors for post-PKS tailoring. Within a single generation, DORAnet   they require.
was able to synthesize 46 more molecules completely by building off
of RetroTide’s carbon backbones. With a second generation, DORAnet  BioPKS pipeline suggests biosynthetic pathways
was able to synthesize 44 more molecules (Fig. 7a), thereby reaching   As a ﬁnal stress test on the robustness of our software, we prompted
93 molecules in total. For the remaining 62 molecules that could not be   the BioPKS pipeline to suggest pathways to natural products for which
synthesized by the BioPKS pipeline, all top-ranked PKS products still  no known pathways exist. We ﬁrst attempted this for the antifungal
comprised at least as many carbon atoms as their corresponding ﬁnal   cryptofolione isolated from the plant Cryptocarya latifolia82. The bio-
targets. Moreover, for these 62 molecules, post-PKS modiﬁcations   synthetic origin of cryptofolione has not been elucidated and only
performed on the top-PKS product are still shown to improve the   total synthesis pathways relying on synthetic chemistry have thus far
structural similarity of the post-PKS product over the PKS product  been utilized to synthesize cryptofolione101. Given  its therapeutic
when both are compared to  their corresponding  target mole-   potential, cryptofolione represents a promising target for biomanu-
cule (Fig. 7b).                                                          facturing with our “PKS-ﬁrst” approach presented here. When the
   We explored the possibility of attempting more than 2 post-PKS   structure of cryptofolione is input into the BioPKS pipeline without any
modiﬁcations on the PKS products involved in the synthesis of these   stereochemical information, RetroTide suggested a PKS design con-
remaining 62 molecules, but ultimately decided against it. This is pri-   sisting of 6 modules that could synthesize cryptofolione exactly
marily because the increase in chemical similarity achieved with    (Fig. 8). This predicted chimera loads an aromatic starter unit, namely
respect to the target is only marginal between the ﬁrst and second   cinnamoyl-CoA to account for the aromatic moiety on one end of
post-PKS reactions as opposed to that between the PKS product and   cryptofolione’s backbone. Cinnamoyl-CoA is a known type  III PKS
the ﬁrst post-PKS modiﬁcation step. This suggests that there are    starter30, and it may be possible to engineer a Type I PKS to accept it.
diminishing returns to increases in chemical similarity with each post-  The extension modules of this chimera then use only malonyl-CoA
PKS step and that these 62 molecules may lie even farther outside the   units to build the remainder of cryptofolione’s backbone. A terminal
chemical space accessible by BioPKS pipeline. Moreover, given that   thioesterase (TE) domain that catalyzes an intramolecular cyclization
other known biological, chemical, or hybrid pathways to some of these   reaction to form the lactone ring at the other end of cryptofolione’s
molecules mayalready exist, if two post-PKS modiﬁcation steps are not  backbone is ﬁnally used to complete cryptofolione’s proposed bio-
sufﬁcient to synthesize these targets, then users may be able to ﬁnd a   synthesis. Although the proposed cinnamoyl-CoA loading has not
more efﬁcient pathway that does not rely on PKSs. Nonetheless, if  been observed in a type I PKS before, since the proposed extension
users still want to use more than two post-PKS steps, perhaps for tar-  modules here all use the commonly observed malonyl-CoA, we deci-
gets without any known pathways, then they can easily do so with the  ded to search the ClusterCAD 2.0 database using these extension
various pruning ﬁlters available in DORAnet. Since reaction networks  modules as queries. The goal of sending RetroTide’s suggested chi-
grow exponentially with each generation, DORAnet enables users to  mera for cryptofolione through ClusterCAD 2.0 was to see if existing
discard intermediate metabolites that may appear too structurally   PKSs could be found that are similar in domain architecture to the
dissimilar to the target, have more atoms than some predetermined   suggested chimera and whose parts could therefore be used to
maximum, or that simply fail to satisfy some other user-deﬁned cri-   assemble the chimera. Our search revealed that module 1 of the
teria. We emphasize here that users have the ﬂexibility to easily build   simocyclinone PKS102 (MIBiG accession: BGC0001072.1) follows a KS-
their own custom ﬁlters into DORAnet and prune pathways according  AT-DH-KR domain architecture and uses malonyl-CoA as an extender
to their own heuristics of interest. Ultimately, users can set up these   unit. This could be used to build modules 3 and 5 for the proposed



Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                       8


[PDF physical page 9]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y





Fig. 8 | Proposed biosynthesis of cryptofolione by BioPKS pipeline. When       and subsequently only uses malonyl-CoA as extender units. The ofﬂoading reaction
prompted to suggest a biosynthesis route to the natural product cryptofolione, a    for the termination domain of this chimeric PKS is set to an intramolecular cycli-
potential therapeutic whose biosynthetic origin remains unknown, BioPKS pipeline   zation reaction so that the lactone ring on the other end of cryptofolione’s carbon
calls upon RetroTide to successfully suggest a 6-module chimeric PKS that could    backbone can be synthesized. Our PKS design lends insight into the possible bio-
synthesize cryptofolione exactly. This chimeric PKS selects cinnamoyl-CoA as a      synthetic origins of α-pyrones such as cryptofolione. Source data are provided as a
starter unit given the aromatic ring on one end of cryptofolione’s carbon backbone   Source Data ﬁle.


chimeric PKS (Fig. 8). In a similar vein, module 2 of the simocyclinone   without any known biosynthetic pathways, we decided to use three
PKS follows a KS-AT-KR domain architecture and could be used to   post-PKS modiﬁcation steps as well as our most generalized reaction
build modules 1, 2, and 4 of the proposed PKS (Fig. 8). Since malonyl-   rules in its synthesis and were ultimately able to synthesize basidalin
CoA is a common extension unit, modules from other PKSs, such as the   exactly. The ﬁrst suggested post-PKS reaction features a peroxidase,
Niddamycin PKS103 (MIBiG accession: BGC0000113.1) can also be used   the second features an aminotransferase, and the third involves
to construct the suggested chimera.                              an alcohol dehydrogenase. Interestingly, while the ﬁrst and second
    Since the BioPKS pipeline suggests a PKS design that can syn-   post-PKS reactions by DORAnet have a high predicted feasibility
thesize  cryptofolione  exactly, no  post-PKS  modiﬁcation  steps   score and are thermodynamically downhill, the last post-PKS reaction
are needed. We note that in our proposed synthesis of cryptofolione,    is predicted to be very infeasible and found to be thermodynamically
the alkene group adjacent to the acyl group prior to ofﬂoading is in   uphill. Since all reaction free energies are calculated under typical
the trans conﬁguration while after lactonization, it changes to the   cellular conditions of 298K, ionic strength 0.25 M, pH 7.4, and pMg
cis conﬁguration. We are uncertain if thioesterase domains that per-   3.0 for all species at 1 M concentrations (see “Methods”), users may
form cyclizations would be able to invert double bond stereochemistry   want to perform such uphill reactions in vitrowherein these conditions
as, to our knowledge, no such examples have yet been observed  may be tweaked a little further to improve thermodynamic favor-
in nature. While in this work, we focused on harnessing PKSs and    ability. Several more alternate proposed pathways to basidalin have
enzymatic reactions to obtain the desired two-dimensional target   also been provided in Supplementary Fig. 14. The ability of the BioPKS
structure, future work will incorporate more stereochemistry correc-   pipeline to suggest pathways to such complex natural products could
tions such that even the desired three-dimensional structure  is   also  enable  users  to  utilize  the BioPKS  pipeline  to  annotate
produced.                                                    orphan BGCs.
   We then prompted the BioPKS pipeline to suggest a synthesis
for the natural product basidalin. Basidalin is a smaller but potent  Discussion
antibiotic ﬁrst extracted in 1983 from the fungus Leucoagaricus   Here, we present a retrobiosynthesis software that harnesses both
naucina83. Despite its early extraction, the ﬁrst total chemical synthesis   multifunctional and monofunctional enzymes to propose the de novo
of basidalin was only achieved recently in 2016104. As is the case with   biosynthesis of a broad spectrum of chemical targets—from simple
cryptofolione, the biosynthetic origins of basidalin have also yet to  commodity chemicals to more complex natural products for which
be uncovered. Thus, we prompted BioPKS pipeline to synthesize   biosynthetic pathways may or may not already exist. Crucially, we have
basidalin and the suggested PKS design was able to synthesize basi-   also put forth a valuable paradigm for the synthesis of such molecules
dalin’s carbon backbone exactly (Fig. 9). This predicted chimera fea-   —that multifunctional enzymes, such as type I PKSs, can be exploited
tures 3 modules in total. The loading module and ﬁrst extension   for creating the carbon scaffolds of target products while regular,
module both utilize hydroxymalonyl-CoA as starter and extender   monofunctional enzymes within biology can subsequently be brought
units, respectively, while the ﬁnal extension module utilizes malonyl-   in for structural reﬁnements that eventually transform such scaffolds
CoA as an extender unit. Similar to the predicted chimera for the   into the target product exactly.
earlier proposed biosynthesis of cryptofolione, a TE domain that cat-      Our motivation for developing this “PKS-ﬁrst” algorithm to drive
alyzes an intramolecular cyclization reaction is used for the proposed   the BioPKS pipeline  lies in expanding biologists’ capabilities to
biosynthesis of basidalin. Since basidalin is a high-value molecule   explore chemical space by complimenting the strengths of PKSs with




Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                      9


[PDF physical page 10]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y





Fig. 9 | Proposed biosynthesis of Basidalin by BioPKS pipeline. When prompted    respectively whilethe ﬁnal extension moduleuses malonyl-CoA asanextender unit.
to suggest a biosynthesis route to basidalin, another therapeutic natural product    Again, an intramolecular cyclization reaction is chosen for ofﬂoading, and we note
whose biosynthetic origin also remains unknown, the BioPKS pipeline suggests a    that RetroTide is able to synthesize the γ-lactone backbone of basidalin exactly.
chimeric PKS design and three post-PKS modiﬁcation steps to synthesize basidalin   Subsequently, three post-PKS modiﬁcation steps involving peroxygenase and
exactly. This chimeric PKS consists of 3 modules. The loading module and ﬁrst      aminotransferase enzymes can produce the target basidalin product. Source data
extension module both use hydroxymalonyl-CoA as starter and extender units       are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.



that of monofunctional enzymes. PKSs excel at synthesizing elon-   elucidated. In doing so, the BioPKS pipeline was able to suggest
gated carbon backbones and/or incorporating unique functional   pathways to the natural products cryptofolione (antifungal) and
handles into target molecules from a common pool of simple, acyl-   basidalin (antibiotic) for which, to the best of our knowledge, no
CoA building blocks. Monofunctional enzymes, by contrast, rarely  known biosynthetic pathways currently exist.
catalyze such iterative C-C bond formation reactions but are adept at      One limitation of our tool is the lack of support for stereo-
precise, regioselective functional group transformations. Indeed,   chemistry corrections. While the enantioselective synthesis of com-
there are  several  reaction  chemistries, such as  glycosylations,  pounds is a key strength of PKSs105,106 and many monofunctional
monooxygenations, and transaminations,  that PKSs are simply   enzymes107, a number of retrobiosynthesis tools in the literature can-
unable to perform and must instead  rely on monofunctional   not reliably predict the correct stereoisomer of both existing and new-
enzymes. Rather than attempting to manufacture chemicals using   to-nature reactions. Nonetheless, with the recent development of
only one of these routes, we propose that a wider space of molecules   cheminformatics tools capable of both extracting and applying
can be accessed by integrating the two.                              stereochemistry-aware reaction templates108–110, we expect our future
   We demonstrated the effectiveness of our approach and of  work to address such corrections as well.
BioPKS pipeline across various test-cases of increasing complexity.        Overall, while the successful engineering and construction of
First, we showcased BioPKS pipeline’s two modes of operation by   chimeric PKSs remains an ongoing challenge, our in silico pipeline
synthesizing 4-hydroxybutyric acid completely through PKSs, while   highlights the potential of the ﬁeld, given the diversity of products that
2-pentanone was reached with just one post-PKS modiﬁcation step.   can be synthesized by integrating PKSs with post-PKS pathways. In
Although metabolic pathways have already been engineered for the   addition to suggesting pathway chemistries to target molecules using
biosynthesis of both chemicals, our proposed pathways offer a   both PKSs and monofunctional enzymes, the BioPKS pipeline also
compelling alternative that may minimize intermediate loss, a com-   enables users to rank results through reaction thermodynamics and
mon occurrence with classic metabolic pathways. Subsequently, we    feasibility calculations to observe if potentially promiscuous, wild-type
further prototyped the BioPKS pipeline for the synthesis of 15 struc-  enzymes would catalyze predicted reactions or if such enzymes would
turally diverse chemicals and proved that, for certain targets, con-  need to be mutated further. With all of these functionalities built in, the
sidering alternate PKS designs beyond the top-ranked design can   BioPKS pipeline serves as a ﬂexible and comprehensive tool for users
yield better intermediates for post-PKS modiﬁcations to synthesize   looking to synthesize molecules via both PKSs and monofunctional
the ﬁnal target. After these initial tests, we turned to a published set   enzymes. We have also signiﬁcantly modularized the code for BioPKS
of molecular candidates for biomanufacturing and proved that we   pipeline such that if users wish, other tools in the literature could be
could synthesize 60% of them (93 out of 155) with our pipeline while   further bundled in for various post-processing analyses involving
allowing for up to two post-PKS modiﬁcation steps. BioPKS pipeline  enzyme selection111–114, global cofactor usage in the cell115, and pre-
can access an even larger chemical space by considering further   dicting potential enzyme cross-talk116. Moreover, with the abundance
post-PKS steps. Longer pathways, however, will certainly be more   of  enzyme   engineering   techniques  now   available—  both
challenging to successfully build experimentally, so we decided to   experimental117,118 and computational119–122—our designs here serve as a
limit our analysis to two post-PKS steps so that our proposed designs   valuable starting point for the research community to continue iter-
are of a realistic complexity. As a ﬁnal test of the BioPKS pipeline, we   ating on them. For users who may be interested, we have also provided
prompted it to suggest combined PKS and post-PKS pathways to   several tutorials on our Github repository that show more examples of
complex  natural therapeutics  for which BGCs have not been   using BioPKS pipeline in various scenarios.



Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                              10


[PDF physical page 11]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y

Methods                                                       designing chimeric PKSs, these designs are returned in descending
User-deﬁned inputs for BioPKS pipeline                          order of chemical similarity—as measured between each design’s
Users can initialize a BioPKS pipeline object in the Python program-   corresponding product and the target product. Users can then
ming language with the simpliﬁed molecular input linear entry system   decide between terminating the growing carbon chain on the simu-
(SMILES) string of their target chemical (Fig. 1). Users can also specify if   lated chimeric PKS via either an intramolecular cyclization reaction,
this target chemical should be synthesized using either only PKSs or   such as that involved in the formation of 6-deoxyerythronolide B25, or
both PKSs and monofunctional enzymes. In order to generate PKS   a thioesterase reaction, thereby forming a terminal carboxylic acid
designs, users can either allow for all 30 starter (Supplementary Data 1)   group. The highest-ranked PKS design from RetroTide either may or
and 11 extender acyl-CoA (Supplementary Data 2) units available within  may not have produced the user’s target product, depending on
the BioPKS pipeline to be used as building blocks or choose a speciﬁc   whether this product is reachable by purely PKS chemistry.
subset of these units. BioPKS pipeline supports both an intramolecular      With the PKS designs obtained from RetroTide, users can search
cyclization as well as a thiolysis reaction to release the bound PKS   the ClusterCAD 2.0 PKS database84 (https://clustercad.jbei.org/pks/)
product from the designed PKS’s thioesterase (TE) domain and users   for naturally-occurring designs that match closely with the suggested
can select from either of these ofﬂoading reactions to generate their   chimeric designs, so as to select an  initial design for biological
PKS product. When using combined PKS and non-PKS pathways, users   engineering. We also note RetroTide is cis/trans-AT PKS agnostic
must specify the number of post-PKS modiﬁcation steps to perform on  and since recent work has shown that trans-ATs can be engineered126,
the PKS product.                                       we encourage users to implement RetroTide designs as  trans-
     Currently, BioPKS pipeline does not support any stereochemistry  AT  PKSs  and/or  supplement  the   list  of  PKS  starters  and
corrections on-the-ﬂy. This is because there are still only a few ﬁn-   extenders with additional substrates, as appropriate for a given bio-
gerprinting methods and chemical similarity metrics that can accu-   synthesis goal.
rately compare the three-dimensional structural similarity of two chiral
molecules.  Further,  since  different  chemical  similarity  metrics  Performing post-PKS modiﬁcations on RetroTide products with
emphasize different features within a molecule anyway, in this work,  DORAnet
we prioritized obtaining the correct two-dimensional structure of the   Post-PKS modiﬁcations are performed using our DORAnet platform
target molecule. Consequently,  all molecules presented here are   (https://github.com/wsprague-nu/doranet). DORAnet is built on the
shown without their stereochemical conﬁgurations. With recent work   concept of our previously released metabolic network expansion
on chiral ﬁngerprints published in the literature123, however, we expect   tool Pickaxe127. If the user-deﬁned target product was not reached by
our future work to at least be able to implement stereochemistry   RetroTide, the PKS product is funneled as a starting molecule into
corrections in a post-hoc fashion.                               DORAnet. DORAnet is a retrosynthesis tool designed to utilize both
   We emphasize here that BioPKS pipeline does not currently sup-   catalytic and metabolic reaction rules for discovering and ranking
port invoking PKSs a second time  if a target molecule cannot be   hybrid pathways. Further details about DORAnet will be published in
reached using PKSs ﬁrst and monofunctional enzymes second. While   a separate work. In this work, DORAnet was used to generate meta-
such an approach that relies on PKSs interchangeably would almost   bolic in-silico network expansions (MINEs) by recursively expanding
certainly expand the net chemical space accessible, this would be too  upon a precursor metabolite using reaction rules. Users can decide
difﬁcult to implement experimentally within the laboratory since PKSs  between two sets of reaction rules in generating MINEs. The ﬁrst set
only accept a very limited pool of substrates. Consequently, it may not   of rules to choose from is our generalized and maximally pro-
be biologically practical to build a scaffold with a PKS, modify it   miscuous JN1224MIN rule set,85, which predicts promiscuous reac-
enzymatically, and then convert it into an acyl-CoA derivative for use   tions by only considering the substrate chemical moieties that can
by a PKS.                                                                 directly undergo enzymatic reactions. The second  is our inter-
                                                             mediate JN3604IMT rule set86, which not only considers reacting
Computational design of chimeric type I PKSs with RetroTide    moieties in predicting reactions but also the surrounding chemical
Chimeric type I PKS designs are created using RetroTide, the ﬁrst key   neighborhoods within which these moieties are present. Both of
component within the BioPKS pipeline. Upon providing the simpli-   these rule sets were generated from MetaCyc and cover ~85% of all
ﬁed molecular input linear entry system (SMILES) string of a target   chemistries encapsulated within BRENDA and KEGG. In this study,
molecule, RetroTide ﬁrst attempts to design PKSs that can synthesize   our intermediate JN3604IMT rules were used for generating mono-
this molecule using various modules, domain architectures, starter   functional enzymatic pathways for all molecules except basidalin.
units, and extender units (Fig. 10). Users can customize which starter   Given  the  structural complexity  of  basidalin, our  generalized
and extender units they would like to use in building chimeric PKSs  JN1224MIN rules were used instead to suggest pathway designs to
from a provided list of 30 starter (Supplementary Data 1) and 11   basidalin. When performing post-PKS modiﬁcations, users must
extender (Supplementary Data 2) units, or optionally expand the list   specify the number of post-PKS steps, i.e., the number of generations
themselves. The complete list of starter and extender units available   for which DORAnet would be run. After these post-PKS modiﬁcations
can be found in the attached Supplementary Data 1 and 2. RetroTide   have been performed, if the target product is reached, pathways
builds PKS designs by recursively adding modules, thereby synthe-  between the PKS product and the ﬁnal, downstream target are
sizing in the forward direction (Fig. 10). Within each round of adding   returned. If the target product is not reached, however, then path-
a module, the PKS product is computed, and only the top N designs  ways to the most chemically similar non-PKS product with respect to
leading to the most chemically similar products progress onto the   the ﬁnal target are returned. When running longer post-PKS mod-
next recursive call. Here, N is a hyperparameter that can be set by the   iﬁcation pathways, users also have the option to choose from various
user and has a default value of 15. The speciﬁc metric of chemical   in-built DORAnet compound ﬁlters (such as the molecular weight
similarity used by RetroTide to compute the structural similarity   ﬁlter or the chemical similarity ﬁlter), so as to ensure that MINEs
between the current PKS product and a target product is also an   remain computationally tractable.
option that can be selected by the user. Users can choose between      Once post-PKS pathways have been elucidated, users can use the
computing the (1) Atom-Atom-Path similarity124, the (2) Atom pair   speciﬁc reaction rules that were involved in generating predicted
Tanimoto similarity125, or the (3) Tanimoto similarity using the MCS   reactions to search for UniProt identiﬁcation numbers128 of potentially
between the current PKS product and the target product either with   promiscuous  enzymes  present  within  either  JN1224MIN85  or
or  without  chirality.  After  RetroTide  has  completely ﬁnished   JN3604IMT86, that may be able to catalyze predicted reactions.



Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                                                          11


[PDF physical page 12]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y





Fig. 10 | RetroTide algorithm for the design of PKSs from a target chemical      the deﬁned target, and only the N (a user selectable parameter) top scoring designs
structure. The RetroTide algorithm has the following steps: a The user provides a   are retained. Next, steps (c) and (d) are repeated iteratively adding all possible
desired target chemical structure. b RetroTideloads all possible PKSstarter module    single PKS modules to the end of each of the best scoring designs from the previous
ﬁnal structures. c The cartesian product between all possible starters, and all        round, until scores stop increasing for each round and then the algorithm halts,
possible extension modules is used to compute all possible 1 module PKS products.   providing the best scoring designs to the user. Finally, the best scoring designs are
These extension module structures are pre-computed once and reused as Retro-     optionally “released” as lactone/lactam, or carboxylic acid products.
Tide runs. d All structures are compared with the user deﬁned similarity metric to




Machine-learning guided selection of post-PKS enzymatic       computed feasibility score to reﬂect both the thermodynamic fea-
pathways                                                                         sibility of a reaction as well as the likelihood of an enzyme trans-
Depending on the number of post-PKS modiﬁcation steps per-   forming a certain moiety at a given reaction site. After computing the
formed, the number of post-PKS pathways found between the PKS   feasibility score for all reactions in a pathway, a net feasibility score
product and the ﬁnal target may be too large to conceivably manu-   for the entire pathway is computed by taking the product of all
ally analyze in order to elucidate the most feasible pathway che-   constituent reactions’ feasibility scores. Instead of using the feasi-
mistries for experimentation. As such, our previously released    bility score, which is a continuous number between 0 and 1, users can
enzymatic reaction feasibility classiﬁer90 (https://github.com/tyo-nu/   also opt for a binary label on whether a predicted reaction would be
DORA_XGB) has been bundled into BioPKS pipeline to further rank   feasible or not using the built-in feasibility thresholds for the feasi-
post-PKS pathways in terms of their predicted feasibility scores    bility classiﬁer. We note here that even though we have used our
(Fig. 2). Feasibility scores are computed for each reaction in a path-  DORA-XGB model to rank DORAnet reactions and pathways, users
way by considering the SMILES strings of all participating species,   are able to use other metrics as well for pathway ranking. Beyond
i.e., substrates, products, and cofactors. Our reaction feasibility   reaction  feasibility and thermodynamics, this can even include
model is based on the gradient boosted trees architecture and was   intermediate toxicity, or pathway length. In future work, a multi-
trained using reported thermodynamically feasible reactions as   objective optimization involving all of these metrics using a different
positive data and thermodynamically infeasible as well as syntheti-   search algorithm, such as A* or monte carlo tree search may help to
cally generated infeasible reactions as negative data. This allows the  expand the accessible chemical space even further.



Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                                       12


[PDF physical page 13]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y


Thermodynamic calculations of post-PKS enzymatic pathways    pipeline GitHub repository [https://github.com/JBEI/BioPKS-Pipeline/
In order to further down-select predicted pathways, BioPKS pipeline   tree/main/notebooks].
also enables users to calculate the Gibbs free energies of reactions as
well as the maximum/minimum driving force (MDF) of multi-step  References
pathways129. The open-source software eQuilibrator 3.080 was used    1.     Keasling, J. D. Manufacturing molecules through metabolic engi-
to calculate the change in Gibbs free energy due to a reaction, ΔrG0.         neering. Science 330, 1355–1358 (2010).
eQuilibrator  3.0  uses  the component  contribution method  for    2.    Clomburg, J. M., Crumbley, A. M. & Gonzalez, R. Industrial bio-
ﬁrst estimating the standard Gibbs free energy change due to a        manufacturing: the future of chemical production. Science 355,
reaction, ΔrG  , by assuming reactant concentrations of 1 M. These       aag0804 (2017).
ΔrG ΔrG∘values are then transformed to our prespeciﬁed conditions of   3.    Choi, K. R. et al. Systems metabolic engineering strategies: inte-
temperature 298 K, ionic strength 0.25 M, pH 7.4, and pMg 3.0 to cal-         grating systems and synthetic biology with metabolic engineer-
culate ΔrG0 under common cellular conditions. Users can also adjust          ing. Trends Biotechnol. 37, 817–837 (2019).
these thermodynamic parameters in their calculations as desired.   4.    Ko, Y.-S. et al. Tools and strategies of systems metabolic engi-
In order to ensure that BioPKS pipeline is accessible to all, we did        neering for the development of microbial cell factories for che-
not  incorporate  eQuilibrator-assets  into  our  software and  only        mical production. Chem. Soc. Rev. 49, 4615–4636 (2020).
incorporated the general eQuilibrator API. Thus, if a pathway includes   5.    Fackler, N. et al. Stepping on the gas to a circular economy:
a compound not present within the eQuilibrator compound database,         accelerating development of carbon-negative chemical produc-
it cannot be decomposed into its groups and added to the database          tion from gas fermentation. Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng. 12,
linked below since doing so would require a ChemAxon license to cal-       439–470 (2021).
culate the pKa values of such compounds. Consequently, the change in   6.   The White House. Executive order on advancing biotechnology and
Gibbs free energy due to a reaction, ΔrG0 can only be computed for         biomanufacturing innovation for a sustainable, safe, and secure
predicted DORAnet reactions in which all participating compounds are        American bioeconomy. The White House (12 September 2022).
present in the eQuilibrator compound database, which in turn can be    7.    Boston Consulting Group (BCG). Synthetic biology is about to
obtained as a SQLite database through Zenodo (http://zenodo.org/         disrupt your industry. BCG Global Available at: https://www.bcg.
records/4128543).                                                             com/publications/2022/synthetic-biology-is-about-to-disrupt-
    Provided that the change in Gibbs free energy due to a reaction,         your-industry (2022).
ΔrG0 can be computed for all reactions along a multi-step pathway,   8.    Boston Consulting Group (BCG). Synthetic biology is getting
users can subsequently calculate the MDF of a post-PKS pathway. This         closer to industrial scale. BCG Global Available at: https://www.
calculation seeks a set of metabolite concentrations that minimizes the         bcg.com/capabilities/digital-technology-data/emerging-
ΔrG0 value of the most thermodynamically uphill or bottlenecked         technologies/expert-insights/nicolas-goeldel (2024).
reaction within a multi-step pathway.                                     9.    Lawson, C. E. et al. Machine learning for metabolic engineering: a
                                                                              review. Metab. Eng. 63, 34–60 (2021).
Mining of potential bio-based chemicals set                          10.   Carbonell, P., Radivojevic, T. & García Martín, H. Opportunities at
In order to collect a larger set of chemicals upon which we could        the intersection of synthetic biology, machine learning, and
validate BioPKS pipeline, we extracted 196 chemicals (Supplementary         automation. ACS Synth. Biol. 8, 1474–1477 (2019).
Data 3) from a list of 209 chemicals that could hypothetically be pro-    11.   Kumar, A., Wang, L., Ng, C. Y. & Maranas, C. D. Pathway design
duced by biomanufacturing as provided by Wu and colleagues        using de novo steps through uncharted biochemical spaces. Nat.
through genome  scale models of Saccharomyces  cerevisiae and       Commun. 9, 184 (2018).
Escherichia coli13. Not all 196 chemicals extracted have existing engi-    12.    Maitra, S. & Maitra, K. Chemistry of bioproducts. In Practices and
neered metabolic pathways for their production. Of these 196 chemi-         Perspectives in Sustainable Bioenergy: A Systems Thinking
cals, we ﬁltered out C1 metabolites, common cofactors, and any        Approach (eds. Mitra, M. & Nagchaudhuri, A.) 233–267 (Springer
sulfonated or chlorinated species (Supplementary Data 4), leaving us          India, 2020).
with 155 molecules in total (Supplementary Data  5). With these   13.   Wu, W., Long, M. R., Zhang, X., Reed, J. L. & Maravelias, C. T. A
remaining targets, we queried their KEGG identiﬁers against the KEGG        framework for the identiﬁcation of promising bio-based chemi-
database88 using their application programming interface (API) and          cals. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 115, 2328–2340 (2018).
were able to receive SMILES strings for all 155 molecules. For these 155   14.   Yim, H. et al. Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for direct
molecules, post-PKS modiﬁcations of up to two steps were used and        production of 1,4-butanediol. Nat. Chem. Biol. 7, 445–452 (2011).
pathways were identiﬁed by comparing the SMILES strings of post-PKS    15.   Raab, A. M., Gebhardt, G., Bolotina, N., Weuster-Botz, D. & Lang, C.
pathways exactly with that of targets.                                      Metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for the bio-
                                                                            technological production of succinic acid. Metab. Eng. 12,
Reporting summary                                                 518–525 (2010).
Further information on research design is available in the Nature   16.   Lee, S. Y. et al. A comprehensive metabolic map for production of
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.                          bio-based chemicals. Nat. Catal. 2, 18–33 (2019).
                                                                                      17.   Jang, W. D., Kim, G. B. & Lee, S. Y. An interactive metabolic map of
Data availability                                                    bio-based chemicals. Trends Biotechnol. 40, 1308–1311 (2022).
The retrobiosynthesis result data are available at GitHub [https://   18.   Matar, S. & Hatch, L. F. Chemistry of Petrochemical Processes
github.com/JBEI/BioPKS-Pipeline/tree/main/data].  Source  data  are          (Elsevier, 2001).
also provided with  this paper. Source data are provided with   19.   Sirirungruang, S., Markel, K. & Shih, P. M. Plant-based engineering
this paper.                                                                          for production of high-valued natural products. Nat. Prod. Rep. 39,
                                                                    1492–1509 (2022).
Code availability                                              20.   Jensen, P. R. Natural products and the gene cluster revolution.
BioPKS pipeline [https://github.com/JBEI/BioPKS-Pipeline], RetroTide        Trends Microbiol. 24, 968–977 (2016).
[https://github.com/JBEI/RetroTide], and DORAnet  [https://github.    21.   Schläpfer, P. et al. Genome-wide prediction of metabolic
com/wsprague-nu/doranet/tree/main] are  available  at GitHub.  All        enzymes, pathways, and gene clusters in plants. Plant Physiol. 173,
notebooks used in generating ﬁgures can be found on the BioPKS       2041–2059 (2017).



Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                                      13


[PDF physical page 14]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y


22.   Rokas, A., E. Mead, M., Steenwyk, L. & A. Raja, J. H. & H. Oberlies, N.   44.  Yuzawa, S., Backman, T. W. H., Keasling, J. D. & Katz, L. Synthetic
      Biosynthetic gene clusters and the evolution of fungal chemodi-         biology of polyketide synthases. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 45,
       versity. Nat. Prod. Rep. 37, 868–878 (2020).                          621–633 (2018).
23.   Grininger, M. Enzymology of assembly line synthesis by modular   45.  Yuzawa, S. et al. Comprehensive in vitro analysis of acyltransfer-
      polyketide synthases. Nat. Chem. Biol. 19, 401–415 (2023).              ase domain exchanges in modular polyketide synthases and its
24.   Nivina, A., Yuet, K. P., Hsu, J. & Khosla, C. Evolution and diversity of         application for short-chain ketone production. ACS Synth. Biol. 6,
      assembly-line polyketide synthases: focus review. Chem. Rev. 119,        139–147 (2017).
     12524–12547 (2019).                                            46.   Buyachuihan, L., Reiners, S., Zhao, Y. & Grininger, M. The malonyl/
25.   Khosla, C. Structures and mechanisms of polyketide synthases. J.         acetyl-transferase from murine fatty acid synthase is a pro-
     Org. Chem. 74, 6416–6420 (2009).                                miscuous engineering tool for editing polyketide scaffolds.
26.   Khosla, C., Tang, Y., Chen, A. Y., Schnarr, N. A. & Cane, D. E.          Commun. Chem. 7, 187 (2024).
      Structure and mechanism of the 6-deoxyerythronolide B syn-       47.   Kellenberger, L. et al. A polylinker approach to reductive loop
      thase. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 76, 195–221 (2007).                      swaps in modular polyketide synthases. ChemBioChem 9,
27.   Wagner, T. D., Trauner, D., Mihoreanu, L., Koert, U. & Hertweck, C.       2740–2749 (2008).
      α-methylation follows condensation in the gephyronic acid mod-   48.   Zargar, A. et al. Chemoinformatic-guided engineering of polyke-
      ular polyketide synthase. Chem. Commun. 52, 8822–8825 (2016).          tide synthases. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 9896–9901 (2020).
28.   Young, J. et al. Elucidation of gephyronic acid biosynthetic path-   49.  Hagen, A. et al. Engineering a polyketide synthase for in vitro
     way revealed unexpected SAM-dependent methylations. J. Nat.          production of adipic acid. ACS Synth. Biol. 5, 21–27 (2016).
      Prod. 76, 2269–2276 (2013).                                    50.  Montaño López, J., Duran, L. & Avalos, J. L. Physiological limita-
29.   Hertweck, C., Luzhetskyy, A., Rebets, Y. & Bechthold, A. Type II            tions and opportunities in microbial metabolic engineering. Nat.
      polyketide synthases: gaining a deeper insight into enzymatic            Rev. Microbiol. 20, 35–48 (2022).
     teamwork. Nat. Prod. Rep. 24, 162–190 (2007).                        51.   Rathnasingh, C. et al. Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid via
30.   Yu, D., Xu, F., Zeng, J. & Zhan, J. Type III polyketide synthases in         malonyl-CoA pathway using recombinant Escherichia coli strains.
      natural product biosynthesis. IUBMB Life 64, 285–295 (2012).                  J. Biotechnol. 157, 633–640 (2012).
31.   Keatinge-Clay, A. T. The structures of type I polyketide synthases.   52.    Inui, M. et al. Expression of Clostridium acetobutylicum butanol
      Nat. Prod. Rep. 29, 1050 (2012).                                          synthetic genes in Escherichia coli. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 77,
32.    Li, H., Cann, A. F. & Liao, J. C. Biofuels: biomolecular engineering        1305–1316 (2008).
     fundamentals and advances. Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng. 1,     53.   Atsumi, S. et al. Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for
     19–36 (2010).                                                           1-butanol production. Metab. Eng. 10, 305–311 (2008).
33.   Menzella, H. G. et al. Combinatorial polyketide biosynthesis by de   54.   Atsumi, S., Hanai, T. & Liao, J. C. Non-fermentative pathways for
     novo design and rearrangement of modular polyketide synthase          synthesis of branched-chain higher alcohols as biofuels. Nature
     genes. Nat. Biotechnol. 23, 1171–1176 (2005).                            451, 86–89 (2008).
34.   McDaniel, R., Ebert-Khosla, S., Hopwood, D. A. & Khosla, C. Engi-   55.   Nielsen, D. R. et al. Engineering alternative butanol production
      neering broader speciﬁcity into an antibiotic-producing polyke-          platforms in heterologous bacteria. Metab. Eng. 11, 262–273
      tide synthase. Science 279, 199–202 (1998).                             (2009).
35.   Zhu, X., Liu, J. & Zhang, W. De novo biosynthesis of terminal        56.   Trinh, C. T., Li, J., Blanch, H. W. & Clark, D. S. Redesigning
      alkyne-labeled natural products. Nat. Chem. Biol. 11,                      Escherichia coli metabolism for anaerobic production of iso-
      115–120 (2015).                                                         butanol. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77, 4894–4904 (2011).
36.   Porterﬁeld, W. B., Poenateetai, N. & Zhang, W. Engineered bio-      57.   Kim, J. & Copley, S. D. Inhibitory cross-talk upon introduction of a
      synthesis of alkyne-tagged polyketides by type I PKSs. iScience        new metabolic pathway into an existing metabolic network. Proc.
      23, 100943 (2020).                                                            Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, E2856–E2864 (2012).
37.   Musiol-Kroll, E. M. et al. Polyketide bioderivatization using the      58.   Sirirungruang, S. et al. Engineering site-selective incorporation of
     promiscuous acyltransferase KirCII. ACS Synth. Biol. 6,                  ﬂuorine into polyketides. Nat. Chem. Biol. 18, 886–893 (2022).
     1895–1903 (2017).                                               59.   Rittner, A. et al. Chemoenzymatic synthesis of ﬂuorinated poly-
38.   Englund, E. et al. Expanding extender substrate selection for              ketides. Nat. Chem. 14, 1000–1006 (2022).
      unnatural polyketide biosynthesis by acyltransferase domain       60.   Müller, K., Faeh, C. & Diederich, F. Fluorine in pharmaceuticals:
     exchange within a modular polyketide synthase. J. Am. Chem.           looking beyond intuition. Science 317, 1881–1886 (2007).
      Soc. 145, 8822–8832 (2023).                                          61.   O’Hagan, D. & Deng, H. Enzymatic ﬂuorination and biotechnolo-
39.   Kalkreuter, E., CroweTipton, J. M., Lowell, A. N., Sherman, D. H. &          gical developments of the ﬂuorinase. Chem. Rev. 115, 634–649
      Williams, G. J. Engineering the substrate speciﬁcity of a modular          (2015).
      polyketide synthase for installation of consecutive non-natural      62.   Carbonell, P., Parutto, P., Baudier, C., Junot, C. & Faulon, J.-L.
     extender units. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 1961–1969 (2019).                 Retropath: automated pipeline for embedded metabolic circuits.
40.   Malico, A. A., Nichols, L. & Williams, G. J. Synthetic biology           ACS Synth. Biol. 3, 565–577 (2014).
      enabling access to designer polyketides. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol.   63.   Delépine, B., Duigou, T., Carbonell, P. & Faulon, J.-L. RetroPath2.0:
      58, 45–53 (2020).                                                a retrosynthesis workﬂow for metabolic engineers. Metab. Eng.
41.   Goranovič, D. et al. Origin of the allyl group in FK506 biosynthesis.        45, 158–170 (2018).
        J. Biol. Chem. 285, 14292–14300 (2010).                          64.   Hatzimanikatis, V. et al. Exploring the diversity of complex meta-
42.  Mo, S. et al. Biosynthesis of the allylmalonyl-CoA extender unit for         bolic networks. Bioinformatics 21, 1603–1609 (2005).
      the FK506 polyketide synthase proceeds through a dedicated      65.   Gricourt, G., Meyer, P., Duigou, T. & Faulon, J.-L. Artiﬁcial intelli-
      polyketide synthase and facilitates the mutasynthesis of analo-         gence methods and models for retro-biosynthesis: a scoping
      gues. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 976–985 (2011).                            review. ACS Synth. Biol. 13, 2276–2294 (2024).
43.   Jez, J. M., Bowman, M. E. & Noel, J. P. Expanding the biosynthetic   66.   Yu, T. et al. Machine learning-enabled retrobiosynthesis of mole-
      repertoire of plant type III polyketide synthases by altering starter         cules. Nat. Catal. 6, 137–151 (2023).
     molecule speciﬁcity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 5319–5324      67.   Koch, M., Duigou, T. & Faulon, J.-L. Reinforcement learning for
      (2002).                                                                    bioretrosynthesis. ACS Synth. Biol. 9, 157–168 (2020).



Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                                   14


[PDF physical page 15]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y


68.   Carbonell, P. et al. An automated design-build-test-learn pipeline   89.  Schomburg, I. et al. The BRENDA enzyme information
      for enhanced microbial production of ﬁne chemicals. Commun.         system–from a database to an expert system. J. Biotechnol. 261,
       Biol. 1, 66 (2018).                                               194–206 (2017).
69.  Zheng, S. et al. Deep learning driven biosynthetic pathways       90.   Chainani, Y., Ni, Z., Shebek, K. M., Broadbelt, L. J. & Tyo, K. E. J.
      navigation for natural products with BioNavi-NP. Nat. Commun. 13,       DORA-XGB: an improved enzymatic reaction feasibility classiﬁer
     3342 (2022).                                                             trained using a novel synthetic data approach. Mol. Syst. Des. Eng.
70.   Levin, I., Liu, M., Voigt, C. & Coley, C. Merging enzymatic and             10, 129–142 (2025).
      synthetic chemistry with computational synthesis planning. Nat.    91.   Robbins, T., Kapilivsky, J., Cane, D. E. & Khosla, C. Roles of con-
    Commun. 13, 7747 (2022).                                           served active site residues in the ketosynthase domain of an
71.   Finnigan, W., Hepworth, L. J., Flitsch, S. L. & Turner, N. J. Retro-         assembly line polyketide synthase. Biochemistry 55, 4476–4484
      BioCat as a computer-aided synthesis planning tool for biocata-           (2016).
       lytic reactions and cascades. Nat. Catal. 4, 98–104 (2021).          92.   Dan, Q. et al. A polyketide-based biosynthetic platform for
72.   Chen, S. & Jung, Y. Deep retrosynthetic reaction prediction           diols, amino alcohols and hydroxy acids. Nat. Catal. 2025,
     using local reactivity and global attention. JACS Au 1,                1–15 (2025).
     1612–1620 (2021).                                              93.   Choi, S. et al. Production of 4-hydroxybutyric acid by metaboli-
73.   Dong, J., Zhao, M., Liu, Y., Su, Y. & Zeng, X. Deep learning in ret-           cally engineered Mannheimia succiniciproducens and its conver-
      rosynthesis planning: datasets, models and tools. Brief. Bioinform.         sion to γ-butyrolactone by acid treatment. Metab. Eng. 20,
      23, bbab391 (2022).                                            73–83 (2013).
74.   Upadhyay, V., Anand, M. & Maranas, C. D. novoStoic2.0: an inte-    94.   Choi, S., Kim, H. U., Kim, T. Y. & Lee, S. Y. Systematic engineering
      grated framework for pathway synthesis, thermodynamic eva-            of TCA cycle for optimal production of a four-carbon platform
       luation, and enzyme selection. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1101/        chemical 4-hydroxybutyric acid in Escherichia coli. Metab. Eng.
     2024.09.27.615368 (2024).                                           38, 264–273 (2016).
75.   Dejong, C. A. et al. Polyketide and nonribosomal peptide retro-     95.   Hein, S., Söhling, B., Gottschalk, G. & Steinbüchel, A. Biosynthesis
      biosynthesis and global gene cluster matching. Nat. Chem. Biol.          of poly(4-hydroxybutyric acid) by recombinant strains of Escher-
       12, 1007–1014 (2016).                                                         ichia coli1. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 153, 411–418 (2006).
76.   Skinnider, M. A. et al. Comprehensive prediction of secondary      96.   Min, K. et al. Conversion of levulinic acid to 2-butanone by acet-
      metabolite structure and biological activity from microbial gen-          oacetate decarboxylase from Clostridium acetobutylicum. Appl.
    ome sequences. Nat. Commun. 11, 6058 (2020).                          Microbiol. Biotechnol. 97, 5627–5634 (2013).
77.    Blin, K. et al. antiSMASH 6.0: improving cluster detection and      97.   Fadda, S., Lebert, A., Leroy-Sétrin, S. & Talon, R. Decarboxylase
     comparison capabilities. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, W29–W35 (2021).          activity involved in methyl ketone production by Staphylococcus
78.   Terlouw, B. R. et al. MIBiG 3.0: a community-driven effort to             carnosus 833, a strain used in sausage fermentation. FEMS
      annotate experimentally validated biosynthetic gene clusters.             Microbiol. Lett. 210, 209–214 (2002).
      Nucleic Acids Res. 51, D603–D610 (2023).                        98.   Park, J. et al. Synthesis of methyl ketones by metabolically engi-
79.   Kautsar, S. A., Suarez Duran, H. G., Blin, K., Osbourn, A. & Medema,        neered Escherichia coli. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 39,
     M. H. plantiSMASH: automated identiﬁcation, annotation and            1703–1712 (2012).
      expression analysis of plant biosynthetic gene clusters. Nucleic    99.   Lee, H., DeLoache, W. C. & Dueber, J. E. Spatial organization of
      Acids Res. 45, W55–W63 (2017).                                 enzymes for metabolic engineering. Metab. Eng. 14, 242–251
80.   Beber, M. E. et al. eQuilibrator 3.0: a database solution for ther-           (2012).
     modynamic constant estimation. Nucleic Acids Res. 50,           100.  Sun, X. et al. Metabolic pathway assembly using docking domains
    D603–D609 (2022).                                             from type I cis-AT polyketide synthases. Nat. Commun. 13,
81.   Wang, L., Upadhyay, V. & Maranas, C. D. dGPredictor: automated        5541 (2022).
      fragmentation method for metabolic reaction free energy pre-      101.  Vaithegi, K. & Prasad, K. R. Total synthesis of (−)-cryptofolione.
      diction and de novo pathway design. PLoS Comput. Biol. 17,             Tetrahedron 79, 131842 (2021).
     e1009448 (2021).                                                 102.  Trefzer, A. et al. Biosynthetic gene cluster of simocyclinone, a
82.   Zhang, Y., Yang, Y. & Zhang, Y. α-Pyrones and their derivatives from         natural multihybrid antibiotic. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 46,
     two Cryptocarya species. Phytochemistry 39, 481–485 (1995).              1174–1182 (2002).
83.   Iinuma, H. et al. Basidalin, a new antibiotic from basidiomycetes. J.   103.  Kakavas, S. J., Katz, L. & Stassi, D. Identiﬁcation and character-
       Antibiot. 36, 448–450 (1983).                                                ization of the niddamycin polyketide synthase genes from Strep-
84.   Tao, X. B. et al. ClusterCAD 2.0: an updated computational plat-        tomyces caelestis. J. Bacteriol. 179, 7515–7522 (1997).
     form for chimeric type I polyketide synthase and nonribosomal     104.  Acosta, J. A., Muddala, R., Barbosa, L. C. & Boukouvalas, J. Total
     peptide synthetase design. Nucleic Acids Res. 51, D532–D537            synthesis of the antitumor antibiotic basidalin. J. Org. Chem. 81,
      (2023).                                                    6883–6886 (2016).
85.   Ni, Z., Stine, A. E., Tyo, K. E. J. & Broadbelt, L. J. Curating a com-    105.  Keatinge-Clay, A. T. Stereocontrol within polyketide assembly
      prehensive set of enzymatic reaction rules for efﬁcient novel               lines. Nat. Prod. Rep. 33, 141–149 (2016).
      biosynthetic pathway design. Metab. Eng. 65, 79–87 (2021).        106.  Weissman, K. J. Polyketide stereocontrol: a study in chemical
86.   Ni, Z. Data-Driven Approaches to Predict and Utilize Enzyme Pro-          biology. Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 13, 348–371 (2017).
      miscuity for Novel Biosynthesis Design. ProQuest Dissertations      107.  Hall, M. Enzymatic strategies for asymmetric synthesis. RSC
     and Theses (Northwestern University, 2022).                       Chem. Biol. 2, 958–989 (2021).
87.   Caspi, R. et al. The MetaCyc database of metabolic pathways and   108.  Heid, E., Probst, D., Green, W. H. & Madsen, G. K. EnzymeMap:
     enzymes – a 2019 update. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, D445–D453             curation, validation and data-driven prediction of enzymatic
      (2020).                                                                    reactions. Chem. Sci. 14, 14229–14242 (2023).
88.   Kanehisa, M., Furumichi, M., Tanabe, M., Sato, Y. & Morishima, K.   109.  Duigou, T., du Lac, M., Carbonell, P. & Faulon, J.-L. RetroRules: a
     KEGG: new perspectives on genomes, pathways, diseases and          database of reaction rules for engineering biology. Nucleic Acids
      drugs. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, D353–D361 (2017).                         Res. 47, D1229–D1235 (2019).




Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                                        15


[PDF physical page 16]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y


110.  Wiest, O., Bauer, C., Helquist, P., Norrby, P. O. & Genheden, S.     authors would like to acknowledge Matthew Incha and Patrick Kinnuen
      Finding relevant retrosynthetic disconnections for stereo-           for their reading of the manuscript and corresponding feedback. This
      controlled reactions. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 64, 5796–5805 (2024).   research project was supported in part through the computational
111.   Upadhyay, V., Boorla, V. S. & Maranas, C. D. Rank-ordering of      resources and staff contributions provided by the Quest High-
     known enzymes as starting points for re-engineering novel sub-    Performance Computing Cluster at Northwestern University, which is
      strate activity using a convolutional neural network. Metab. Eng.     jointly supported by the Ofﬁce of the Provost, the Ofﬁce of Research,
      78, 171–182 (2023).                                       and Northwestern University Information Technology. This research also
112.   Carbonell, P. et al. Selenzyme: enzyme selection tool for pathway   used resources of the National Energy Research Scientiﬁc Computing
      design. Bioinformatics 34, 2153–2154 (2018).                     Center (NERSC), a Department of Energy Ofﬁce of Science User Facility
113.   Dalkiran, A. et al. ECPred: a tool for the prediction of the enzymatic   using NERSC award ERCAP0028489.
      functions of protein sequences based on the EC nomenclature.
    BMC Bioinform. 19, 1–13 (2018).                      Author contributions
114.  Yu, T. et al. Enzyme function prediction using contrastive learning.   Y.C.: Methodology and software, data curation, writing—original draft
     Science 379, 1358–1363 (2023).                             and subsequent edits, visualization—generated the ﬁgures in this
115.  Chowdhury, A. & Maranas, C. D. Designing overall stoichiometric   manuscript. J.D.: methodology and software, M.G.S.: methodology and
      conversions and intervening metabolic reactions. Sci. Rep. 5,       software, V.B.: methodology and software, Q.Z.: methodology and
     16009 (2015).                                                     software, W.S.: methodology and software, K.E.J.T.: writing—review and
116.  Porokhin, V. et al. Analysis of metabolic network disruption in       editing, were the principal investigators who directed this project,
     engineered microbial hosts due to enzyme promiscuity. Metab.    contributed to the data analysis and interpretation, as well as edited the
      Eng. Commun. 12, e00170 (2021).                                manuscript. L.J.B.: conceptualization—conceptualized the approach of
117.   Arnold, F. H. Design by directed evolution. Acc. Chem. Res. 31,      this study. Investigation. Formal analysis. Writing—review and editing,
      125–131 (1998).                                           were the principal investigators who directed this project, contributed to
118.  Wang, Y. et al. Directed evolution: methodologies and applica-     the data analysis and interpretation, as well as edited the manuscript.
       tions. Chem. Rev. 121, 12384–12444 (2021).                         A.M.: conceptualization— conceptualized the approach of this study.
119.  Dauparas, J. et al. Robust deep learning–based protein sequence   Investigation. Formal analysis. Writing— review and editing, the principal
     design using ProteinMPNN. Science 378, 49–56 (2022).             investigators who directed this project, contributed to the data analysis
120.  Watson, J. L. et al. De novo design of protein structure and func-   and interpretation, as well as edited the manuscript. J.D.K.: con-
      tion with RFdiffusion. Nature 620, 1089–1100 (2023).              ceptualization—conceptualized the approach of this study. Investiga-
121.  Nava, A. A., Roberts, J., Haushalter, R. W., Wang, Z. & Keasling, J. D.    tion. Formal analysis. Writing—review and editing, were the principal
     Module-based polyketide synthase engineering for de novo         investigators who directed this project, contributed to the data analysis
      polyketide biosynthesis. ACS Synth. Biol. 12, 3148–3155 (2023).    and interpretation, as well as edited the manuscript. H.G.M.: con-
122.  Jumper, J. et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with   ceptualization— conceptualized the approach of this study. Investiga-
      AlphaFold. Nature 596, 583–589 (2021).                                tion. Formal analysis. Writing— review and editing, were the principal
123.  Orsi, M. & Reymond, J.-L. One chiral ﬁngerprint to ﬁnd them all. J.   investigators who directed this project, contributed to the data analysis
     Cheminform. 16, 53 (2024).                                and interpretation, as well as edited the manuscript. T.W.H.B.: metho-
124.  Gobbi, A., Giannetti, A. M., Chen, H. & Lee, M. L. Atom-atom-path   dology and software, data curation, conceptualization —conceptualized
       similarity and sphere exclusion clustering: tools for prioritizing     the approach of this study. Investigation. Formal analysis. Writing —
     fragment hits. J. Cheminform. 7, 1–11 (2015).                      review and editing, were the principal investigators who directed this
125.  Carhart, R. E., Smith, D. H. & Venkataraghavan, R. Atom pairs as     project, contributed to the data analysis and interpretation, as well as
     molecular features in structure–activity studies: deﬁnition and      edited the manuscript.
      applications. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 25, 64–73 (1985).
126.  Mabesoone, M. F. et al. Evolution-guided engineering of trans-   Competing interests
      acyltransferase polyketide synthases. Science 383,                   J.D.K. has ﬁnancial interests in Amyris, Ansa Biotechnologies, Apertor
      1312–1317 (2024).                                            Pharma, Berkeley Yeast, Cyklos Materials, Demetrix, Lygos, Napigen,
127.  Shebek, K. M., Strutz, J., Broadbelt, L. J. & Tyo, K. E. Pickaxe: a      ResVita Bio, and Zero Acre Farms. The other authors declare no com-
     Python library for the prediction of novel metabolic reactions.      peting interests.
    BMC Bioinform. 24, 106 (2023).
128.  The UniProt Consortium et al. UniProt: the Universal Protein      Additional information
     Knowledgebase in 2025. Nucleic Acids Res. 53, D609–D617       Supplementary information The online version contains
      (2025).                                                     supplementary material available at
129.  Noor, E. et al. Pathway thermodynamics highlights kinetic obstacles   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y.
       in central metabolism. PLoS Comput. Biol. 10, e1003483 (2014).
                                                            Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Acknowledgements                                               Tyler W. H. Backman.
This work was funded in part by the DOE Joint BioEnergy Institute,
supported by the U. S. Department of Energy Ofﬁce of Science’s Bio-    Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Martin Gri-
logical and Environmental Research (BER) program, through contract     ninger, Karthik Raman and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their
DE-AC02-05CH11231 between Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory    contribution to the peer review of this work. A peer review ﬁle is avail-
and the U.S. Department of Energy. Funding for Y.C. for this study was    able.
partly provided by the Northwestern University Graduate School Cluster
in Biotechnology, Systems, and Synthetic Biology, which is afﬁliated     Reprints and permissions information is available at
with the Biotechnology training program. The funding for M.G.S. was     http://www.nature.com/reprints
partly provided by the Northwestern University DeFeo Family Under-
graduate Research Fellowship in Synthetic Biology and partly by the      Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
Northwestern University Summer Undergraduate Research Award. The    isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.



Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                                    16


[PDF physical page 17]
Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-61160-y


Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed
material. You do not have permission under this licence toshare adapted
material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third
party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.


© The Author(s) 2025





Nature Communications| (2025)16:5787                                                                                           17