Review                                                                                                                                                      Clinical Microbiology Reviews


FUTURE DIRECTIONS AND CONCLUSION

Current therapies for invasive fungal infections face significant limitations, including
a narrow range of drug targets, suboptimal fungicidal activity, and risk of host toxic­
ity. Although there is an urgent need for novel antifungal agents, drug development
has been challenged by the high degree of conservation between fungal and human
biology as well as the increasing prevalence of multidrug-resistant yeast strains. Taken
together, these considerations position the CoA biosynthesis pathway as a compelling
drug target due to its essential role in fungal metabolism and the presence of key
differences between yeast and human enzymatic machinery (22). Considerable progress
has been made in targeting the pathway’s first step, pantothenate phosphorylation
by PanK. Structural analogs of pantothenate and non-substrate inhibitors such as
pyrimidinone-triazoles that compete for the PanK substrate binding sites have demon­
strated particularly promising antifungal effects (26, 96). Moreover, general disruption
of CoA metabolism has been shown to sensitize fungi to a wide range of clinically
approved antifungals and other xenobiotics, underscoring the potential for CoA-target­
ing strategies to enhance the therapeutic efficacy and safety of existing treatments
while also mitigating the development of resistance (25, 27). Moving forward, medic­
inal chemistry optimization will be essential to address pharmacological challenges,
improving compound potency, oral bioavailability, and activity against clinically relevant
wild-type fungal strains where efflux and nutrient competition reduce drug effective
ness, while minimizing host  off-target  effects. Whether a CoA targeting inhibitor
advances as a standalone drug or as a potentiator will depend on the extent of
enzyme inhibition that can be achieved. Near-complete inhibition would be required
for standalone efficacy, whereas compounds that do not fully block enzyme function
can still serve effectively as potentiators to restore susceptibility to existing antifungal
agents. Early pharmacokinetic and toxicity studies will be critical for identifying which





FIG 7  Proposed model illustrating how CoA metabolism modulates antifungal drug susceptibility. Inhibition of CoA biosynthesis decreases acetyl-CoA
production, disrupting vacuolar function and impairing cellular detoxification mechanism. Impaired detoxification renders fungal cells highly susceptible to
antifungal agents.

June 2026 Volume 39   Issue 2                                                                                                  10.1128/cmr.00307-2518