Review                                                                                                                                                      Clinical Microbiology Reviews


the cab1G351S mutant (with reduced PanK activity) were approximately five times more
susceptible to amphotericin B compared to wild-type yeast and that this increased
susceptibility could be overcome by supplementation with high levels of pantothenate.
These observations were recapitulated by pharmacological treatment of wild-type yeast
with α-PanAm, which likewise increased their susceptibility to amphotericin B. Although
the cab1ts mutant is resistant to amorolfine, fluconazole, and terbinafine, later studies
revealed that this resistance phenotype is not attributable to mutations in the CAB1
gene (27). In contracts, analysis of a “genetically cleaner” strain lacking chromosomal
CAB1 but carrying the cab1G351S allele revealed that the G351S substitution confers
increased susceptibility to all antifungal drugs tested (27). Similarly, mutations affecting
other residues in the CAB1 gene (e.g., cab1N290I and cab1S158A) also showed increased
susceptibility to a broad spectrum of antifungals (27). This PanK-modulation of antifungal
susceptibility extends beyond yeast as genetic studies in A. fumigatus showed that the
PanK gene (AfPanK) is essential for viability and that downregulation of its expression
under the regulatory control of the nitrogen-regulated niiA (nitrate reductase) promoter
results in increased susceptibility to voriconazole (26).

Vacuolar and mitochondrial function as key mediators of drug susceptibility

The precise mechanism by which reduced CoA biosynthesis activity leads to increased
drug susceptibility has only recently been elucidated. Recent studies showed that
yeast expressing various hypomorphic cab1 variants (cab1G351S, cab1N290I, or cab1S158A)
displayed enhanced susceptibility not only to antifungals targeting ergosterol biosyn­
thesis (amphotericin  B, terbinafine, fluconazole) but also to compounds targeting
unrelated pathways (caspofungin, hygromycin B, cycloheximide) and to metal stress
(excess copper and iron) (27). Mechanistic analyses revealed that, compared to their
wild-type counterparts, these PanK-deficient yeast mutants had enlarged vacuoles,
diminished vacuolar detoxification capacity, abnormal mitochondrial morphology, and
elevated levels of reactive oxygen species (27). Taken together, these findings support a
model whereby defective CoA biosynthesis leads to altered vacuolar detoxification and
mitochondrial function, which, in turn, enhances fungal sensitivity to a wide range of
agents (Fig. 7). Further evidence for this model came from experiments using a yeast
mutant strain expressing the acetyl-CoA synthetase ACS2 under a tet-off (doxycycline-
repressible) promoter, as well as wild-type yeast treated with the pantazine PZ-2891
or the celecoxib derivative AR-12, which were found to inhibit acetyl-CoA synthetase
(27). These enzymes function immediately downstream of CoA biosynthesis to convert
CoA into acetyl-CoA (Fig. 7). In these studies, reduced expression or inhibition of ACS
activity led to increased yeast sensitivity to multiple clinically approved antifungals (27).
These results suggest that disruption of acetyl-CoA production alone is sufficient to
confer broad-spectrum antifungal susceptibility. Consistent with these findings, PZ-2891
significantly potentiated the efficacy of amphotericin B, caspofungin, and terbinafine in
C. albicans and of caspofungin in A. fumigatus (27). Since acetyl-CoA acts as a central
metabolic node essential for multiple processes (including ergosterol biosynthesis and
membrane maintenance), we propose that defective acetyl-CoA production may be the
key mediator linking CoA metabolism to vacuolar and mitochondrial dysfunction that
ultimately drives increased drug susceptibility.
   Collectively, these findings suggest that drug candidates targeting CoA metabolism
and acetyl-CoA biosynthesis (the PCA pathway) could serve as potentiators of clinically
approved antifungals when used in combination. By increasing fungal susceptibility,
such candidates may improve the efficacy and safety profiles of existing antifungals by
reducing the dosage or treatment duration necessary to eliminate infection. Further­
more, since increased drug detoxification is a well-established mechanism underlying
multidrug resistance, the ability of CoA-targeting drugs to impair vacuolar function
suggests that they may help counteract the development of antifungal resistance (47).



June 2026 Volume 39   Issue 2                                                                                                  10.1128/cmr.00307-2517