Review                                                                                                                                                      Clinical Microbiology Reviews





FIG 5 Sequence alignment of S. cerevisiae Cab1 and human PanK3. Pairwise sequence alignment of fungal Cab1 and human PanK3 showing conserved catalytic
motifs and divergent regions involved in ATP and pantothenate binding. Cab1 and human PanK3 share approximately 36% sequence identity and 53% sequence
similarity across their primary sequences. Conserved residues within the catalytic pockets of both enzymes are highlighted in orange, while divergent residues
within the ATP-binding and pantothenate-binding regions are highlighted in purple and green, respectively.


drug targets. Interestingly, whereas fungi have two separate genes (CAB4 and CAB5) that
encode enzymes performing the PPAT and DPCK activities, respectively, humans have
only one gene (COASY) encoding a single bifunctional enzyme capable of catalyzing
both activities (101). These structural and organizational divergences suggest that the
final steps in CoA biosynthesis may present opportunities for selectively targeting fungal
enzymes without affecting their human counterparts.

PANTOTHENATE KINASE AS A TARGET FOR ANTIFUNGAL DRUG DEVELOP­
MENT

The CoA biosynthesis pathway remains an underexplored yet attractive pathway for
antifungal drug development due to its essential role in fungal metabolism and the
key differences between human and fungal enzymes. To date, most research aimed at
identifying novel drug candidates targeting CoA biosynthesis has focused on developing
small-molecule inhibitors of fungal PanK (26, 80).

Pantothenate analogs

Given the essential role of enzymes involved in pantothenate utilization in the viability
and pathogenicity of several human pathogens, structural analogs of pantothenate have
long been explored as potential antimicrobial agents (102, 103). Pantothenate analogs

June 2026 Volume 39   Issue 2                                                                                                  10.1128/cmr.00307-2513