Review                                                                                                                                                      Clinical Microbiology Reviews





FIG 6  Inhibitors of the PCA pathway. Chemical structures of pantothenate analogs, pyrimidone triazoles, and MNS that inhibit fungal Pank activity and the
pantazines and AR12 that inhibit fungal ACS activity.


Gihaz et al. (26). The screen used purified A. fumigatus PanK (AfPanK) to interrogate
a library of 156,593 chemically diverse compounds, taking advantage of the enzyme’s
amenability to large-scale production, stability in vitro, and robust kinetic properties.
The combination of the chemical screen and the availability of the Cab1p structure was
instrumental in identifying and advancing a lead chemotype, the pyrimidone triazoles
(PTZs), for structure-based optimization of novel antifungal drugs targeting PanK (Fig.
6). These compounds act as lead inhibitors that compete with pantothenate for binding
to the PanK active site of A. fumigatus (26). The PTZ compounds demonstrated broad-
spectrum antifungal activity against C. albicans, N. glabrata, and C. parapsilosis in vitro
(26). This activity was dependent on the concentration of pantothenate in the culture
medium, with high pantothenate levels leading to diminished antifungal efficacy (26).
In vitro efficacy studies using a S. cerevisiae strain with impaired drug efflux (“monster”
strain) demonstrated the importance of efflux pumps in the reduced potency of these
compounds in wild-type fungi. While further optimization of the PTZ chemotype is
warranted to improve  its pharmacological properties, the lack of inhibitory activity
against human PanKs (and modeling data suggesting distinct binding interactions in
fungal vs human PanK) indicates that this class of compounds remains a promising
starting point for antifungal drug development (26). In addition to the PTZ series,
a chemically distinct scaffold, 3,4-methylenedioxy-β-nitrostyrene (MNS), was identified
through biochemical screening of purified C. albicans PanK, followed by validation in C.
albicans strains with regulated CAB1 expression (80). MNS functions as an ATP-competi­
tive inhibitor of C. albicans PanK, lowering intracellular CoA pools in a target-dependent
manner while showing minimal activity against human PanK isoforms (80). Structural
modeling, guided by the S. cerevisiae Cab1p crystal structure, suggests that MNS may
bind to the Candida Cab1 enzyme (80). MNS exhibited antifungal activity in vitro, with
MIC₅₀ values in the low micromolar range and reduced kidney fungal burden in murine
candidiasis models. However, the compound also inhibits the host NLRP3 inflammasome
(113, 114), suppressing IL-1β production, which counteracts antifungal efficacy at higher
doses (80). These off-target effects limit the drug development potential of MNS in its

June 2026 Volume 39   Issue 2                                                                                                  10.1128/cmr.00307-2515