Review                                                                                                                                                      Clinical Microbiology Reviews


polysaccharide β-glucan, a key structural component of the fungal cell wall (Fig. 1) (53).
Because the cell wall is a structure absent in human cells, echinocandins notably exhibit
minimal host toxicity (53).
   Since  their  approval, echinocandins have  gradually become a cornerstone  of
antifungal therapy due to their fungicidal activity against azole-resistant fungi, including
most Candida and Aspergillus species (55). Despite success in this context, clinical cases
of echinocandin resistance have been steadily rising, particularly among certain Candida
species where acquired mutations in the FKS1 and FKS2 genes prevent drug binding (56).
Other limitations of echinocandins include their lack of efficacy against Mucormycetes,
Cryptococcus spp., or Fusarium species (57, 58) and the requirement for intravenous
administration (53).

LIMITATIONS OF CLINICALLY APPROVED ANTIFUNGAL AGENTS

Despite the availability of these four approved drug classes, mortality rates range from
20% to 90% for invasive Candida, C. auris, Cryptococcus, and Aspergillus infections,
highlighting the urgent need for a new generation of systemically active drugs (7). One
of the most significant limitations of current antifungal therapies is their narrow target
profile, as nearly all act to disrupt ergosterol levels in the cell membrane, β-glucan levels
in the cell wall or nucleic acid metabolism. This paucity of targets is concerning due to
the high risk of cross-resistance associated with drugs that act on the same pathways
(59). However, new drug targets have proven difficult to identify because fungi are
eukaryotic organisms that share many molecular components with humans. As a result,
many candidate compounds that demonstrate promising antifungal activity in vitro have
failed to be clinically viable in vivo due to associated host toxicity (60).
   Beyond the need for drugs with novel targets and favorable safety profiles, there is
also a growing emphasis on new drugs exhibiting more rapid fungicidal activity (28).
Many of the most widely used antifungals are only fungistatic, inhibiting fungal growth
but ultimately relying on the immune system to clear the infection (61). This limitation
is of special concern in immunocompromised patients with weak immune systems, a
population that comprises a growing proportion of those with invasive systemic mycoses
in both the developed and developing worlds (62).
   Furthermore, the overuse of a limited set of antifungals has contributed to the
emergence of multidrug-resistant fungal strains, such as C. auris and A. fumigatus (12,
63). Genetic studies of these resistant strains have revealed mutations in genes that
regulate xenobiotic efflux and increase drug detoxification capacity, as well as mutations
in mismatch repair genes (such as MSH1) that facilitate the accumulation of additional
pro-survival mutations (28, 47, 64). These findings highlight the need for antifungal
strategies that target resistance-associated pathways to increase the efficacy and durable
lifetime of both existing and future therapies.

EMERGING ANTIFUNGAL AGENTS IN DEVELOPMENT

Over the past decade, extensive research efforts have yielded several new antifungal
agents aimed at overcoming the limitations of existing therapies. Some of these
compounds, including ibrexafungerp (approved in 2021), oteseconazole (2022), and
rezafungin (2023), have received FDA approval, while others such as fosmanogepix,
olorofim, and ATI-2307 are advancing through clinical evaluation (65). These new agents
include both next-generation derivatives that improve the pharmacological and safety
profiles of established drug classes, as well as entirely new chemical entities that act
through previously unexploited molecular mechanisms (65, 66). Below, we summarize
key examples of these emerging antifungal agents currently in clinical or advanced
preclinical development.

Cell wall-targeting agents

Rezafungin and ibrexafungerp represent next-generation glucan synthase inhibitors that
build upon the echinocandin scaffold. Rezafungin, a long-acting echinocandin with a

June 2026 Volume 39   Issue 2                                                                                                      10.1128/cmr.00307-25 6