Review                                                                                                                                                      Clinical Microbiology Reviews





FIG 1  Cellular targets of clinically approved antifungal drugs. Clinically approved antifungal agents act in distinct cellular pathways. Azoles inhibit lanosterol
14α-demethylase on the ergosterol biosynthetic pathway, allylamines inhibit squalene epoxidase, and polyenes bind ergosterol at the plasma membrane.
Echinocandins inhibit β-1,3-glucan synthase in the cell wall, flucytosine interferes with RNA and DNA synthesis. Representative drugs and approval years are
indicated.


   Despite its high potency, clinical use of amphotericin B has been largely limited
to severe systemic infections (such as cryptococcal meningitis) due to its associated
host  toxicity  (28). This  toxicity most often manifests as renal dysfunction arising
from interactions between amphotericin B and cholesterol, the human counterpart of
ergosterol that is enriched in the plasma membranes of kidney cells (36). In the 1990s,
the development and clinical approval of lipid formulations (e.g., liposomal amphotericin
B, AmBisome) significantly reduced the nephrotoxicity associated with amphotericin B
treatment without altering its fungicidal activity (28). Nonetheless, more widespread
use of amphotericin B remains limited by its requirement for intravenous administration
and the existence of intrinsically resistant fungal strains with low ergosterol content
(37). Several efforts during the past decade have focused on addressing these limita­
tions through the discovery of new polyenes or amphotericin B derivatives for treating
systemic fungal infection (38). This has resulted in a number of such compounds in
various phases of development that exhibit reduced host toxicity, greater solubility
(enabling oral administration), and an ability to target multiple fungal membrane lipids
to combat primary and acquired resistance (39–41).

Pyrimidine analogs

Following amphotericin B, flucytosine was the next first-in-class antifungal drug to
be clinically approved in the 1970s. Flucytosine  is a pyrimidine analog of cytosine
that is converted by fungal cytosine deaminase to the toxic compound 5-fluorouracil.
5-Fluorouracil competes with uracil for incorporation into nascent RNA, leading to a
direct disruption of global RNA synthesis and indirect impairment of protein synthe­
sis (Fig. 1) (42). 5-Fluorouracil can further be metabolized into 5-fluorodeoxyuridine
monophosphate (FdUMP), which potently inhibits thymidylate synthase, a key enzyme
in DNA synthesis (Fig. 1) (42). Notably, since the human genome does not encode a
cytosine deaminase capable of converting flucytosine, the drug’s toxic effects are largely
restricted to fungi when it is administered at a pharmacological dose (43). However, the

June 2026 Volume 39   Issue 2                                                                                                      10.1128/cmr.00307-25 4