Review                                                                                                                                                      Clinical Microbiology Reviews


mechanisms of drug detoxification and multidrug resistance. Collectively, these findings
establish CoA metabolism as a compelling target for the next generation of antifun­
gal therapies, offering a multipronged strategy to overcome the limitations of current
treatment options and reduce fungal-related mortality.

KEYWORDS  antifungal agents, coenzyme A, Acetyl CoA, PCA pathway, vitamin B5,
pantothenate kinase, pyrimidone triazoles, vacuoles, fungi, multidrug resistance

INTRODUCTION

    ungal  infections  represent a growing  public  health burden,  contributing  to
    significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. More than one billion individualsF
globally are estimated to be affected by fungal diseases, ranging from superficial local
infections to more severe, life-threatening invasive disease, with recent global burden
analyses estimating ~6.5 million serious invasive fungal infections annually, resulting
in ~3.8 million deaths, of which ~2.5 million are directly attributable to fungal disease
(1, 2). Within the United States, invasive fungal infections are of particular concern
due to the expansion of immunocompromised populations at elevated risk, including
neonates in intensive care units, people living with HIV/AIDS, cancer patients undergo­
ing chemotherapy, and organ transplant recipients on immunosuppressants (3, 4). This
threat is compounded by the increased prevalence of isolates resistant to the limited
arsenal of systemically acting antifungal agents clinically available (5). Currently, only
four classes of antifungals, azoles, echinocandins, polyenes, and flucytosine (a pyrimidine
analog), are approved for the treatment of invasive fungal infections, with the last
first-in-class addition to this repertoire, caspofungin, introduced over two decades ago
(6). While existing drugs demonstrate efficacy against their respective indications, they
are collectively associated with multiple limitations that compromise their ability to
address the escalating challenge posed by invasive fungal diseases.
   In 2022, the World Health Organization released the first Fungal Priority Pathogens
List (FPPL) calling for more research and drug development directed toward fungal
strains causing life-threatening invasive infections (7). The  list categorizes 19 fungal
pathogens into 3 priority groups (critical, high, and medium) based on several crite­
ria including their infection-associated mortality, incidence, and levels of antifungal
resistance. The critical priority group includes four species that collectively contribute
to over one million deaths annually: Candida albicans, Candidozyma auris, Aspergillus
fumigatus, and Cryptococcus neoformans (7, 8). C. albicans  is a commensal microbe
regularly present in human mucosa but can become pathogenic and cause invasive
infection in critically ill or immunocompromised individuals. In this population, mortality
rates for invasive candidiasis caused by C. albicans range from 20% to 50% despite
the availability of antifungal treatments (9). C. auris infection can also result in life-threat­
ening invasive candidiasis affecting vulnerable patient populations, with an associated
mortality rate of 30%–72% (10, 11). C. auris has attracted increased clinical attention
because of its high outbreak potential and intrinsic resistance to most clinically available
antifungals, resulting in limited treatment options (12, 13). A. fumigatus is a ubiqui­
tous environmental mold that can lead to invasive aspergillosis, primarily affecting the
respiratory system of immunocompromised hosts. The rise of drug-resistant A. fumigatus
infections is particularly concerning, with mortality rates reported between 47% and
88% (7, 14, 15). Cryptococcosis carries a high mortality rate of 41%–61% for patients with
HIV infection and 8%–20% among HIV-negative individuals, exacerbated by diagnostic
challenges and limited access to effective therapies in low-resource settings (16, 17).
C. neoformans species complex is a soil fungal pathogen that causes life-threatening
meningoencephalitis following inhalation, especially in those with HIV/AIDS (18). In
contrast, the Cryptococcus gattii species complex (CGSC), which includes five pathogenic
species (19), exhibits distinct host predilections, with C. bacillisporus, C. decagattii, and
C. tetragattii predominantly infecting HIV-positive or immunocompromised individuals,


June 2026 Volume 39   Issue 2                                                                                                      10.1128/cmr.00307-25 2