
[PDF physical page 1]
          Journal of
    Fungi


Article
Development of the CRISPR-Cas9 System for the
Marine-Derived Fungi Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 and
Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7

Yingying Chen 1,2, Cunlei Cai 1,2,3, Jiafan Yang 1,2,3    , Junjie Shi 1,2,3, Yongxiang Song 1,2    , Dan Hu 4,
Junying Ma 1,2,*  and Jianhua Ju 1,2,*


                                            1  CAS Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-Resources and Ecology, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Marine
                                     Materia Medica, RNAM Center for Marine Microbiology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology,
                                    Chinese Academy of Sciences, 164 West Xingang Road, Guangzhou 510301, China; yychen@scsio.ac.cn (Y.C.);
                                   18262628958@163.com (C.C.); 15050316090@163.com (J.Y.); shijunjie21@mails.ucas.ac.cn (J.S.);
                                       songx@scsio.ac.cn (Y.S.)
                                            2   Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Guangzhou), No. 1119, Haibin Road,
                                Nansha District, Guangzhou 511458, China
                                            3   College of Oceanology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266400, China
                                            4  Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Pharmacodynamic Constituents of TCM and New Drugs Research,
                                            Institute of Traditional Chinese Medicine and Natural Products, College of Pharmacy, Jinan University,
                               Guangzhou 510632, China; thudan@jnu.edu.cn
                                     *   Correspondence: majunying@scsio.ac.cn (J.M.); jju@scsio.ac.cn (J.J.); Tel.: +86-20-8902-3028 (J.J.)


                                Abstract: Marine-derived fungi are emerging as attractive producers of structurally novel secondary
                                metabolites with diverse bioactivities. However, the lack of efﬁcient genetic tools limits the discovery
                                 of novel compounds and the elucidation of biosynthesis mechanisms. Here, we ﬁrstly established
                           an effective PEG-mediated chemical transformation system for protoplasts in two marine-derived
Citation: Chen, Y.; Cai, C.; Yang, J.;
                                  fungi, Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 and Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7. Next, we developed a simple and
Shi, J.; Song, Y.; Hu, D.; Ma, J.; Ju, J.
                                   versatile CRISPR-Cas9-based gene disruption strategy by transforming a target fungus with a single
Development of the CRISPR-Cas9
                              plasmid. We found that the transformation with a circular plasmid encoding cas9, a single-guide
System for the Marine-Derived Fungi
Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 and     RNA (sgRNA), and a selectable marker resulted in a high frequency of targeted and insertional gene
Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7. J. Fungi    mutations in both marine-derived fungal strains. In addition, the histone deacetylase gene rpd3 was
2022, 8, 715. https://doi.org/        mutated using the established CRISPR-Cas9 system, thereby activating novel secondary metabolites
10.3390/jof8070715                   that were not produced in the wild-type strain. Taken together, a versatile CRISPR-Cas9-based gene
                                disruption method was established, which will promote the discovery of novel natural products and
Academic Editors: Eriko Takano and
                                 further biological studies.Robert A. Arkowitz

Received: 7 June 2022             Keywords: marine-derived fungi; CRISPR-Cas9; Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190; Aspergillus sp. SCSIO
Accepted: 6 July 2022               SX7S7; secondary metabolites; histone deacetylase
Published: 8 July 2022


Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-    1. Introduction
iations.                         Marine fungi are important sources of novel natural products for drug discovery due
                               to their unique defenses that allow them to survive under extreme conditions. The extreme
                            sea environments are typically characterized by the absence of sunlight, high hydrostatic
                              pressure, oligotrophy, and low temperature, which can induce extremophilic fungi to pro-
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
                        duce secondary metabolites with diverse biological activities [1,2]. Cephalosporin C, a
Licensee MDPI, Basel,  Switzerland.
This article is an open access article   β-lactam-type natural antibiotic, was discovered from a Cephalosporium species isolated
                         from the Sardinian coast, representing the ﬁrst fungal antibiotic isolated from a marine en-distributed  under  the  terms  and
conditions of the Creative Commons   vironment [3]. Until 2021, Gomes and his colleagues cataloged antimicrobials from marine
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://   fungi and reported 108 compounds with antibacterial potential that can be developed to
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/   new drug leads [4]. Additionally, the secondary metabolites from marine fungi also hold
4.0/).                      promise as antitumor and anti-inﬂammatory therapeutic agents [1,5]. With the advent of





J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715. https://doi.org/10.3390/jof8070715                                               https://www.mdpi.com/journal/jof


[PDF physical page 2]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715                                                                                                             2 of 15



                            the post-genomic era, the surge of genomic data available suggests that the biosynthetic
                             potential of fungi is more immense than previously anticipated. However, most of the
                             biosynthetic gene clusters are either dormant or expressed at very low levels under labora-
                             tory growth conditions. The genetic engineering of the largely unexplored fungal species
                                      (e.g., marine-derived fungi) would be an efﬁcient strategy to induce the expression of silent
                         gene clusters that could lead to the discovery of novel bioactive compounds [6,7].
                            Although the genetic manipulation systems in ﬁlamentous fungi are being explored,
                            the deeper exploration of important pharmaceutical secondary metabolites has been ham-
                          pered by a lack of versatile, simple, and highly efﬁcient genetic manipulation techniques [8].
                              Fortunately, the emergence of CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
                            repeats)-Cas9-based genome editing technology has revolutionized genetic research and
                          has raised hopes for discovering new bioactive compounds from fungi. The CRISPR-Cas9
                         system consists of two components, a single chimeric guide RNA (sgRNA) and a Cas9
                              nuclease. The Cas9 nuclease is guided by sgRNA, introducing speciﬁc DNA double-strand
                           breaks (DSBs) that are located directly 3 bp upstream of a protospacer-adjacent motif
                      (PAM) [9]. The break is then repaired by the non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) path-
                         way, resulting in deletions and substitutions, thereby inactivating the target gene [10].
                        To date, this technology has been widely applied across species, including various fun-
                             gal strains, such as Trichoderma reesei [11], Pyricularia oryzae [12], Aspergillus oryzae [13],
                              Aspergillus niger [14], Aspergillus fumigatus [15], Aspergillus nidulans [16], Talaromyces atro-
                               roseus [17], Neurospora crassa [18], Candida albicans [19], Alternaria alternata [20], Penicillium
                           chrysogenum [21], Ustilago maydis [22], Acremonium chrysogenum [23], Glarea lozoyensis [24],
                            Nodulisporium sp., and Sporormiella minima [25]. However, the applications of the CRISPR-
                         Cas9 techniques are still limited to a small subset of genetically tractable Ascomycota that
                           has been relatively thoroughly studied. Therefore, developing species-speciﬁc and efﬁcient
                         CRISPR-Cas9-based methods is crucial for the genetic manipulation and exploitation of
                           novel natural products of fungi isolated from various environments.
                              Both Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 and Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7 are marine-derived
                              fungi. We have isolated several antibacterial and antifungal compounds from these two
                               strains [26,27]. In addition to the natural products expressed under normal conditions,
                      genome sequencing and antiSMASH analyses revealed that both strains possess various
                             cryptic secondary metabolites that can be activated. Moreover, Spiromastix sp. SCSIO
                         F190 is also an excellent model for studying the interactions of marine fungi and endo-
                             bacteria [26]. Therefore, establishing a reproducible and efﬁcient genetic manipulation
                         system is vital for studying the biosynthesis pathways of isolated compounds, activating
                                  silent secondary metabolite gene clusters, and revealing the molecular interactions between
                            the marine fungal host and endo-bacteria.
                                 In this study, we develop all of the critical steps for transforming and establishing a
                               stable and reproducible CRISPR-Cas9-based genetic disruption system for the two marine-
                          derived fungi. Next, we successfully use it to delete the regulatory genes creA and cak1
                             in Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 and Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7, respectively. Moreover,
                            the histone-deacetylase-encoding gene rpd3 is also disrupted, leading to the activation of
                            various novel secondary metabolites.

                                   2. Materials and Methods
                                   2.1. Strains, Plasmids, and Culture Conditions

                                  Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 was obtained from a marine sediment sample collected
                        from the Northern South China Sea, while Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7 is a coral-derived
                             epiphytic fungus that was obtained from the South China Sea. Both strains were routinely
                         maintained on potato dextrose agar (PDA) or in potato dextrose broth (PDB) at 28 ◦C. A
                          complete medium [28] was used for the sporulation and PDB was used for the protoplast
                            preparation. An antibiotic sensitivity test was carried out on Aspergillus nitrogen-free
                        minimal (ANM) medium [28] containing corresponding antibiotics. Escherichia coli strain
                   DH5α was cultured in Luria–Bertani (LB) medium with appropriate antibiotics for plasmid


[PDF physical page 3]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715                                                                                                             3 of 15



                 DNA isolation. A plasmid containing Trichoderma reesei codon-optimized cas9 (toCas9) and
                        hygromycin B phosphotransferase (hph) coding sequences was kindly provided by Prof.
                     Dan Hu from Jinan University [25]. A plasmid pFC330 containing the sgRNA expression
                         sequence was generously offered by Prof.  Yi Tang from the University of California,
                        Los Angeles, CA, USA. These two vectors were used to construct the cas9 and sgRNA-
                           expressing vector pBSKII-toCas9-hph-sgRNA used in this study. All strains and plasmids
                         used in this study are listed in Supplementary Materials Table S1.

                                   2.2. DNA Manipulation

                           The primer synthesis and DNA sequencing were performed by Sangon Biotech Co.,
                             Ltd. (Shanghai, China) and Qingke Biotech Co., Ltd. (Guangzhou, China) (Supplementary
                            Materials Table S2). The plasmid extraction and DNA puriﬁcation were carried out with
                          commercial kits (Omega Bio-Tech, Inc., Norcorss, GA, USA). The restriction enzymes and
                            other DNA modiﬁcation reagents were purchased from New England Biolabs, Inc. (NEB,
                             Hitchin, UK) and Takara Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Dalian, China). The DNA ampliﬁcation
                      was carried out on a PCR thermal cycler from Applied Biosystems (Thermo Fisher, Shang-
                                hai, China) with either Taq DNA polymerase (TaKaRa, Dalian, China) or High-Fidelity
                            Fastpfu DNA polymerase (TransGen, Beijing, China). The isothermal assembly of multiple
                 DNA fragments was performed using a pEASY®-Uni Seamless Cloning and Assembly Kit
                         from TransGen Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China).

                                   2.3. Maker Gene Selection and Fungal Sensitivity Test

                           The antibiotic sensitivity levels were determined in ANM medium with varying
                             concentrations of hygromycin B, geneticin, pyrithiamine, zeocin, and glufosinate. Concen-
                               trations of 200 and 400 µg mL−1 were applied, except for pyrithiamine (2 and 10 µg mL−1)
                       and geneticin (50 and 200 µg mL−1). Control plates without antibiotics were used. The
                                strains were point-inoculated and grown on solid ANM media with and without antibiotics
                                at 28 ◦C for 4–8 days.

                                   2.4. Construction of Cas9 and gRNA Expression Vectors

                             CRISPR-Cas9 vectors with speciﬁc sgRNA genes, harboring the respective protospacer
                       and a 6 bp inverted repeat of the 5′-end of the protospacer to complete the hammer-head
                           cleavage site, were generated in a single isothermal assembly step. Firstly, pBSKII-toCas9-
                          hph was cut by the BsaAI restriction enzyme. Then, sgRNA together with ribozyme
                          sequences controlled by the PgdpA and TtrpC sequences was separately ampliﬁed from
                       pFC330 using two primer pairs Frag1-F/R and Frag2-F/R. The primers of Frag1-F and
                          Frag2-R are universal primers for all genes carrying 5′-end sequences complementary to
                             the ends of the plasmid pBSKII-toCas9-hph cut with BsaAI, as outlined in Table S2. Frag1-R
                                    is a gene-speciﬁc primer containing a 5′-end hammerhead (HH) ribozyme sequence and
                          a 6 bp inverted repeat of the 5′-end of the protospacer. Frag2-F is also a gene-speciﬁc
                         primer containing a gene-speciﬁc protospacer, partial sgRNA backbone sequence, and
                             5′-end sequences complementary to the end of Fragment1. The two fragments ampliﬁed by
                          Frag1-F/R and Frag2-F/R are inserted into the BsaAI-digested pBSKII-toCas9-hph plasmid
                        by the isothermal assembly.

                                   2.5. Optimization of Protoplast Preparation

                                 In order to examine the effect of the enzyme digestion on the protoplast yields of
                                different fungal ages, a total of 1 × 109 conidia were cultured in 50 mL potato dextrose broth
                        (PDB) at 100 rpm and 28 ◦C for 12, 28, 24, and 36 h. After completion of the culture, the
                           mycelia were collected via centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 10 min. The collected hyphae were
                      washed twice with sterile 0.6 M MgSO4 and then digested with different concentrations
                             of lysing enzymes (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and Yatalase (TaKaRa, Dalian,
                          China) for different times in a digestive solution with 1.2 M MgSO4 and 10 mM sodium
                          phosphate buffer at pH 7.0. The digestive solution and the hyphae were mixed on a shaker


[PDF physical page 4]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715                                                                                                             4 of 15


                               at 100 rpm at 28 ◦C. The digested solutions were checked under a microscope for the
                            protoplast morphology and counting. The ﬁrst microscopic observation was at 2 h, then
                               at 30 min intervals until homogeneous protoplasts, about twice the size of spores, were
                          formed. The protoplast suspension was transferred into a transparent centrifuge tube and
                             gently overlaid with an equal volume of trapping buffer (0.6 M sorbitol, 100 mM Tris/HCl,
                   pH = 7.0), then spun for 30 min at 4000 rpm (4000× g) at 4 ◦C. The mycelial debris pelleted
                        and a white band of protoplasts formed at the interface. Protoplast bands were taken from
                             the interface with a Pasteur pipette and pooled into the third chilled Falcon tube. Then, an
                          equal volume of STC (0.01 M Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 0.01 M CaCl2, and 1.2 M sorbitol) buffer
                       was added into the Falcon tube and the protoplast was precipitated via centrifugation and
                      washed once again with 10 mL STC. Finally, the protoplasts were resuspended in STC
                             solution to a concentration of 2 × 107 mL−1 for the subsequent transformation.

                                   2.6. Transformation and Regeneration of Protoplasts
                           About 2–5 µg of cas9 and gRNA expression plasmid was added into 100 µL of the
                        above protoplast suspension, then 25 µL of 60% PEG was added to each tube and mixed
                               gently. Next, 1 mL of 60% polyethylene glycol (PEG) was added to the DNA–protoplast
                          mixture after 30 min incubation on ice with gentle mixing. The PEG-treated protoplast
                          suspension was diluted with 5 mL STC solution and centrifuged at 2000× g for 10 min at
                          4 ◦C. Next, the protoplasts were resuspended in 200 µL of STC solution and poured onto
                           3–4 regeneration plates (ANM with 1.2 M sorbitol) containing 1.5% agar and hygromycin B.
                            After 4–14 days cultivation at 28 ◦C, the transformants were inoculated onto a new PDA
                              plate (without sorbitol).

                                   2.7. Transformant Validation via MSBSP-PCR and Sequencing

                           The transformants were randomly picked and cultured in PDA for genomic DNA
                              extraction. The ﬁrst PCR reaction was performed using genomic DNA and a primer
                          designed to anneal at the recognition sites of the gRNA. Based on the principle of the site-
                          based speciﬁc primers polymerase chain reaction (MSBSP-PCR) described by Guo et al. [29],
                             the ﬁrst-round screening would identify CRISPR-Cas9-induced mutations located close to
                            the DSB site that occur 3 bp upstream of the PAM. The second PCR reaction was carried
                           out using genomic DNA and primers located upstream and downstream of the target gene,
                       which would detect gene disruptions situated far from the PAM. The strains that either
                                failed to show positive PCR bands or with obvious phenotypes were further validated via
                            the sequencing of the PCR products ampliﬁed with primer pairs ﬂanking the target gene.

                                   2.8. Secondary Metabolite Analysis

                            To examine the production of secondary metabolites, both mutants and wild-type
                               strains were cultivated in PDB liquid medium for 7 days at 28 ◦C, 180 rpm. The cultures
                        were extracted with butanone, the organic phases were evaporated to dryness, and the
                          remaining residues were redissolved in 1 mL MeOH, 30 µL of which was injected into the
                               analytical HPLC for analysis. The HPLC analysis was performed on an Agilent 1260 HPLC
                         system (Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA) equipped with a binary pump
                       and a diode array detector using an analytical Phenomenex column (250 × 4.60 mm,
                          5 microns). The samples were eluted with a linear gradient of 0% to 80% solvent B over
                          20 min, followed by 70% to 100% solvent B in 1.5 min, and then eluted with 100% solvent B
                               in 5.5 min at a ﬂow rate of 1.0 mL/min using UV detection at 220 nm, 254 nm, 275 nm, and
                          354 nm.

                                   3. Results
                                   3.1. Antibiotic Sensitivity Test and Resistance Maker Gene Selection

                           The establishment of an effective selection system for differentiating transformed
                                isolates from untransformed ones is a key step in genetic tool development. In this study,
                    we tested the fungal sensitivity to ﬁve commonly used antibiotics with available resistance


[PDF physical page 5]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715                                                                                                             5 of 15



                            genes: hygromycin B, zeocin, pyrithiamine, glufosinate, and G418. Fresh spores of Spiro-
                              mastix sp. SCSIO F190 and Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7 strains were pointed and inoculated
                               in ANM plates with two concentrations of the above antibiotics. After 4 or 8 days of culture,
                              Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7 was not able to grow in the plate containing hygromycin,
                              zeocin, and pyrithiamine, but only hygromycin B could inhibit the growth of Spiromastix sp.
                      SCSIO F190 (Figure 1). Therefore, the resistance gene hygromycin B phosphotransferase
                              (hph) was chosen as the selection marker gene for both strains.





                              Figure 1. The sensitivity of the wild-type strains Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 (A) and Aspergillus sp.
                         SCSIO SX7S7 (B) in the ANM plate with different concentrations of hygromycin B, pyrithiamine,
                                zeocin, glufosinate, and G418 at 28 ◦C for 8 and 4 days, respectively. Control: culture without the
                               addition of antibiotics.

                                   3.2. Establishment of Protoplast Preparation and Transformation

                   A viable and stable protoplast formation system is the basis for protoplast-based
                            transformations. The ﬁrst step in the protoplast preparation is removing the cell wall
                         through enzymatic digestion. The fungal cell wall structure is highly variable among
                               different species and highly dynamic during the growth of fungi, including during spore
                           germination, hyphal branching, and the formation of the diaphragm [30]. Thus, species-
                           speciﬁc transformation protocols must be optimized for each strain, especially for those
                          seldom-studied wild-type marine fungi. Here, two cell wall digestion enzymes, lysing
                      enzyme and Yatalase, were combined to test the protoplast release from Spiromastix sp.
                      SCSIO F190 and Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7. The effects of the fungal ages and enzyme
                            incubation time on the protoplast release were tested in 10 mL of mixed enzyme solution
                               (5 mg/mL of each enzyme). The conidia of Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7 were inoculated
                               into 100 mL PDB medium and were grown at 28 ◦C for 12, 18, and 24 h. After the completion
                             of the culture, the mycelia were collected and then digested by an enzyme mixture for 6,


[PDF physical page 6]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715                                                                                                             6 of 15


                               12, and 18 h with 100 rpm at 28 ◦C. We found that 12 h mycelia culture combined with
                          18 h digestion is the optimal condition for the protoplast preparation of Aspergillus sp.
                      SCSIO SX7S7 (Figures 2A,C and S1). The above results indicated that the new mycelia,
                     named germlings (germinated from the spore around 20–40 µm), produced the largest
                      amount of fully digested protoplasts. Therefore, the optimal enzyme digestion time for
                            the Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 strain was only tested using the germlings. The results
                       showed that the optimal enzymolysis time of the Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 germlings for
                             protoplast release is 9 h (Figures 2B,D and S2).





                              Figure 2. A microscopic check of germination and protoplasts released from the mycelia: (A,B)
                              germlings of Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7 (A) and Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 (B) under 12 h and 24 h
                                   culture, respectively; (C,D) protoplasts of Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7 (C) and Spiromastix sp. SCSIO
                            F190 (D) after 18 h and 9 h digestion, respectively.

                                   Stable osmotic pressure is the critical factor for protoplasts to regenerate cell walls [31].
                            In this study, the osmotic pressure stabilizers 1 M sucrose and 1.2 M sorbitol were tested
                               for protoplast regeneration in ANM regeneration medium with the optimized protoplast
                          formation system. The regenerated number of diluted protoplasts was counted using
                            microscopy. The results showed that the 1 M sucrose and 1.2 M sorbitol had similar effects
                       and led to protoplast regeneration rates of nearly 45% and 40% for Spiromastix sp. SCSIO
                         F190 and Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7, respectively (Figure S3). Taking the economy and
                            efﬁciency into consideration, we found that 1 M sucrose is more suitable as the osmotic
                            pressure stabilizer for the protoplast regeneration of both strains.

                                   3.3. CRISPR-Cas9 Plasmid Construction for Gene Inactivation

                            The CRISPR-Cas9 technology has been seldomly applied to marine-derived fungi. To
                     make use of this powerful technique in the marine-derived fungi Spiromastix sp. SCSIO
                         F190 and Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7, we took advantage of two CRISPR-Cas9 editing
                          systems with different sgRNA and Cas9 expression strategies, which were established by
                           Liu et al. and Nodvig et al. in 2015, respectively [11,16,25], and constructed a new CRISPR-
                        Cas9 vector pBSKII-toCas9-hph-sgRNA. A plasmid pBSKII-toCas9-hph [11,25] containing
                                 T. reesei codon-optimized cas9 (toCas9) and hygromycin B phosphotransferase (hph) coding
                           sequences was used as the backbone. The sgRNA expression cassette including protospacer-


[PDF physical page 7]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715                                                                                                             7 of 15



                          sequence-ﬂanked hammerhead (HH) and hepatitis delta virus ribozymes (HDV) ribozyme
                           sequences, as well as a 6 bp inverted repeat of the 5-end of the protospacer to complete
                            the hammerhead cleavage site under the control of gpdA promoter (PgpdA) and the trpC
                            terminator (TtrpC), was ampliﬁed from pFC330 [16] (Figure 3). The two ribozyme sequences
                          ensure the liberation of the sgRNA from the transcript in the nucleus. The new CRISPR-
                         Cas9 circular vector pBSKII-toCas9-hph-sgRNA was constructed by inserting the ampliﬁed
                    sgRNA expression fragments into the backbone vector via one-step isothermal assembly
                             (Figure 3).





                              Figure 3. The construction of new CRISPR-Cas9 vectors (pBSKII-toCas9-hph-gRNA) for the directed
                             mutagenesis of marine-derived fungi. The vector backbone for the construction of new fungal vectors
                         was derived from the plasmid pBSKII-toCas9-hph, and was digested by the BsaAI restriction enzyme.
                                 Variable sgRNA genes controlled by the gpdA promoter and trpC terminator were ampliﬁed from the
                         pFC330 plasmid using two pairs of primers. The Fragment1-containing gpdA promoter sequence,
                             a 6 bp inverted repeat of the 5′-end of the protospacer (in red), the hammerhead (HH) ribozyme
                               sequence, and 5′-end sequence complementary (in dark green) to the left side of BsaAI cutting site in
                             plasmid pBSKII-toCas9-hph was ampliﬁed by primers Frag1 F/R. Fragment2 carrying the protospacer
                               sequence, the sgRNA backbone sequence, the hepatitis delta virus (HDV) ribozyme sequence, and the
                               trpC terminator sequence ﬂanked by the 15 bp complementary sequence to fragment1 (in yellow) and
                             20 bp complementary sequence to the right side of BsaAI cutting site in plasmid pBSKII-toCas9-hph
                        was ampliﬁed by the primer Frag2 F/R. The resultant PCR products of ﬂanking regions and the
                              BsaAI-digested pBSKII-toCas9-hph plasmid can be joined together to form a new construct using the
                                isothermal assembly method. For simplicity, all complementary ends are visualized in the same color
                          and no DNA elements in the above ﬁgure are drawn to scale.

                                   3.4. Target Gene Deletion in Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 and Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7

                            To test the functionality of our system, we ﬁrst attempted to mutate the testing gene
                           creA encoding a carbon catabolism repressor and protein kinase cak1 in Spiromastix sp.
                      SCSIO F190 and Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7, respectively. The successful mutagenesis
                             of the two genes is easy to monitor, as the inactivity of these two genes usually results in
                          a phenotype change with strong growth defects [32–35]. For the Spiromastix sp. SCSIO
                         F190 strain, the CRISPR-Cas9 plasmids containing either no sgRNA or a sgRNA with a
                            protospacer targeting the exon of creA were introduced into the protoplast of Spiromastix sp.
                       SCSIO F190 via PEG. After 15 days of growth, we found around 28 out of 102 colonies with


[PDF physical page 8]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715                                                                                                             8 of 15



                           apparent phenotype changes when creA was targeted (Figure S4). Ten of those colonies with
                         growth changes were picked out and their genomic DNA was puriﬁed. Then, the complete
                            creA gene sequence was ampliﬁed using primers located in the 5′ and 3′ UTRs of the creA
                           gene. Unexpectedly, half of the 10 transformants failed to show any PCR bands, and the
                          remaining ﬁve colonies gave identical PCR products to the wild-type results (Figure 4A).
                         However, all 10 transformants showed identical PCR products to the wild-type results when
                          using a forward primer targeted to the sgRNA binding site and a reward primer located
                        around 600 bp after the PAM sequence (Figure 4B), which suggested that the mutations
                          did not happen in the sgRNA binding site as well as the subsequent sequence, while the
                         above failed PCR results were not due to the DNA template quality but to large fragment
                              deletion or insertion. To further examine any single base or only a few bases in mutagenesis
                              that cannot be recognized from the DNA gel, the ﬁve PCR fragments encompassing the
                                  full creA gene were sequenced and two of them showed one base deletion in the sgRNA
                           binding site (Figure 4C). For the other three clones with growth defects that failed to detect
                        any mutations, we found two different phenotypes on non-selective medium after they
                       had been growing for a long time (Figure S5), while the pure ∆creA mutant exhibited clear
                         growth changes with less conidiation compared to the wild-type strain (Figures 4D and S5),
                             indicating that the original transformants were heterokaryotic with transformed–mutated
                       and non-transformed–non-mutated nuclei.





                              Figure 4. The inactivation of the creA gene in Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 using the CRISPR-Cas9
                               system: (A) DNA ampliﬁcation of the DNA regions surrounding the full creA genes in the ten clones
                              picked out from the regeneration plate using primers ﬂanking the creA genes; (B) DNA ampliﬁcation
                                 of the DNA regions surrounding the PAM sites of the ten clones picked out from the regeneration
                                plate using primers ﬂanking the PAM sites; (C) sequence analysis of the PCR products generated
                                 in (A); (D) morphological comparison between the ∆creA and F190 wild-type strains on a complete
                                 plate at 28 ◦C for 14 days ((A,B) lane 1–10: tested creA mutated clones; lane 11: wild-type strain).

                                     Similarly, an sgRNA gene with a protospacer targeting the exon of cak1 in the CRISPR-
                         Cas9 expression vector was introduced into the protoplast of Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7
                            via PEG. Six transformants with serious growth defects (Figures 5E and S6) were picked
                           out and their genome DNA were extracted. Next, the DNA regions surrounding the target
                         gene were ampliﬁed using primers ﬂanking the cak1 gene. Consistent with the mutation
                            events in the Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 strain, ﬁve of the six transformants failed to show
                         any PCR bands, suggesting that large unknown fragment deletion or insertion happened in
                        most transformants (Figure 5A). The only clone (clone 5) that showed a normal PCR band
                             similar to the wild-type strain was sequenced and revealed a 14 bp deletion around the
                 PAM site (Figure 5D). Serendipitously, we obtained a non-speciﬁc band of clone 1 when
                          using a forward primer targeted to the sgRNA binding site and reward primer located
                        around 500 bp after the PAM sequence due to non-speciﬁc priming of the forward primer.
                        The sequencing of this non-speciﬁc band demonstrated that the sequence near the sgRNA
                            expression cassette in the pBSKII-toCas9-hph-sgRNA plasmid was inserted into the cleavage


[PDF physical page 9]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715                                                                                                             9 of 15



                                   site of Cas9 3 bp upstream of PAM (Figure 5D), conﬁrming our above speculation that the
                               failed PCR might have been caused by the insertion of a large fragment. To examine the
                               insertion in further detail (e.g., how long of a sequence from the pBSKII-toCas9-hph-sgRNA
                          plasmid was inserted), forward primers located at different sites of the CRISPR-Cas9 vector
                        combined with a reverse primer targeted to the cak1 gene were used to amplify the junction
                          sequence (Figure S7). As expected, different lengths of PCR products were obtained, except
                              for a region with a length larger than 10 kb (Figure S7), which may have been due to the
                              limitations of long-range PCR testing. Sequencing of the above PCR bands revealed that
                            the contiguous vector was inserted at the target site. Additionally, PCR reactions using
                          ITS1/4 primers with the above puriﬁed DNA samples were performed to further conﬁrm
                               that the failed PCR result was not due to the quality of the DNA template but rather to the
                     unknown insertion or deletion (Figure 5C).





                              Figure 5. The inactivation of the cak1 gene in Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7 using the CRISPR-Cas9
                               system: (A) DNA ampliﬁcation of the DNA regions surrounding the full cak1 genes of the six clones
                              picked out from the regeneration plate using primers ﬂanking the cak1 genes; (B) DNA ampliﬁcation
                                 of the DNA regions surrounding the PAM sites of the six clones picked out from the regeneration
                                  plate using primers ﬂanking the PAM sites; (C) positive control used for checking the DNA template
                                 quality of the six clones picked out from the regeneration plate using primers ﬂanking the ITS region;
                             (D) sequence analysis of PCR products of clones 1 and 5; (E) morphological comparison between the
                                 representative ∆cak1 mutant and 7S7 wild-type strains on a complete plate at 28 ◦C for 4 days ((A–C)
                               lane 1–6: tested cak1 mutation clones; lane 7: wild-type strain).

                                   3.5. CRISPR-Cas9 Can Efﬁciently Mutate Histone Deacetylase Gene for Novel Natural
                             Products Activation

                           The above results show that the established CRISPR-Cas9 system can efﬁciently in-
                         duce gene disruption in both marine-derived strains. Hence, the CRISPR-Cas9 system was
                              further applied to activate the silent gene clusters. The inactivation of histone deacetylases
                     (HDACs) has been demonstrated to be an efﬁcient approach for cryptic gene cluster ac-
                              tivation [6,36–38]. In this study, rpd3, a gene encoding a classical histone deacetylase in
                              Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7, was deleted, and the associated phenotypic and metabolic
                          changes were evaluated. Three clones carrying potential rpd3 mutations were picked out
                       and conﬁrmed via genotyping PCR (Figure S8). Similar to the above situations, two of the
                           rpd3 mutants failed to show any PCR bands using primers targeting different sites of the
                           rpd3 gene. The sequencing of an unspeciﬁc PCR band from clone 2 revealed that a part
                             of the Cas9 coding sequence was inserted into the rpd3 gene (Figure S8D). Inconsistent
                         with the above insertion, only a 1.2 kb PCR product was observed when using primers


[PDF physical page 10]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715                                                                                                            10 of 15



                             located at different sites of the transformed vector paired with a reverse primer targeted to
                            the rpd3 gene (Figure S9), suggesting that the insertion may be composed of rearranged
                         segments of the transformation vector. The removal of rpd3 resulted in slower growth
                       and defective sporulation in Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7 (Figure S8E). The metabolite
                             extraction and HPLC analysis revealed the production of novel compounds in all three
                          independent rpd3 mutants compared to the wild-type strain (Figure 6). Moreover, the major
                          secondary metabolites of the wild-type strain were signiﬁcantly decreased in rpd3 mutants
                             (Figure 6), which suggested that the disruption of rpd3 reduced the gene expression levels
                             of compounds 1–12 associated biosynthetic gene clusters. In contrast, the gene clusters
                               that are responsive to the biosynthesis of putative novel compounds were transcriptionally
                               activated.





                              Figure 6. HPLC-DAD contour plot of extracts from the wild-type Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7
                         and three independent transformants of ∆rpd3 mutants. The boxed region shows the novel com-
                         pounds induced in ∆rpd3 mutant strains. The red lines of each ﬁgure indicates the middle po-
                                   sition of x and y axis for better comparision. The number indicates the compounds isolated
                           from the wild-type strain ((1) asperdepside A; (2) nornidulin; (3) nidulin; (4) aspergillusidone B;
                                     (5) 2,7-dichlorounguinol;  (6) aspergillusidone C; (7) aspergillusidone A; (8) 2-chlorounguinol;
                                     (9) emeguisin A; (10) 7-carboxyfolipastatin; (11) agonodepside A; (12) unguidepside A).

                                   4. Discussion

                               For novel species, an efficient genetic manipulation system is important for the elucida-
                               tion of the fungal molecular mechanisms behind the industrial applications and the discovery
                               of natural products. CRISPR-Cas9-based technologies have reached almost every corner of the
                              genetic manipulation field, providing powerful tools to edit the genomes of plants, animals,
                                bacteria, fungi, and many other organisms. The CRISPR era of fungi began in 2015, when
                      Zou and colleagues first demonstrated that CRISPR-Cas9 is an efficient gene disruption tool
                              in the filamentous fungus Trichoderma reesei by adopting a “producing Cas9 in vivo while


[PDF physical page 11]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715                                                                                                            11 of 15



                               transcribing sgRNA in vitro” strategy [11]. In the same year, Mortensen’s team built a single-
                           plasmid-based CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing toolkit for Aspergillus, producing both Cas9 and
                    sgRNA in vivo [16]. Later, CRISPR-Cas9 was successfully used in many other filamentous
                                fungi; for example, Hu and his lab members established an efficient CRISPR-Cas9-based gene
                             disruption strategy via the simultaneous transformation of in vitro transcriptional gRNA and
                             the linear maker gene cassette into Cas9-expressing fungi [25].
                                 In the current study, we developed a new CRISPR-Cas9 and sgRNA expression plas-
                      mid pBSKII-toCas9-hph-sgRNA by reassembling plasmid elements from previous studies
                         based on the following considerations: (i) Transforming the linear resistance maker gene
                          fragment into the Cas9-expressing fungi usually requires two selective markers available
                               for the target strain; however, wild-type fungi from high-salt marine habitats have evolved
                             signiﬁcant resistance to multiple antibiotics [39,40], meaning most marine fungi, including
                             Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190, are not able to obtain two distinctive selective markers for
                            the transformation of the cas9-expressing plasmid and linear maker gene fragment or
                    sgRNA separately. (ii) Generally, the sgRNA can be expressed both in vitro and in vivo,
                          but the in vitro transcription and puriﬁcation process is laborious and costly. (iii) RNA
                          polymerase type III promoters (U6 and U3 promoters) are frequently applied for the in vivo
                             transcription of the sgRNA [41]. Unfortunately, these kinds of promoters are ill-deﬁned
                             in ﬁlamentous fungi [42]. Additionally, the CRISPR target sequences recognized by the
                    U6 and U3 promoters are constrained with a certain sequence speciﬁcity [43]. Therefore,
                        employing the ribozyme–sgRNA–ribozyme transcription cassette controlled by the RNA
                          polymerase II promoters could guarantee the production of sgRNA in most species, as the
                              functional sequences of RNA polymerase II promoters are well characterized in ﬁlamentous
                              fungi. (iv) Even if the AMA1 sequence from A. nidulans permits autonomous plasmid
                               replication, some integrations of the AMA1 vector into the genome have been observed
                              in Gibberella fujikuroi [44]; thus, whether the AMA1 sequence can support episomal DNA
                             delivery in other fungal species with the highly active non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ)
                             repair pathway is still unclear. Moreover, adding the AMA1 sequence into the Cas9 and
                    sgRNA expression vector would lead to a plasmid length larger than 15 kb, resulting in
                          decreased isothermal assembly efﬁciency. Based on the above information, we tried a
                             strategy involving the expression of both Cas9 and sgRNA in vivo in a single plasmid
                          without the AMA1 sequence. Our results demonstrated that this system functions well in
                       two phylogenetically distinct marine fungi. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
                            reported demonstration of genome editing in the Spiromastix genus of Ascomycete fungi.
                           Most studies have shown that CRISPR-Cas9-induced mutations are predominantly
                             short deletions (1–400 bp) [13,42,45,46]; on the contrary, the most abundant modiﬁcations
                        (more than 50% of tested strains) induced by CRISPR-Cas9 in the marine-derived fungi
                             Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 and Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7 were large fragment inser-
                              tions or deletions. Two occasional non-speciﬁc PCR events revealed that the insertion
                           fragments come from the CRISPR-Cas9 plasmid that is broken at a random site, indicating
                            the integration of the transforming plasmid at the Cas9 cut site through the NHEJ repair
                          pathway. The high-frequency integration of the transforming construct at the Cas9 cut site
                          has been also described in several other fungal species, e.g., A. fumigatus and Sclerotinia
                               sclerotiorum [15,25,47], but not in all tested species, even when similar CRISPR-Cas9 plas-
                        mids were used [13]. The mechanism behind the species-speciﬁc mutation patten is still not
                            well understood. Recently, Rollins et al. showed that the transformed plasmid can express
                         Cas9 and sgRNA quickly before being inserted itself into the target sgRNA binding site in
                             the ﬁlamentous pathogen Sclerotinia sclerotiorum [13]. Nevertheless, whether the pattern of
                          plasmid insertion in the two marine fungal species is the same as for Sclerotinia sclerotiorum
                                        still needs to be further conﬁrmed by investigating the copy number of the CRISPR-Cas9
                            expression plasmid in the host strain.
                       An important caveat when using CRISPR-Cas9 technology is the potential for off-target
                                  effects. Nonetheless, assessments of the probability of off-target mutations in different
                         ﬁlamentous fungal species through whole-genome sequencing have revealed that the


[PDF physical page 12]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715                                                                                                            12 of 15



                                off-target effects after CRISPR-Cas9 mutagenesis may not be a major issue [42,47]. In the
                            current study, we also tried to limit the off-target effects by improving the speciﬁcity of
                            the sgRNA, in which the 13 bp sequence adjacent to the PAM is unique in the genome, as
                        Cas9 or sgRNA does not recognize and edit DNA sites with any number of mismatches
                             (within 10–12 bp) near the PAM [42,48,49]. In addition, the consistency of the induced novel
                             natural products from three independent rpd3 mutants also suggested a low probability of
                                 off-target effects. However, it is still advisable to keep the Cas9 and sgRNA expression at a
                     minimum level to mitigate this probability. The transient expression CRISPR-Cas9 system
                       and plasmid-free CRISPR-Cas9 system assembling the Cas9 protein and sgRNA to form a
                               stable RNP in vitro will be further tested to mitigate the risk of off-target effects.
                           The implementation of the CRISPR-Cas9 system presented here is expected to lead
                             to an acceleration in the discovery and activation of novel SMs, especially for those non-
                           domesticated fungal species. The fungal secondary metabolite gene clusters are controlled
                       by a complex regulatory network involving multiple proteins and complexes that not
                          only respond to various environmental stimuli, but also regulate the cellular chromatin
                          modiﬁcations [50]. The CRISPR-Cas9 toolkit developed in this study provided a powerful
                            platform for the genetic manipulation of these regulators, inducing the production of novel
                             natural products. Using a single CRISPR-Cas9 plasmid, we successfully mutated a histone
                             deacetylase gene, rpd3, and activated a series of novel compounds that are not produced in
                            the wild-type strain.
                            Taken together, in this study an efﬁcient and robust genetic manipulation system
                      was developed in the marine-derived fungi Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 and Aspergillus sp.
                       SCSIO SX7S7. Using this approach, several novel secondary metabolites were activated in
                            the rpd3 mutant of Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7. The CRISPR-Cas9 toolbox could expedite
                            the discovery and biosynthetic mechanism elucidation of increasingly invaluable natural
                          products in Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 and Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7, as well as many
                            other marine-derived ﬁlamentous fungi.


                           Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https://www.
                                mdpi.com/article/10.3390/jof8070715/s1. Figure S1: Microscopic check of germination and protoplast
                               released from the mycelium of Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7 under different times of culture and
                         enzyme digestion. Figure S2: Microscopic check of germination and protoplasts released from the
                           mycelium of Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 under different times of enzyme digestion. Figure S3: Effects
                                 of osmotic pressure stabilizer. Figure S4: Inactivation of the creA gene in Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190
                              using CRISPR-Cas9. Regeneration plates of transformants with the CRISPR-Cas9 plasmids containing
                                  either a sgRNA gene with a protospacer targeting exon of creA (A), or no sgRNA gene (B). CRISPR-
                           Cas9 plasmid containing a sgRNA targeting creA results in growth defect colonies that accumulated
                          more pigment. The arrows indicate creA mutants, and the growth phenotype of representative clones
                           were showed in ampliﬁed ﬁgure. Figure S5: Morphological comparison of the ∆creA and wild type
                               heterokaryotic strain with Spiromastix sp. SCSIO F190 wild type strain and the pure ∆creA mutant.
                                All strains were grown on PDA plate at 28 ◦C for 14 days. Figure S6: Morphology of cak1 mutants in
                                  Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7. Figure S7: PCR veriﬁcation of the inserted pBSKII-toCas9-hph-sgRNA
                             plasmid sequence into the cak1 gene. Figure S8: Inactivation of the rpd3 gene in Aspergillus sp. SCSIO
                              SX7S7. Figure S9: PCR veriﬁcation of the inserted pBSKII-toCas9-hph-sgRNA plasmid sequence into
                                the rpd3 gene. Table S1: Strains and plasmids applied or constructed in this study. Table S2: Primers
                            used in this study.

                           Author Contributions: J.J. and Y.C. designed the experiment. Y.C., C.C., J.Y. and J.S. performed the
                            experiment and processed the experimental data. Y.C. drafted the manuscript.  J.J., J.M., Y.S. and
                            D.H. reviewed the draft. J.J. and J.M. supervised the project. All authors have read and agreed to the
                              published version of the manuscript.

                            Funding: This research was funded by Key Special Project for Introduced Talents Team of Southern
                           Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Guangzhou) (GML2019ZD0406), Local
                               Innovative and Research Teams Project of Guangdong Pearl River Talents Program (2019BT02Y262),
                               National Natural Science Foundation of China (22037006), Open Program of Shenzhen Bay Laboratory
                              (SZBL2021080601006), Nansha District Science and Technology Award under the Science and Technol-


[PDF physical page 13]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715                                                                                                            13 of 15




                           ogy Plan Project, China Innovation and Entrepreneurship Competition Award Project (NSJL202102),
                          and Marine Economy Development Program of Guangdong Province (GDNRC[2021]54).

                                 Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

                           Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

                           Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available in this manuscript, and
                                constructs can be requested from the corresponding author.

                          Acknowledgments: We are grateful to Dan Hu (Jinan University, Guangzhou, China) for providing
                               the pBSKII-toCas9-hph plasmid and Yi Tang (University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA) for
                              providing FC330 plasmid. We thank Vikram Norton for correcting the grammar mistakes.

                             Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.   Hasan, S.; Ansari, M.I.; Ahmad, A.; Mishra, M. Major bioactive metabolites from marine fungi: A Review. Bioinformation 2015, 11,
     176–181. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.   Shabana, S.; Lakshmi, K.R.; Satya, A.K. An Updated Review of Secondary Metabolites from Marine Fungi. Mini Rev. Med. Chem.
     2021, 21, 602–642. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.   Newton, G.G.; Abraham, E.P. Cephalosporin C, a new antibiotic containing sulphur and D-alpha-aminoadipic acid. Nature 1955,
     175, 548. [CrossRef]
4.   Gomes, N.G.M.; Madureira-Carvalho, A.; Dias-da-Silva, D.; Valentao, P.; Andrade, P.B. Biosynthetic versatility of marine-
     derived fungi on the delivery of novel antibacterial agents against priority pathogens. Biomed.  Pharmacother. 2021,
     140, 111756. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.   Deshmukh, S.K.; Prakash, V.; Ranjan, N. Marine Fungi: A Source of Potential Anticancer Compounds. Front. Microbiol.
     2017, 8, 2536. [CrossRef]
6.   Mao, X.M.; Xu, W.; Li, D.; Yin, W.B.; Chooi, Y.H.; Li, Y.Q.; Tang, Y.; Hu, Y. Epigenetic genome mining of an endophytic fungus
     leads to the pleiotropic biosynthesis of natural products. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 2015, 54, 7592–7596. [CrossRef]
7.   Macheleidt, J.; Mattern, D.J.; Fischer, J.; Netzker, T.; Weber, J.; Schroeckh, V.; Valiante, V.; Brakhage, A.A. Regulation and Role of
     Fungal Secondary Metabolites. Annu. Rev. Genet. 2016, 50, 371–392. [CrossRef]
8.    Jiang, C.; Lv, G.; Tu, Y.; Cheng, X.; Duan, Y.; Zeng, B.; He, B. Applications of CRISPR/Cas9 in the Synthesis of Secondary
     Metabolites in Filamentous Fungi. Front. Microbiol. 2021, 12, 638096. [CrossRef]
9.   Cong, L.; Ran, F.A.; Cox, D.; Lin, S.; Barretto, R.; Habib, N.; Hsu, P.D.; Wu, X.; Jiang, W.; Marrafﬁni, L.A.; et al. Multiplex genome
     engineering using CRISPR/Cas systems. Science 2013, 339, 819–823. [CrossRef]
10.  Doudna, J.A.; Charpentier, E. Genome editing. The new frontier of genome engineering with CRISPR-Cas9. Science 2014,
     346, 1258096. [CrossRef]
11.   Liu, R.; Chen, L.; Jiang, Y.; Zhou, Z.; Zou, G. Efﬁcient genome editing in ﬁlamentous fungus Trichoderma reesei using the
    CRISPR/Cas9 system. Cell Discov 2015, 1, 15007. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.  Arazoe, T.; Miyoshi, K.; Yamato, T.; Ogawa, T.; Ohsato, S.; Arie, T.; Kuwata, S. Tailor-made CRISPR/Cas system for highly
     efﬁcient targeted gene replacement in the rice blast fungus. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2015, 112, 2543–2549. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.  Katayama, T.; Tanaka, Y.; Okabe, T.; Nakamura, H.; Fujii, W.; Kitamoto, K.; Maruyama, J. Development of a genome editing
     technique using the CRISPR/Cas9 system in the industrial ﬁlamentous fungus Aspergillus oryzae. Biotechnol. Lett. 2016, 38,
     637–642. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.  Kuivanen, J.; Wang, Y.J.; Richard, P. Engineering Aspergillus niger for galactaric acid production: Elimination of galactaric acid
     catabolism by using RNA sequencing and CRISPR/Cas9. Microb. Cell Fact. 2016, 15, 210. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.   Fuller, K.K.; Chen, S.; Loros, J.J.; Dunlap, J.C. Development of the CRISPR/Cas9 System for Targeted Gene Disruption in
      Aspergillus fumigatus. Eukaryot. Cell 2015, 14, 1073–1080. [CrossRef]
16.  Nodvig, C.S.; Nielsen, J.B.; Kogle, M.E.; Mortensen, U.H. A CRISPR-Cas9 System for Genetic Engineering of Filamentous Fungi.
    PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0133085.
17.   Nielsen, M.L.; Isbrandt, T.; Rasmussen, K.B.; Thrane, U.; Hoof, J.B.; Larsen, T.O.; Mortensen, U.H. Genes Linked to Production of
     Secondary Metabolites in Talaromyces atroroseus Revealed Using CRISPR-Cas9. PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0169712. [CrossRef]
18.  Matsu-Ura, T.; Baek, M.; Kwon, J.; Hong, C. Efﬁcient gene editing in Neurospora crassa with CRISPR technology. Fungal. Biol.
      Biotechnol. 2015, 2, 4. [CrossRef]
19.  Ng, H.; Dean, N. Dramatic Improvement of CRISPR/Cas9 Editing in Candida albicans by Increased Single Guide RNA Expression.
     mSphere 2017, 2, e00385-16. [CrossRef]
20.  Wenderoth, M.; Pinecker, C.; Voss, B.; Fischer, R. Establishment of CRISPR/Cas9 in Alternaria alternata. Fungal. Genet. Biol. 2017,
     101, 55–60. [CrossRef]
21.   Pohl, C.; Kiel, J.A.; Driessen, A.J.; Bovenberg, R.A.; Nygard, Y. CRISPR/Cas9 Based Genome Editing of Penicillium chrysogenum.
    ACS Synth. Biol. 2016, 5, 754–764. [CrossRef] [PubMed]


[PDF physical page 14]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715                                                                                                            14 of 15




22.   Schuster, M.; Schweizer, G.; Reissmann, S.; Kahmann, R. Genome editing in Ustilago maydis using the CRISPR-Cas system.
     Fungal. Genet. Biol. 2016, 89, 3–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.  Chen, C.; Liu, J.; Duan, C.; Pan, Y.; Liu, G. Improvement of the CRISPR-Cas9 mediated gene disruption and large DNA fragment
     deletion based on a chimeric promoter in Acremonium chrysogenum. Fungal. Genet. Biol. 2020, 134, 103279. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.  Wei, T.Y.; Wu, Y.J.; Xie, Q.P.; Tang, J.W.; Yu, Z.T.; Yang, S.B.; Chen, S.X. CRISPR/Cas9-Based Genome Editing in the Filamentous
    Fungus Glarea lozoyensis and Its Application in Manipulating gloF. ACS Synth. Biol. 2020, 9, 1968–1977. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.  Zheng, Y.M.; Lin, F.L.; Gao, H.; Zou, G.; Zhang, J.W.; Wang, G.Q.; Chen, G.D.; Zhou, Z.H.; Yao, X.S.; Hu, D. Development of a
      versatile and conventional technique for gene disruption in ﬁlamentous fungi based on CRISPR-Cas9 technology. Sci. Rep. 2017,
      7, 9250. [CrossRef]
26.  Shao, M.; Sun, C.; Liu, X.; Wang, X.; Li, W.; Wei, X.; Li, Q.; Ju, J. Upregulation of a marine fungal biosynthetic gene cluster by an
     endobacterial symbiont. Commun. Biol. 2020, 3, 527. [CrossRef]
27.  Yang, J.F.; Zhou, L.; Zhou, Z.B.; Song, Y.X.; Ju, J.H. Anti-pathogenic depsidones and its derivatives from a coral-derived fungus
      Aspergillus sp. SCSIO SX7S7. Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 2022, 102, 104415. [CrossRef]
28.  Todd, R.B.; Davis, M.A.; Hynes, M.J. Genetic manipulation of Aspergillus nidulans: Meiotic progeny for genetic analysis and strain
     construction. Nat. Protoc. 2007, 2, 811–821. [CrossRef]
29.  Guo, J.; Li, K.; Jin, L.; Xu, R.; Miao, K.; Yang, F.; Qi, C.; Zhang, L.; Botella, J.R.; Wang, R.; et al. A simple and cost-effective method
      for screening of CRISPR/Cas9-induced homozygous/biallelic mutants. Plant Methods 2018, 14, 40. [CrossRef]
30.   Li, D.; Tang, Y.; Lin, J.; Cai, W. Methods for genetic transformation of ﬁlamentous fungi. Microb. Cell Fact. 2017, 16, 168. [CrossRef]
31.  Liang, M.; Li, W.; Qi, L.; Chen, G.; Cai, L.; Yin, W.B. Establishment of a Genetic Transformation System in Guanophilic Fungus
     Amphichorda guana. J. Fungi 2021, 7, 138. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.  Chen, Y.; Dong, L.; Alam, M.A.; Pardeshi, L.; Miao, Z.; Wang, F.; Tan, K.; Hynes, M.J.; Kelly, J.M.; Wong, K.H. Carbon
     Catabolite Repression Governs Diverse Physiological Processes and Development in Aspergillus nidulans. mBio 2022,
     13, e0373421. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.  De Souza, C.P.; Hashmi, S.B.; Osmani, A.H.; Andrews, P.; Ringelberg, C.S.; Dunlap, J.C.; Osmani, S.A. Functional analysis of the
      Aspergillus nidulans kinome. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e58008. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.  Makela, M.R.; Aguilar-Pontes, M.V.; van Rossen-Ufﬁnk, D.; Peng, M.; de Vries, R.P. The fungus Aspergillus niger consumes sugars
     in a sequential manner that is not mediated by the carbon catabolite repressor CreA. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 6655. [CrossRef]
35.   Jonkers, W.; Rep, M. Mutation of CRE1 in Fusarium oxysporum reverts the pathogenicity defects of the FRP1 deletion mutant. Mol.
      Microbiol. 2009, 74, 1100–1113. [CrossRef]
36.  Guzman-Chavez, F.; Salo, O.; Samol, M.; Ries, M.; Kuipers, J.; Bovenberg, R.A.L.; Vreeken, R.J.; Driessen, A.J.M. Deregulation of
     secondary metabolism in a histone deacetylase mutant of Penicillium chrysogenum. Microbiologyopen 2018, 7, e00598. [CrossRef]
37.  Shwab, E.K.; Bok, J.W.; Tribus, M.; Galehr, J.; Graessle, S.; Keller, N.P. Histone deacetylase activity regulates chemical diversity in
      Aspergillus. Eukaryot. Cell 2007, 6, 1656–1664. [CrossRef]
38.  Collemare, J.; Seidl, M.F. Chromatin-dependent regulation of secondary metabolite biosynthesis in fungi: Is the picture complete?
    FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 2019, 43, 591–607. [CrossRef]
39.  Amend, A.; Burgaud, G.; Cunliffe, M.; Edgcomb, V.P.; Ettinger, C.L.; Gutierrez, M.H.; Heitman, J.; Hom, E.F.Y.; Ianiri, G.;
     Jones, A.C.; et al. Fungi in the Marine Environment: Open Questions and Unsolved Problems. mBio 2019, 10, e01189-18. [CrossRef]
40.   Yao, G.; Chen, X.; Han, Y.; Zheng, H.; Wang, Z.; Chen, J. Development of versatile and efﬁcient genetic tools for the marine-derived
     fungus Aspergillus terreus RA2905. Curr. Genet. 2022, 68, 153–164. [CrossRef]
41.   Ullah, M.; Xia, L.; Xie, S.; Sun, S. CRISPR/Cas9-based genome engineering: A new breakthrough in the genetic manipulation of
     ﬁlamentous fungi. Biotechnol. Appl. Biochem. 2020, 67, 835–851. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.  Song, R.; Zhai, Q.; Sun, L.; Huang, E.; Zhang, Y.; Zhu, Y.; Guo, Q.; Tian, Y.; Zhao, B.; Lu, H. CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing
     technology in ﬁlamentous fungi: Progress and perspective. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2019, 103, 6919–6932. [CrossRef]
43.  Nissim, L.; Perli, S.D.; Fridkin, A.; Perez-Pinera, P.; Lu, T.K. Multiplexed and programmable regulation of gene networks with an
     integrated RNA and CRISPR/Cas toolkit in human cells. Mol. Cell 2014, 54, 698–710. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.  Bruckner, B.; Unkles, S.E.; Weltring, K.; Kinghorn, J.R. Transformation of Gibberella fujikuroi: Effect of the Aspergillus nidulans
   AMA1 sequence on frequency and integration. Curr. Genet. 1992, 22, 313–316. [CrossRef]
45.  Feng, Z.; Mao, Y.; Xu, N.; Zhang, B.; Wei, P.; Yang, D.L.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, Z.; Zheng, R.; Yang, L.; et al. Multigeneration analysis
     reveals the inheritance, speciﬁcity, and patterns of CRISPR/Cas-induced gene modiﬁcations in Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
   USA 2014, 111, 4632–4637. [CrossRef]
46.  Zhang, N.; Roberts, H.M.; Van Eck, J.; Martin, G.B. Generation and Molecular Characterization of CRISPR/Cas9-Induced
     Mutations in 63 Immunity-Associated Genes in Tomato Reveals Speciﬁcity and a Range of Gene Modiﬁcations. Front. Plant Sci.
     2020, 11, 10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.   Li, J.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Yu, P.L.; Pan, H.; Rollins, J.A. Introduction of Large Sequence Inserts by CRISPR-Cas9 to Create
     Pathogenicity Mutants in the Multinucleate Filamentous Pathogen Sclerotinia sclerotiorum. mBio 2018, 9, e00567-18. [CrossRef]
48.  Cradick, T.J.; Fine, E.J.; Antico, C.J.; Bao, G. CRISPR/Cas9 systems targeting beta-globin and CCR5 genes have substantial
      off-target activity. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013, 41, 9584–9592. [CrossRef]


[PDF physical page 15]
J. Fungi 2022, 8, 715                                                                                                            15 of 15




49.  Fu, Y.; Foden, J.A.; Khayter, C.; Maeder, M.L.; Reyon, D.; Joung, J.K.; Sander, J.D. High-frequency off-target mutagenesis induced
    by CRISPR-Cas nucleases in human cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 2013, 31, 822–826. [CrossRef]
50.  Brakhage, A.A. Regulation of fungal secondary metabolism. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2013, 11, 21–32. [CrossRef]