
[PDF physical page 1]
Chemistry & Biology
Article


Characterization of a Fungal Thioesterase
Having Claisen Cyclase and Deacetylase Activities
in Melanin Biosynthesis

Anna L. Vagstad,1 Eric A. Hill,1 Jason W. Labonte,1 and Craig A. Townsend1,*
1Department of Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
*Correspondence: ctownsend@jhu.edu
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2012.10.002



SUMMARY                                                     1995). Understanding the fundamental principles of melanogen-
                                                                   esis may enable development of new antifungals to combat
Melanins are a broad class of darkly pigmented   infections.
macromolecules formed by oxidative polymerization    The major pathway for melanin biosynthesis in fungi is through
of phenolic monomers. In fungi, melanins are known   polymerization of polyketide-derived 1,8-dihydroxynaphthalene
virulence factors that contribute to pathogenicity.   (DHN, 1) monomers into dark brown or black cell-wall pigments.
Their biosynthesis generally involves polymerization   Melanins are highly insoluble, and thus are resistant to structural
                                                                    characterization, but have electrochemical and mechanical
of 1,8-dihydroxynaphthalene via a 1,3,6,8-tetrahy-
                                                                 properties that help exert their protective or virulent functions
droxynaphthalene (THN) precursor assembled by
                                                            (Jacobson, 2000). The pivotal intermediate of the biosynthetic
multidomain,  nonreducing  polyketide  synthases.                                                       pathways is 1,3,6,8-tetrahydroxynaphthalene (THN, 2), which
Convergent routes to THN have evolved in fungi.   undergoes two rounds of enzymatic reduction and dehydration
Parallel heptaketide and hexaketide pathways exist   to 1. The THN skeleton is synthesized by multidomain, nonre-
that  utilize conventional C-terminal thioesterase/   ducing iterative polyketide synthases (NR-PKSs). In some cases,
Claisen cyclase domains and separate side-chain   melanin genes are clustered at one genetic locus, but they can
deacylases. Here, in vitro characterization of Pks1   also be dispersed throughout the genome (Woo et al., 2010).
from Colletotrichum lagenarium establishes a true   Although nonessential, melanin pigments are important  for
THN synthase with a bifunctional thioesterase (TE)   survival and longevity. In many opportunistic plant and human
catalyzing both cyclization and deacetylation of an   pathogenic fungi, color-block mutants are signiﬁcantly less or
                                                              not infective (Bell and Wheeler, 1986; Langfelder et al., 2003).
enzyme-bound hexaketide substrate. Chimeric TE
                                                                Colletotrichum lagenarium (syn. Colletotrichum orbiculare)  is
domains were generated by swapping lid regions of
                                                       a dematiaceous fungus that infects members of the cucumber
active sites between classes of melanin TEs to gain                                                                    family and causes anthracnose disease (Tsuji et  al., 2003).
insight into this unprecedented catalysis of carbon–   Melanin structurally stabilizes the cell wall, facilitating turgor
carbon bond making and breaking by an a/b-hydro-   pressure to build up in specialized infectious bodies called
lase fold enzyme.                                          appressoria and is essential for host penetration (Pihet et al.,
                                                            2009; Takano et al., 1997). Treatment of C. lagenarium with the
                                                            melanin inhibitor tricyclazole (which targets THN reductase)
INTRODUCTION                                           induces an albino phenotype, causes ﬂaviolin (3, the autoxida-
                                                                        tion product of THN) to accumulate, and prevents inﬁltration of
Fungal infections afﬂict millions of people and cause crop losses   the plant dermis (Kubo et al., 1985).
in the billions of dollars each year (Gladieux et al., 2011). Many    The importance of THN (2) is highlighted by the existence of
human pathogenic fungi are dematiaceous yeasts that produce   convergent biosynthetic routes to this common metabolite in
dark cell-wall pigments called melanins and are among the most   different fungi, as outlined in Figure 1. In Aspergillus fumigatus,
resistant to current antifungal treatments (Nosanchuk and Casa-   heptaketide YWA1 (4) is the hemiketal of the direct product of
devall, 2006). Melanin is linked to fungal virulence in a variety of   the Alb1 NR-PKS (Watanabe et  al., 2000). The acetoacetyl
hosts. Human pathogens with melanized cell walls are more   side chain is removed by a separate serine hydrolase, Ayg1p,
resistant to damage from the host immune response, promoting,   to yield THN (Tsai et  al., 2001). In an alternative pathway,
for example, resistance to phagocytosis (Thywißen et al., 2011)  WdPks1 from zoopathogenic Wangiella (Exophiala) dermatitidis
and reactive oxygen species (Cunha et al., 2010) mustered in   synthesizes a hexaketide, 2-acetyl-1,3,6,8-tetrahydroxynaph-
self-defense by macrophages. Inhibition of melanin production   thalene (ATHN, 5), and the acetyl side chain is likewise removed
has been proposed as an effective route to controlling fungal   by WdYg1p, an Ayg1p homolog (Wheeler et al., 2008). A handful
infections  in susceptible immune-compromised populations   of examples of naphtho-g-pyrone synthases have been bio-
(Liu and Nizet, 2009). In phytopathogenic fungi, melanin biosyn-   chemically characterized in other fungi with wA from Aspergillus
thetic enzymes are validated targets for fungicides, which are   nidulans being a paradigm example. wA synthesizes YWA1,
widely used to prevent crop damage (Wheeler and  Klich,   which is thought to be polymerized directly into melanin-related

                                Chemistry & Biology 19, 1525–1534, December 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved  1525


[PDF physical page 2]
                                                                    Chemistry & Biology

                                                              Thioesterase as Claisen Cyclase and Deacetylase





                                                                              sity is achieved through ‘‘programmed’’ selection of starter unit,
                                                                polyketide chain length, regiospeciﬁcity of backbone cycliza-
                                                                                tion(s), and mode of product release. Enormous progress has
                                                     been made in the last decade to understand the catalytic func-
                                                                        tion of the six canonical domains that comprise these enzymes
                                                     and how they orchestrate polyketide assembly (Crawford and
                                                      Townsend, 2010). The b-ketoacyl synthase (KS), malonyl-CoA:
                                                                       acyl-carrier protein transacylase (MAT), and acyl-carrier protein
                                                           (ACP) were functionally identiﬁed by their similarity to domains
                                                          from fatty acid metabolism. Like fatty acid biosynthesis, each
                                                         round of iterative extension introduces a single C2-unit through
                                                               decarboxylative thio-Claisen condensation of malonyl with the
                                                             extending chain. Intermediates are tethered as terminal thioest-
                                                                 ers of a 4’-phosphopantetheinyl moiety attached to the ACP. The
                                                               N-terminal domain, dubbed the starter unit: acyl-carrier protein
                                                               transacylase (SAT), initiates synthesis with a prescribed starter
                                                                             unit, typically acetyl from the acyl-CoA (Crawford et al., 2006,
                                                              2008b). The product template (PT) domain catalyzes regiospe-
                                                                 ciﬁc cyclization and aromatization of the nascent ACP-bound
                                                              b-keto chain (Crawford et al., 2009; Li et al., 2010). In melanin-
                                                             type NR-PKSs connectivity between the C2 and C7 backbone
                                                         carbons produces a monocyclic intermediate, as shown in Fig-
                                                              ure 1. The C terminus constitutes a thioesterase (TE) domain
                                                               responsible for product release. The Claisen/Dieckmann cyclase
                                                                class of TE domains (TE/CLC), which catalyzes C–C bond forma-
                                                                        tion in contrast to the classical hydrolytic release of fatty acids,
                                                 was originally identiﬁed  in the wA naphthopyrone synthase
                                                          from A. nidulans (Fujii et al., 2001). Further insight into this class
                                                                     of TEs was advanced through determination of the crystal
                                                                   structure of a dissected TE/CLC monodomain from the norsolor-
                                                                              inic acid anthrone synthase, PksA, from Aspergillus parasiticus
                                                       (Korman et al., 2010). Inactivating mutation or deletion of TE/
                                             CLC domains generally results in spontaneous O-C cyclization
                                                                   to release full-length pyrone shunt products (Crawford and
                                                      Townsend, 2010).
                                                                             Historically,  metabolites  originating  from  NR-PKSs  ﬁt
                                                                           this model  of  polyketide  assembly;  however, Pks1  from
                                                           C. lagenarium appeared to be an outlier. THN (2) was identiﬁed
                                                         as the major product from cultures of Pks1 heterologously ex-
                                                          pressed in Aspergillus oryzae (Fujii et al., 1999). Application of
                                                               14C-labeled acetyl or malonyl substrates showed no apparent
                                                                 incorporation of an acetyl starter unit and that pentaketide 2
                                                 was produced solely from malonyl units  (Fujii et  al., 2000).
Figure 1. Convergent Biosynthetic Routes to the THN (2) Interme-  When the TE domain was inactivated, hexaketide pyrone 7
diate in Fungal DHN (1) Melanin Biosynthesis by NR-PKSs with
                                                 was produced instead, paralleling the synthetic logic since
Tandem ACP Domains
Pyrones (6 and 7) are released from heptaketide and hexaketide pathways  shown by other NR-PKS systems (Crawford et al., 2008a; Zhang
as shunt metabolites. Pathways blocked at the THN reductase, for example,   et al., 2008). Furthermore, expression of a chimera that spliced
by treatment with tricyclazole, accumulate ﬂaviolin  (3), the autoxidation   Pks1 to the C terminus of the wA gene at the PT-ACP junction
product of 2.                                                       resulted in isolation of the nonnative hexaketide Claisen cyclase
                                                               product, ATHN (5) (Watanabe and Ebizuka, 2002). Based on the
conidial green pigment, circumventing the THN intermediate   prevailing understanding of PKS catalysis at the time of this
(Watanabe et  al., 1999). These fungal pathways are distinct   publication, the ability to select for the pentaketide chain length
from bacterial type  III THN synthases, such as RppA from  was ascribed to a special function of the Pks1 TE domain.
Streptomyces griseus, where ﬁve malonyl units are condensed   Subsequent  experiments  with NR-PKS  family  members,
to  directly form the pentaketide as a precursor  in hexa-   however, support the view that chain length is determined by
hydroxyperylenequinone melanin  biosynthesis (Funa  et  al.,   the KS domain, making this ‘‘TE chain length control’’ theory
2002, 2005).                                                 untenable for Pks1 (Crawford and Townsend, 2010).
  Fungal NR-PKSs are a family of multidomain enzymes that      In  corresponding  studies, Ayg1p was  identiﬁed as  the
generate substituted aromatic natural products. Structural diver-   side-chain hydrolase that removes acetoacetyl from YWA1 in

1526  Chemistry & Biology 19, 1525–1534, December 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved


[PDF physical page 3]
Chemistry & Biology

Thioesterase as Claisen Cyclase and Deacetylase





                                                                                         Figure 2. Overview of Syntheses for Melanin
                                                                                  Standards
                                                                                                                            (A) Synthesis of C12-pyrone 7.
                                                                                                                        (B) Synthesis of THN (2), ﬂaviolin (3), and ATHN (5).
                                                                                    See also Figure S1 for HPLC separation of stan-
                                                                                                      dards.




                                                                                     dures, as detailed in Figure 2 and the
                                                                             Supplemental Experimental Procedures
                                                                                               (available online). The synthesis of ATHN
                                                                                                             (5, Figure 2) initially proved troublesome
                                                                                  but was efﬁciently achieved by way of
                                                                             double O-acylation/Fries rearrangements
                                                                                          to generate the asymmetric pentasubsti-
                                                                                      tuted phenyl ester 8.
                                                                             Methoxymethyl protection of the ester
                                                                        9 followed by coupling with the Weinreb
                                                                        amide 10 gave the ketone 11. Enolate
                                                                                                cyclization, removal of the  silyl group,
                                                                      and oxidation led to the desired hexake-
                                                                                               tide pyrone 7 after removal of the methox-
                                                                                ymethyl groups. Dibenzyl protection of
                                                                                     the ester 12 followed by Friedel-Crafts
A. fumigatus (Tsai et al., 2001). A BlastP search of the sequenced   acylation  afforded  the  acetophenone  13.  Treatment  with
A. oryzae genome (Machida et al., 2005) for proteins similar to   methoxide in methanol yielded dibenzyl THN (14), which was
Ayg1p revealed a potential functional complement in this heter-   deprotected by hydrogenolysis immediately before use  for
ologous host, the transcription of which was supported under   high-pressure  liquid  chromatography  (HPLC)  analysis  of
standard laboratory conditions by detection of an expressed  THN (2) or readily oxidized in air to ﬂaviolin (3). The double
sequence tag (AoEST6890) from a conidial cDNA library (Akao   O-acylation/Fries  rearrangements  noted  above,  selectively
et al., 2007). Furthermore, the puriﬁed Pks1 SAT monodomain   afforded  the asymmetric  pentasubstituted phenyl  ester  8.
was found  to  selectively  transfer  acetyl  in  disparity  with   Di-O-benzyl protection and Dieckmann condensation generated
labeled-precursor incorporation experiments (Crawford et al.,   3-di-O-benzyl ATHN, which  following  hydrogenolysis gave
2008b). Taking into account these results and the precedence  ATHN (5).
of fungal NR-PKSs catalyzing chain extension prior to cyclization
in the PT and TE domains, we hypothesized that C. lagenarium   Protein Deconstruction and Correction of the Pks1
(and heterologous host A. oryzae) contained an enzyme with  Coding Sequence
Ayg1p-like activity and that hexaketide ATHN (5) was the direct  To study NR-PKSs in vitro, we have adopted a ‘‘deconstruction’’
product of Pks1 (Crawford et al., 2008b). Such a hexaketide   approach based on in silico prediction of domain boundaries
precursor was originally proposed by Bardshiri and Simpson   to dissect expressible, functional units from target enzymes
(1983) when feeding experiments with labeled acetate failed to   (Udwary et al., 2002). This approach offers a versatile method
reveal a ‘‘starter-unit effect’’ for melanin intermediates isolated   to assess domains individually or in selected sets, as exempliﬁed
from Phialaphora lagerbergii. However, the supposition of an   by the four-part reconstitution of A. parasiticus PksA activity to
Ayg1p-like activity in A. oryzae was undermined when heterolo-   synthesize norsolorinic acid anthrone, the ﬁrst committed inter-
gous expression of the melanin PKS from W. dermatitidis   mediate  in aﬂatoxin biosynthesis (Crawford  et  al., 2008a).
(WdPks1)  in  this host accumulated ATHN (Wheeler  et  al.,   Expression plasmids to study melanin biosynthesis by Pks1
2008), not THN as had been observed for expression of Pks1   from C. lagenarium were patterned on analogous interdomain
under similar conditions. These observations led us to suspect   cleavage sites used for deconstruction of PksA. Soluble, active
that something else was occurring. We chose, therefore, to study   proteins were readily achieved for all constructs, except those
Pks1 in vitro to establish the biochemical rationale for THN   containing the TE domain—a domain typically overexpressed
production in C. lagenarium.                                    without difﬁculty.
                                                       The  current  annotation  for  Pks1  (GenBank  accession
RESULTS                                             BAA18956) designates two short exons within the N-terminal
                                                SAT domain and a third long exon spanning all domains. The
Synthesis of Standards                                 Pks1 protein sequence was aligned to other characterized NR-
To proceed with this study, synthetic standards of melanin  PKSs for comparative analysis. Close inspection revealed that
biosynthetic intermediates and shunt metabolites were prepared    all catalytic residues and secondary structural elements ap-
to conﬁdently identify the products of in vitro Pks1 reactions.   peared to be intact. Despite its correct appearance, reassess-
Most of the synthetic methods utilized were standard proce-   ment of Pks1 gDNA using FGNESH gene prediction software

                                Chemistry & Biology 19, 1525–1534, December 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved  1527


[PDF physical page 4]
                                                                    Chemistry & Biology

                                                              Thioesterase as Claisen Cyclase and Deacetylase





                                                                                         Figure 3. Two-Part Multidomain Combina-
                                                                                                  tion TE Assay: Pks1DTE Reacted with Either
                                                                                  No, Pks1, or wA TE
                                                                                                 Reactions were monitored by UV-vis spectro-
                                                                                             photometry scanning every 10 min from 280–
                                                                                       650 nm. Products were separated by HPLC using
                                                                                         a linear gradient. THN (2) initially accumulates in
                                                                                                       the Pks1 TE reaction, indicated by increasing
                                                                                          absorbance at 336 nm, and then spontaneously
                                                                                                         oxidizes to ﬂaviolin (3), the major product detected
                                                                                        by HPLC. ATHN  (5)  likewise  spontaneously
                                                                                                         oxidizes to 3-AF (15). Diode array spectra were
                                                                                                      extracted for the major product peak from each
                                                                         HPLC chromatogram. See also Figure S2  for
                                                                             WdPks1 parent TE swap control reactions. See
                                                                                                         also Tables S2 and S3.




                                                              Domain Swapping Reveals
                                                                   a Thioesterase with Claisen
                                                                      Cyclase and Deacetylase Activities
                                                                       The second advantage of the deconstruc-
                                                                                                tion approach  is  that  individually ex-
                                                                             pressed domains can be ‘‘mixed and
                                                                                    matched,’’ offering a ﬂexible platform for
                                                                       domain swapping among different NR-
                                                                        PKSs. In an initial set of reactions, Pks1
                                                                SAT–KS–MAT–PT–ACP–ACP (Pks1DTE)
                                                                  was combined with either the Pks1 or
                                                        wA TE monodomain. Reaction progress
                                                                  was monitored by UV-vis spectrophotom-
                                                                                                     etry, and products were separated by
                                                                                reverse-phase HPLC and identiﬁed by
                                                                           comparison to synthetic standards (Fig-
                                                                                   ure 3). The Pks1 TE reaction rapidly accu-
                                                                             mulated an absorbance peak at 336 nm,
(http://linux1.softberry.com/berry.phtml) exposed an alternative   indicative of THN production (not ATHN as predicted if a second
protein sequence in which the ﬁnal 17 residues of exon 3 were   Ayg1p-like enzyme were  invoked). THN  (2) spontaneously
replaced by a short 14-amino-acid exon 4. Constructs based   converts to the reddish-purple oxidation product ﬂaviolin (3),
on this modiﬁed cDNA resulted in soluble expression of the   the major species observed by HPLC. Trace amounts of C12-
functional TE domain. Furthermore, transcript analysis of the   pyrone 7 and ATHN (5) were also detected. In contrast, the wA
region straddling the in-silico-predicted pks1 exon 3-4 junction  TE reaction developed a lmax at 411 nm, producing mainly 5 to
conﬁrmed that  this revised splicing pattern  is observed  in   mirror the product proﬁle observed previously for the full-length
C. lagenarium mRNA, in amendment of the original gene struc-  Pks1–wA chimera expressed in A. oryzae (Watanabe and Ebi-
ture report (Takano et al., 1995). In the ﬁrst study of Pks1 activity,   zuka, 2002). ATHN spontaneously oxidizes to 3-acetyl-ﬂaviolin
the cDNA clone used for heterologous expression in A. oryzae   (3-AF, 15) over time, albeit at a slower rate than THN oxidation
was based on the original three-exon gene structure but addi-   (Wheeler et al., 2008). The control reaction with no TE gradually
tionally contained an extra genomic sequence at its 30 terminus   accumulated 7, formed by spontaneous O–C cyclization of the
that encompassed the proposed fourth exon (Fujii et al., 1999).   monocyclic ACP-bound product of the PT domain.
The heterologous host A. oryzae was able to complement native    The complementary experiment was conducted using the
mRNA splicing to afford the active enzyme. Additional transcript   deconstructed SAT–KS–MAT and PT–ACP–ACP proteins from
evidence in support of a revised gene structure was identiﬁed in   the ATHN synthase WdPks1. When combined with either no
the melanin PKS (GenBank accession CCF45141) from the   TE, its cognate WdPks1 TE, or Pks1 TE, results closely paralleled
closely related species Colletotrichum higginsianum (Ushimaru   those for the Pks1 parent enzyme reactions and produced C12-
et al., 2010), which has a TE domain that shares 94.4% protein   pyrone 7, ATHN (5), and THN (2), respectively (Figure S2, avail-
sequence identity with Pks1. Expressed sequence tags reported   able online). Both WdPks1 and Pks1, therefore, produce chemi-
for ChPks1 (CH063_03518, Broad Institute) in the Colletotrichum    cally equivalent monocyclic intermediates, and their TE domains
genome database conﬁrm that the C. higginsianum gene tran-   alone are responsible for the alternative synthetic outcomes.
script contains the same four-exon structure validated here for    Taken together, these results verify that Pks1 is a hexaketide
C. lagenarium Pks1.                                            synthase, but with an unprecedented bifunctional TE possessing

1528  Chemistry & Biology 19, 1525–1534, December 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved


[PDF physical page 5]
Chemistry & Biology

Thioesterase as Claisen Cyclase and Deacetylase





Table 1. Pks1 Prefers Acetyl Starter Units

                 Observed    Relative   Observed    Relative
Product    Peak   [M+H]+       Intensity   [M+Na]+     Intensity

3-AF (15)  M      249.0390    0.61       271.0207    0.64

        M+1   250.0426   1         272.0247   1
ESI-MS detection of 13C-labeled acetyl starter unit incorporation into
ATHN (5) for the Pks1DTE + wA-TE reaction, measured as peak intensi-
ties for the autoxidation product 3-AF (15).


both Claisen cyclase and deacetylase activities to release the
truncated pentaketide product THN (2) directly. Pks1 is a true
THN synthase and does not require a second hydrolase for poly-
ketide shortening as has been described for melanin biosyn-
thesis in A. fumigatus (Tsai et al., 2001) and W. dermatitidis
(Wheeler et al., 2008).

Incorporation of 13C-acetyl Starter Units
Loss of acetyl by TE-catalyzed cleavage accounts  for the
absence of a ‘‘starter-unit effect’’ in the biosynthesis of THN
from classical precursor labeling studies (Bardshiri and Simp-   Figure 4. Additional Substrates Tested for Side-Chain Removal by
                                                                  the Pks1 TE Monodomain
son, 1983). To conﬁrm that the starter unit of Pks1 was indeed
                                                        No conversion was detected for any compound.
acetyl, as indicated by the substrate preference of the excised
SAT domain (Crawford et al., 2008b), incorporation of [1-13C]-
acetate was monitored by mass spectrometry for the Pks1 TE   2008). The present study, corroborated  in  earlier work by
and wA TE in vitro reactions. As expected, no mass shift was   Ebizuka and  Fujii  (Fujii et  al., 2000), conﬁrms that Pks1  is
observed  for ﬂaviolin because the starter unit  is removed;   a THN synthase. Other PKSs included in the sequence analysis
however, the M+1 species indicative of labeled acetyl incorpora-   have been linked to pigment biosynthesis through gene disrup-
tion was observed as the major peak (M:M+1, 0.6:1) for ATHN (5),    tion, heterologous expression, or their presence in biosynthetic
detected as 3-AF (15) (Table 1).                            gene clusters with conﬁrmed melanin pathway enzymes. The
  The unenriched products presumably contain starter units   direct products of these PKSs are largely undeﬁned; however,
arising from decarboxylation of unlabeled malonyl units intro-   phylogenetic analysis demonstrates that TEs of the same known
duced by the MAT domain and can be a physiologically relevant   function group within a clade (Figure 5A). Sequences labeled by
source of chain initiators. The ability of Pks1 to access acetyl   an asterisk were modiﬁed to reﬂect revised mRNA splicing
starter units from either SAT or MAT domains could improve   based on in silico FGNESH predictions, which yielded proteins
the overall catalytic efﬁciency of this system.                 more similar to melanin-producing NR-PKSs than their current
                                                                 annotation. The proposed protein sequence corrections are
Deacetylase Activity Is Coupled to Claisen Cyclization      provided in Figure S3 and result in minor changes to their C
ATHN (5) treated with the Pks1 TE monodomain or full-length   termini.
protein was not converted to THN (2), signifying that deacetylase    A homology model of Pks1 TE was prepared using the recently
activity was coupled to Claisen cyclization at the active site. The   determined 1.7  A˚ crystal structure of the PksA TE domain
hexaketide pyrone 7 was also inert to ring opening and Claisen   (Protein Data Bank [PDB] ID code 3ILS) as the template, which
cyclization by the Pks1 TE. In separate experiments, deacetyla-   shares 37% sequence identity and 53% sequence similarity
tion or deformylation of various monocyclic and bicyclic acetyl-   with the Pks1 TE (Figure 5B) (Korman et al., 2010). In comparison
and aldehyde-containing substrates, pictured in Figure 4, like-   to Pks1, the PksA TE accepts a bicyclic C20 substrate with a hexyl
wise failed to occur.                                                   starter-unit side chain and catalyzes an analogous Claisen cycli-
                                                                   zation to close the third ring of norsolorinic acid anthrone (Craw-
Primary Sequence and Structural Comparisons of           ford et al., 2008a). The TEs adopt an a/b-hydrolase fold (Nardini
Melanin-Related Thioesterase Domains                  and Dijkstra, 1999) with a ﬂexible lid insert between b6 and b7 of
We elected to examine in greater detail which features of the   the canonical structure comprised of a helix-loop-helix motif that
Pks1 TE were important for its extra deacetylase function. The   caps an internal binding chamber. Following transesteriﬁcation
protein sequence of Pks1 was compared to other NR-PKSs   of the PT-cyclized intermediate from ACP to TE, lid closure is
involved in melanin and conidial pigment biosynthesis. Several   thought to facilitate exclusion of water and side-chain localiza-
YWA1-producing PKSs have been functionally characterized,   tion to favor C-C bond formation catalyzed by a Ser-His-Asp
including A. fumigatus Alb1 (Watanabe et al., 2000), A. nidulans   catalytic triad (Korman et al., 2010). Several lid residues line
wA (Watanabe et  al., 1999), Aspergillus niger FwnA (Chiang   the roof of the PksA TE active site and are indicated by blue trian-
et al., 2011; Jørgensen et al., 2011), and Gibberella zeae Pks12   gles in the alignment of this region depicted in Figure 5C. Owing
(Frandsen et  al., 2011). WdPks1 from W. dermatitidis is the   to high sequence and predicted secondary structure similarity
sole validated example of an ATHN synthase (Wheeler et al.,  among NR-PKSs, the lid is almost certainly a conserved feature

                                Chemistry & Biology 19, 1525–1534, December 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved  1529


[PDF physical page 6]
                                                                    Chemistry & Biology

                                                              Thioesterase as Claisen Cyclase and Deacetylase





Figure 5. Comparative Analyses of TE Domains
(A) Phylogenetic tree of NR-PKSs with conﬁrmed involvement in melanin or conidial pigment biosynthesis. The direct product of the PKS, when known, is
indicated by either a blue square (THN), red circle (ATHN), or green diamond (YWA1). Bootstrap values are shown next to the branch points. See also Table S1.
(B) Homology model of Pks1 TE based on the PksA TE structure PDB ID code ILS3. The lid region used in chimera swaps is colored blue, and the catalytic triad is
shown as balls and sticks colored by element.
(C) Sequence alignment of the lid region with PksA numbering. Hydrophobic residues lining the PksA active site are indicated by blue triangles. Arrows indicate lid
loop (circle) and complete lid (diamond) regions swapped in the chimeras. The black boxes surrounding Pks1 and WdPks1 residues indicate the regions mutated
in helix swaps. See also Figure S3 for the full TE sequence alignment.
(D) Product distribution of three-part TE assay reactions organized by parent TE. Labels indicate percent peak area for each product. Error bars show standard
deviation from duplicate reactions. LL, Lid loop; L, Lid; Cl, C. lagenarium Pks1; wA, A. nidulans wA; Wd, W. dermatitidis WdPks1. See also Tables S2 and S3.



of this subfamily of TEs. The full-length domain alignment of   protein. Because the smaller proteins are expressed in greater
PksA with melanin-type TEs is provided in Figure S3.               yields, these fragments were used to assay the mutant TEs.
                                                                 Acetyl and malonyl N-acetyl cysteamine (SNAC) thioesters
Lid Swap Chimera Alter TE Activity                       were used as effective alternative substrates to acyl-CoA mono-
Of the residues predicted to line the TE active site, the lid was   mers. Reactions were monitored by UV-vis spectrophotometric
identiﬁed as a potential region of sequence divergence between   scanning kinetics for detection of chromophore development
YWA1/ATHN- and THN-producing PKSs. Furthermore, other   and by HPLC for proﬁling product distribution. Reduction in de-
a/b-hydrolase family members have proven amenable to  lid   acetylase activity was demonstrated by diminished production
variations and  in some cases have demonstrated  altered   of THN (2) in favor of ATHN (5). Decline in Claisen cyclase activity
substrate preferences or reactivities (Chen et al., 2009). There-  was indicated by accumulation of the C12-pyrone 7. Other
fore, a series of Pks1 and wA lid chimeras was developed by   metabolites were not observed above trace amounts. Product
swapping the alternative lid sequences from the wA (YWA1-   distributions of the lid chimera are summarized in Figure 5D
type), WdPks1 (ATHN-type), and Pks1 (THN-type) proteins.   and represent the average of duplicate reactions. THN (2), which
Three-part Pks1 SAT–KS–MAT + PT–ACP–ACP + TE reactions   elutes as a broad peak around 14 minutes, and its oxidation
accumulated THN in comparable yields to the intact full-length   product ﬂaviolin (3) were summed to give the total deacetylated

1530  Chemistry & Biology 19, 1525–1534, December 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved


[PDF physical page 7]
Chemistry & Biology

Thioesterase as Claisen Cyclase and Deacetylase





product. Likewise, peak areas  for ATHN  (5) and oxidation
product 3-AF (15) were combined.
  Swapping the lid loop (LL) regions among different classes of
TEs had no signiﬁcant effect on either the kinetics of chromo-
phore formation or product distribution. The loop sequence of
Pks1 is four residues longer than either wA or WdPks1 but was
ruled out here as a factor in deacetylation catalysis. Inclusion
of the LL-ﬂanking aL1 and aL2 helices in the lid chimeras caused
a major shift in the distribution of products. Within the Pks1
parent, the WdPks1 lid efﬁciently complemented Claisen cyclase
activity but showed a 78% reduction in THN relative to wild-type
with a concomitant increase in ATHN. The Pks1 lid-wA variant
displayed reduced Claisen efﬁciency (pyrone was the favored
product at 82% total peak area) and complete side-chain reten-
tion (with no THN detected). The inverse experiment, where the
Pks1 lid was integrated into the wA parent, was insufﬁcient to
turn on deacetylase activity and produced virtually no Claisen
products, releasing the pyrone almost exclusively at 98% of
the total.
  The Pks1  lid-Wd chimera was  inspected more  closely
because of its reduced ability to catalyze deacetylation without   Figure 6. Proposed Mechanisms for Product Partitioning in WdPks1
any apparent loss in Claisen cyclization. The aL1 and aL2 helices   and Pks1 TEs, which Synthesize ATHN (5) and THN (2), Respectively
were individually mutated to the WdPks1 sequence (boxed resi-   The acetyl starter unit is shown in bold.
dues in Figure 4C), resulting in changes to six amino acids per
helix. Product proﬁles reﬂect the importance of aL1 for efﬁcient
removal of the acetyl side chain, which had a distribution virtually  DISCUSSION
identical to the complete lid swap, whereas aL2 produced mainly
THN (88%).                                      No additional catalytic machinery  is necessarily required to
  Next, the hexaketide pathway homolog TE from WdPks1 was   cleave the acetyl pendant by Pks1 TE. Whereas the discrete
examined to see  if side-chain removal could be activated in   serine hydrolases from A. fumigatus (Ayg1p) and W. dermatitidis
a closer functional relative. Surprisingly, some THN was innately   (WdYg1p) melanin pathways can act on YWA1 and ATHN,
produced by the wild-type WdPks1 TE, accounting for 13% of   respectively, Pks1 TE showed no conversion  of any  free
the product output. Substitution with the Pks1 lid enhanced   substrate tested for side-chain removal. Lack of activity toward
this basal deacetylase activity. Even though signiﬁcant product   synthetic ATHN implies that TE acts on the immediate product
was siphoned  into pyrone derailment, the THN peak area   of the Claisen cyclase event, perhaps prior to aromatization to
increased 2-fold over native Wd levels, and the ratio of Claisen   the naphthalene core, where overcoming aromatic stabilization
products, THN:ATHN, shifted from 1:6 to 2:1 for this variant.     would hinder side-chain hydrolysis, as depicted in Figure 6. In
  Complementation of Claisen cyclization between wA (YWA1-    lieu of reprotonation to restore the resting state of the catalytic
type) and WdPks1 (ATHN-type) TEs was also considered. The    triad, the serine residue could attack into the side-chain carbonyl
wA lid catalyzed C-C bond formation in the WdPks1 TE with   to release THN and acetic acid as products, analogous to b-di-
a marginal increase in the shunt O-C population. The Wd lid   ketide hydrolases (E.C.3.7.1.X), of which Ayg1p and WdYg1p
partially complemented cyclase function in the wA TE, releasing   are members (Grogan, 2005). The absence of water in the active
a mixture of ATHN (34%) and pyrone (65%).                         site of the closed-lid structure of PksA TE (Korman et al., 2010)
  In some cases generation of the pyrone by TE lid chimera   suggests that side-chain attack is direct rather than water medi-
reactions was much greater than either no TE or Pks1 TE   ated by a general base mechanism in Pks1. Although specula-
S2009A loss-of-function mutant controls, where transesteriﬁca-    tive, we hypothesize that product partitioning between ATHN
tion of the monocyclic intermediate from ACP to TE cannot   and THN is kinetically controlled, based on the fact that both
occur. Spontaneous release of this intermediate from the ACP   Pks1 TE and WdPks1 TE synthesize both products but in highly
was extremely slow, and the enzyme likely wields a protective   skewed, opposing ratios. According to this model, nucleophilic
role in slowing the favorable O-C cyclization mode. In contrast,   attack at C11 would out-compete reprotonation of S2009 to
the wA lid-Pks1 chimera, for example—which was deﬁcient in    shift the equilibrium of product formation toward the retro-
Claisen cyclase activity but could presumably still accept the   Claisen products in Pks1. Enzyme-assisted stabilization of the
monocyclic substrate—accumulated much higher amounts of   prearomatic ‘‘diketide’’ intermediate may further promote this
the pyrone. The foundation for this observed phenomenon could   transformation.
be passive, that is, through reduced protection of the monocy-      In an alternative mechanism, deacetylation (retro-Claisen) of
clic intermediate while covalently bound to Claisen-deﬁcient   the TE-bound monocyclic intermediate may occur  prior to
TEs, or active, through TE-conferred catalytic release of the   Claisen cyclization (Dieckmann) with the instantly formed enolate
pyrone. Our experiments did not differentiate between these   closing directly to THN. We consider this scenario, however,
alternatives.                                                       less likely because a suitable base could not be identiﬁed in

                                Chemistry & Biology 19, 1525–1534, December 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved  1531


[PDF physical page 8]
                                                                    Chemistry & Biology

                                                              Thioesterase as Claisen Cyclase and Deacetylase





the homology model of the Pks1 TE in the region where the   clic hexaketide precursor, explaining the absence of an
side  chain  is presumed  to  reside.  Structural analyses  of   observable ‘‘starter-unit effect’’ in this system. Domain and
closely related melanin-TEs might illuminate how small changes   secondary structural element swapping experiments could
in  their  active-site geometries could contribute to product   provide a valid route to engineering NR-PKS pathways to
partitioning.                                          expand the biosynthetic potential of these enzymes and in
  Domain-swapping exercises illustrate the interchangeability of   understanding the molecular foundation of melanogenesis,
NR-PKS domains among closely related synthases. The wA TE,  where it may aid efforts to discover new, effective antifungal
which accepts a native C14-ACP-bound substrate, proﬁciently   therapies. The unusual ability of Pks1 TE to catalyze tandem
catalyzed Claisen cyclization of the Pks1-generated C12 interme-   carbon-carbon bond making and breaking reactions  in
diate. This promiscuity in side-chain binding indicates that the  a single enzymatic step further expands the diverse array
precise identity of the terminal acetyl group of the YWA1 TE-   of reactions known for a/b-hydrolase fold enzymes gener-
bound precursor is not the sole determinant for orienting the    ally (Carr and Ollis, 2009) and the repertoire of activities
side chain for Claisen/Dieckmann C–C bond formation in wA.   exempliﬁed by fungal TE domains in particular.
Furthermore, secondary structural motifs within domains have
proven adaptable to exchange and are useful in deciphering   EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
which protein features are responsible for speciﬁc activities
and ultimately natural product programming. Through genera-   Synthesis of Melanin Standards
tion of TE chimera, we have shown that the lid region, speciﬁcally     All  synthetic  details  are  provided  in  the  Supplemental  Experimental
the aL1 helix, is a factor in maintaining the active-site topography   Procedures.
of Pks1 TE necessary to catalyze efﬁcient deacetylation, a previ-
ously unknown function for NR-PKS TE domains. Another recent   C. Orbiculare cDNA Analysis
                                                                        C. orbiculare NRRL28842 was cultured in potato-sucrose liquid medium sup-
example where this approach was successfully applied involved
                                                                    plemented with 0.2% yeast extract, and mycelia were transferred to 1.2 M
structural swaps between ketoreductase domains from resor-   sucrose for 20 hr as previously described to rapidly induce transcription of
cylic acid macrolactone synthases, members of the highly   melanin biosynthetic pathway genes (Okamoto et al., 2001; Takano et al.,
reducing class of fungal iterative PKSs, to understand the ratio-    1995). Mycelia were harvested by vacuum ﬁltration over Miracloth (EMD
nale for differential stereochemistries of their product hydroxyls    Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), frozen in liquid N2, and stored at  80 C until
(Zhou et al., 2012).                                                       use. Total RNA was harvested from mycelia ground in liquid N2 using an
                                                              RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA, USA) as recommended by the
  Stepwise production of THN via an isolable acyl side-chain
                                                                         manufacturer with the on-column DNase digestion step. First-strand cDNA
intermediate (YWA1 or ATHN), leads to greater potential for                                                            was prepared from 1 mg total RNA and random hexamer primer (IDT, Coralville,
synthetic diversity. In A. niger, for example, FwnA produces    IA, USA) using M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in
naphtho-g-pyrones, including YWA1, that can be directly incor-   a 20 ml volume. A reaction lacking reverse transcriptase was used as a negative
porated into natural products (like the dimeric aurosperones) or,    control. The cDNA synthesis reaction was used directly as a template for
through selective use of the Ayg1p homolog OlvA, can be    ampliﬁcation of the region spanning the proposed exon 4 in pks1 using primer
                                                                                set Pks1e4check-5.1 50-GAAGGCGAGACAGTCCAAAG-30 and Pks1e4check-directed into the DHN melanin pathway (Chiang et al., 2011).
                                                                              3.1 50-TAAGAGTGTGCATGATCTCGC-30. PCRs  contained 2  ml cDNA,
Alternatively, C. lagenarium (and likely many other melanin NR-
                                                                 200 mM deoxynucleoside triphosphates, 0.4 mM each primer, 3% dimethyl
PKSs that are closely related) has a bifunctional TE domain    sulfoxide, and 2.5 units OneTaq DNA Polymerase (New England BioLabs,
that  catalyzes both  Claisen  cyclization and  deacetylation.    Ipswich, MA, USA) in manufacturer-provided buffer in 50 ml volume. A touch-
Melanin is important for fungal survival and longevity, as well   down PCR method was employed. The thermocycler conditions were 94 C
as virulence in many pathogenic species. Depending on the    0:15 (melt), 60 C to 52 C 0:30 (1 C/cycle incremental temperature drop,
selective pressures exerted on different fungal strains, more efﬁ-    anneal), and 68 C 1:20 (extend) for eight cycles; the annealing temperature
                                                            was maintained at 52 C for an additional 20 cycles. Total RNA and PCR-
cient THN biosynthesis may have evolved in response to envi-
                                                                       ampliﬁed cDNA were analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis. The cDNA
ronmental factors necessitating greater proﬁciency in cell-wall   amplicon was subcloned into pCRII-TOPO using a TOPO TA Cloning Kit
pigmentation at the expense of product diversity.                       (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA), and puriﬁed plasmids from four colonies
                                                                  were individually sequenced to conﬁrm the revised splicing prediction. The
SIGNIFICANCE                                         cDNA inserts were aligned in Sequencher v4.0 (Gene Codes Corporation,
                                                              Ann Arbor, MI, USA), and the contig is provided in the Supplemental Experi-
                                                                        mental Procedures.
Fungal melanins provide survival advantages in harsh envi-
ronments. They are also virulence factors for many patho-
genic fungi, where pigment disruption often renders these   Cloning and Expression
                                                    DNA manipulations were carried out using standard methods (Sambrook and
strains noninfective. Similar heptaketide and hexaketide
                                                                                  Russell, 2001). wA and Pks1 fragments were ampliﬁed from A. nidulans
pathways have been described that utilize separate deace-   RLMH67 and C. orbiculare (syn. C. lagenarium) NRRL 28842 gDNA, respec-
tylases to remove the acetoacetyl and acetyl side chains of     tively. The W. dermatitidis TE coding sequence DNA was purchased from Gen-
their respective bicyclic substrates released by standard    Script (Piscataway, NJ, USA). Point mutants and lid chimeras were generated
C-terminal thioesterase/Claisen cyclase domains of NR-   by overlap extension PCR using wild-type TE constructs as template DNA.
PKSs. In vitro biochemical characterization conﬁrms that   Subsequently,   additional  WdPks1  fragments  were  ampliﬁed  from
                                                            W. dermatitidis UT8656 gDNA. Further cloning details are summarized in the
Pks1 efﬁciently synthesizes THN unaided by a second
                                                                      Supplemental Experimental Procedures (Tables S2 and S3). Recombinant
enzyme, deﬁning an efﬁcient third fungal route to this impor-    proteins were heterologously expressed from BL21(DE3) in Luria-Bertani broth
tant melanin precursor. Pks1 TE is both a Claisen cyclase   medium and puriﬁed by Ni2+-afﬁnity chromatography as previously described
and deacetylase that processes an enzyme-bound monocy-    using standard methods (Crawford et al., 2008a).

1532  Chemistry & Biology 19, 1525–1534, December 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved


[PDF physical page 9]
Chemistry & Biology

Thioesterase as Claisen Cyclase and Deacetylase





In Vitro Reactions                                                  sequence pair. Evolutionary distances were computed using the Poisson
Reactions were carried out at room temperature with 10 mM protein (each) in    correction method.
reaction buffer (100 mM K/PO4 pH 7.0 and 1 mM tris[2-carboxyethyl]phos-
phine [TCEP]) and were initiated by the addition of a substrate mix containing
                                                   SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
acetyl and malonyl as the CoA or SNAC thioesters. Reactions were monitored
by UV-vis spectrophotometry using scanning kinetics from 280–650 nm on
                                                                      Supplemental Information includes three ﬁgures and three tables and can
a Cary 50 instrument (Varian Inc., Walnut Creek, CA, USA). Products were ex-
                                                               be found with this article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2012.
tracted into ethyl acetate or ﬁltered through a 10k MWCO Microcon centrifugal
                                                                            10.002.
ﬁlter device (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) for HPLC analysis. Products (100 ml
injections) were separated by reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent 1200, Santa Clara,
                                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
CA, USA) using a bisolvent linear gradient over a Prodigy ODS3 column (4.6 3
250 mm, 5 mm, Phenomenex, Torrence, CA, USA). Solvent A: H2O + 0.1%
                                                 We thank Prof. J.M. Crawford (Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA) for
formic acid; Solvent B: acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid; 5% to 80% B over
                                                                                 preliminary DNA work and helpful discussions. Drs. S.A. Rehner (USDA-
30 minutes with a ﬂow rate of 1 ml/minute.
                                                                ARS, Beltsville, MD, USA) and K. O’Donnell (USDA, Peoria, IL, USA), Prof.  In initial TE swaps, Pks1DTE was combined with either no TE, Pks1 TE, or
                                                                        N. P. Keller (University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA), Dr. Z. Wang (Naval
wA TE with 0.5 mM acetyl-CoA and 2 mM malonyl-CoA substrates. After
                                                                    Research Laboratory, Washington, DC, USA), and Prof. P.J. Szaniszlo (Univer-
4 hr, reactions were ﬁltered through Microcon centrifugal ﬁlter devices and
                                                                                              sity of Texas, Austin, TX, USA) kindly provided spores and/or gDNA from
analyzed by HPLC. Full-length Pks1 and three-part (SAT–KS–MAT + PT–
                                                                        C. orbiculare, A. nidulans, and W. dermatitidis, respectively. We are grateful
ACP–ACP + TE) combinations were likewise tested.
                                                                                 to Katherine Belecki for collecting mass spectrometry data and to K.L. Fiedler
  Wild-type, point mutant, and lid-chimera TEs were assayed in three-part
                                                                and Prof. R.J. Cotter of the Middle Atlantic Mass Spectrometry Laboratory at
multidomain combinations with Pks1 SAT–KS–MAT and PT–ACP–ACP using
                                                                             the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine and the Mid-Atlantic Regional Ofﬁce of
0.25 mM acetyl-SNAC and 1 mM malonyl-SNAC substrates in reaction buffer
                                                                 Shimadzu Scientiﬁc Instruments, Inc. (Columbia, MD, USA) for use of their Shi-
additionally containing 10% glycerol. Reactions were monitored by UV-vis
                                                            madzu LC-IT-TOF. This work was supported by the National Institutes of
spectrophotometry for 2 hr and ﬁltered through Microcon centrifugal ﬁlter
                                                                           Health Grant ES 001670.
devices. Products were separated by HPLC, and the resulting chromatograms
(A254 nm) integrated to calculate peak areas. Control reactions with WdPks1
                                                                         Received: April 24, 2012SAT–KS–MAT and PT–ACP–ACP were similarly conducted.
                                                                          Revised: September 25, 2012
                                                                       Accepted: October 2, 2012
Deacetylase/Deformylase Assay
                                                                             Published: December 20, 2012
ATHN (5), C12-pyrone 7, and a variety of other acetyl and aldehyde side-chain
compounds (Figure 5, 0.5 mM) were separately incubated with the Pks1 TE or
S2009A mutant control (10 mM) overnight. Reactions were ﬁltered through  REFERENCES
Microcon centrifugal ﬁlter devices and analyzed by HPLC. ATHN (5) was
also tested as a substrate for full-length Pks1.                              Akao, T., Sano, M., Yamada, O., Akeno, T., Fujii, K., Goto, K., Ohashi-Kunihiro,
                                                                                         S., Takase, K., Yasukawa-Watanabe, M., Yamaguchi, K., et al. (2007). Analysis
                                                                                   of expressed sequence tags from the fungus Aspergillus oryzae cultured underStarter Unit Incorporation Assay
                                                                                        different conditions. DNA Res. 14, 47–57.Three-part in vitro reactions containing Pks1 SAT–KS–MAT, Pks1 PT–ACP–
ACP, and either Pks1 TE or wA TE were initiated with 1 mM [1-13C]-acetyl-    Bardshiri, E., and Simpson, T.J. (1983). 13C and 2H labelling studies on the
SNAC and 1 mM malonyl-SNAC. Following overnight incubation, 500 ml reac-    biosynthesis of scytalone in Phialaphora lagerbergll. Tetrahedron 39, 3539–
tions were quenched with 10 ml HCl and extracted twice with 1 ml ethyl acetate.   3542.
Pooled extracts were evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 250 ml 50%    Bell, A.A., and Wheeler, M.H. (1986). Biosynthesis and functions of fungal
aqueous  acetonitrile. Products were analyzed by HR-ESI-LCMS on a    melanins. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 24, 411–451.
Shimadzu LC-IT-TOF over a Luna C18(2) analytical column (2.0 3 150 mm,
                                                                                  Carr, P.D., and Ollis, D.L. (2009). a/b hydrolase fold: an update. Protein Pept.
3 mm, Phenomenex) using a linear gradient of 20% to 80% B over 30 minutes
                                                                                          Lett. 16, 1137–1148.
with a ﬂow rate of 0.2 ml/minute. Positive ion peak intensities were compared
                                                                    Chen, B., Cai, Z., Wu, W., Huang, Y., Pleiss, J., and Lin, Z. (2009). Morphingfor the M and M+1 peaks using LCMS Solutions v3.50 software (Shimadzu,
                                                                                            activity between structurally similar enzymes: from heme-free bromoperoxi-Columbia, MD, USA).
                                                                  dase to lipase. Biochemistry 48, 11496–11504.

Homology Model of Pks1 TE                                             Chiang, Y.-M., Meyer, K.M., Praseuth, M., Baker, S.E., Bruno, K.S., and Wang,
A homology model for the Pks1 TE domain was generated with the loopmodel   C.C. (2011). Characterization of a polyketide synthase in Aspergillus niger
algorithm of MODELER within the Accelrys Discovery Studio Suite v2.1   whose product is a precursor for both dihydroxynaphthalene (DHN) melanin
(Accelrys Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). The PksA TE domain (PDB ID code   and naphtho-g-pyrone. Fungal Genet. Biol. 48, 430–437.
3ILS) was set as the template structure. The model was built based on ClustalX   Crawford, J.M., and Townsend, C.A. (2010). New insights into the formation of
alignments of 37 NR-PKS TE sequences, and overhangs were cut from the    fungal aromatic polyketides. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 8, 879–889.
sequences.                                                                         Crawford, J.M., Dancy, B.C.R., Hill, E.A., Udwary, D.W., and Townsend, C.A.
                                                                                    (2006). Identiﬁcation of a starter unit acyl-carrier protein transacylase domain
Sequence Analyses                                                                    in an iterative type  I polyketide synthase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103,
A list of validated NR-PKSs involved in melanin and conidial pigment bio-   16728–16733.
synthesis was compiled (Table S1). Analyses were conducted in MEGA5
                                                                         Crawford, J.M., Korman, T.P., Labonte, J.W., Vagstad, A.L., Hill, E.A., Kamari-
(Tamura et al., 2011) and involved 29 proteins. Sequence alignment was
                                                                         Bidkorpeh, O., Tsai, S.-C., and Townsend, C.A. (2009). Structural basis for
completed with ClustalX2 using default settings. The gDNA from potentially
                                                                                biosynthetic programming of fungal aromatic polyketide cyclization. Nature
mismatched protein sequences was submitted to FGNESH gene prediction
                                                                          461, 1139–1143.
software (http://linux1.softberry.com/berry.phtml) to consider alterations to
splicing patterns. In cases in which better sequence similarity to other NR-   Crawford, J.M., Thomas, P.M., Scheerer, J.R., Vagstad, A.L., Kelleher, N.L.,
PKSs was achieved by revised splicing, these sequences were included in   and Townsend, C.A. (2008a). Deconstruction of iterative multidomain polyke-
lieu of the current annotation. The evolutionary history was inferred using    tide synthase function. Science 320, 243–246.
the neighbor-joining method and a bootstrap consensus tree was composed   Crawford, J.M., Vagstad, A.L., Whitworth, K.P., Ehrlich, K.C., and Townsend,
from 1,000 replicates.  All ambiguous positions were removed  for each    C.A. (2008b). Synthetic strategy of nonreducing iterative polyketide synthases

                                Chemistry & Biology 19, 1525–1534, December 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved  1533


[PDF physical page 10]
                                                                    Chemistry & Biology

                                                              Thioesterase as Claisen Cyclase and Deacetylase





and the origin of the classical ‘‘starter-unit effect’’. ChemBioChem 9, 1019–   melanin biosynthesis by Colletotrichum lagenarium. Microbiology 147, 2623–
1023.                                                                   2628.

Cunha, M., Franzen, A., Seabra, S., Herbst, M., Vugman, N., Borba, L.,    Pihet, M., Vandeputte, P., Tronchin, G., Renier, G., Saulnier, P., Georgeault, S.,
de Souza, W., and Rozental, S. (2010). Melanin in Fonsecaea pedrosoi:    Mallet, R., Chabasse, D., Symoens, F., and Bouchara, J.-P. (2009). Melanin is
a trap for oxidative radicals. BMC Microbiol. 10, 80.                        an essential component for the integrity of the cell wall of Aspergillus fumigatus
Frandsen, R.J.N., Schu¨ tt, C., Lund, B.W., Staerk, D., Nielsen, J., Olsson, S.,    conidia. BMC Microbiol. 9, 177.
and Giese, H. (2011). Two novel classes of enzymes are required for the   Sambrook, J., and Russell, D.W. (2001). Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory
biosynthesis of aurofusarin in Fusarium graminearum. J. Biol. Chem. 286,   Manual (Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press).
10419–10428.                                                          Takano, Y., Kubo, Y., Shimizu, K., Mise, K., Okuno, T., and Furusawa, I. (1995).
Fujii, I., Mori, Y., Watanabe, A., Kubo, Y., Tsuji, G., and Ebizuka, Y. (1999).    Structural analysis of PKS1, a polyketide synthase gene involved in melanin
Heterologous expression and product identiﬁcation of Colletotrichum lagena-    biosynthesis in Colletotrichum lagenarium. Mol. Gen. Genet. 249, 162–167.
rium polyketide synthase encoded by the PKS1 gene involved in melanin   Takano, Y., Kubo, Y., Kawamura, C., Tsuge, T., and Furusawa, I. (1997). The
biosynthesis. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 63, 1445–1452.                       Alternaria alternata melanin biosynthesis gene restores appressorial melaniza-
Fujii, I., Mori, Y., Watanabe, A., Kubo, Y., Tsuji, G., and Ebizuka, Y. (2000).    tion and penetration of cellulose membranes in the melanin-deﬁcient albino
Enzymatic synthesis of 1,3,6,8-tetrahydroxynaphthalene solely from malonyl   mutant of Colletotrichum lagenarium. Fungal Genet. Biol. 21, 131–140.
coenzyme A by a  fungal  iterative  type   I  polyketide  synthase PKS1.                                                                     Tamura, K., Peterson, D., Peterson, N., Stecher, G., Nei, M., and Kumar, S.
Biochemistry 39, 8853–8858.                                                                                    (2011). MEGA5: molecular evolutionary genetics analysis using maximum like-
Fujii, I., Watanabe, A., Sankawa, U., and Ebizuka, Y. (2001). Identiﬁcation of    lihood, evolutionary distance, and maximum parsimony methods. Mol. Biol.
Claisen cyclase domain in fungal polyketide synthase WA, a naphthopyrone    Evol. 28, 2731–2739.
synthase of Aspergillus nidulans. Chem. Biol. 8, 189–197.                                                                        Thywißen, A., Heinekamp, T., Dahse, H.-M., Schmaler-Ripcke, J., Nietsche,
Funa, N., Ohnishi, Y., Ebizuka, Y., and Horinouchi, S. (2002). Properties and    S., Zipfel, P.F., and Brakhage, A.A. (2011). Conidial dihydroxynaphthalene
substrate speciﬁcity of RppA, a chalcone synthase-related polyketide syn-   melanin of the human pathogenic fungus Aspergillus fumigatus interferes
thase in Streptomyces griseus. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 4628–4635.                 with the host endocytosis pathway. Front. Microbiol. 2, 96.
Funa, N., Funabashi, M., Ohnishi, Y., and Horinouchi, S. (2005). Biosynthesis of    Tsai, H.-F., Fujii, I., Watanabe, A., Wheeler, M.H., Chang, Y.C., Yasuoka, Y.,
hexahydroxyperylenequinone melanin via oxidative aryl coupling by cyto-    Ebizuka, Y., and Kwon-Chung, K.J. (2001). Pentaketide melanin biosynthesis
chrome P-450 in Streptomyces griseus. J. Bacteriol. 187, 8149–8155.             in Aspergillus fumigatus requires chain-length shortening of a heptaketide
Gladieux, P., Byrnes  Iii, E.J., Aguileta, G., Fisher, C.M., Heitman, J., and    precursor. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 29292–29298.
Giraud, T. (2011). Epidemiology and evolution of fungal pathogens in plants    Tsuji, G., Tsuge, S., Shiraishi, T., and Kubo, Y. (2003). Expression pattern of
and animals. In Genetics and Evolution of Infectious Disease, M. Tibayrenc,   melanin  biosynthesis  enzymes  during  infectious  morphogenesis  of
ed. (London: Elsevier), pp. 59–132.                                            Colletotrichum lagenarium. J. Gen. Plant Pathol. 69, 169–175.
Grogan, G. (2005). Emergent mechanistic diversity of enzyme-catalysed beta-   Udwary, D.W., Merski, M., and Townsend, C.A. (2002). A method for prediction
diketone cleavage. Biochem. J. 388, 721–730.                                    of the locations of linker regions within large multifunctional proteins, and
Jacobson, E.S. (2000). Pathogenic roles for fungal melanins. Clin. Microbiol.    application to a type I polyketide synthase. J. Mol. Biol. 323, 585–598.
Rev. 13, 708–717.                                                       Ushimaru, T., Terada, H., Tsuboi, K., Kogou, Y., Sakaguchi, A., Tsuji, G., and
Jørgensen, T.R., Park, J., Arentshorst, M., van Welzen, A.M., Lamers, G.,   Kubo, Y. (2010). Development of an efﬁcient gene targeting system  in
Vankuyk,  P.A., Damveld,  R.A., van den Hondel, C.A.M., Nielsen,  K.F.,    Colletotrichum higginsianum using a non-homologous end-joining mutant
Frisvad, J.C., and Ram, A.F. (2011). The molecular and genetic basis of   and  Agrobacterium  tumefaciens-mediated  gene  transfer.  Mol.  Genet.
conidial pigmentation in Aspergillus niger. Fungal Genet. Biol. 48, 544–553.    Genomics 284, 357–371.

Korman, T.P., Crawford, J.M., Labonte, J.W., Newman, A.G., Wong,  J.,   Watanabe, A., and Ebizuka, Y. (2002). A novel hexaketide naphthalene synthe-
Townsend, C.A., and Tsai, S.-C. (2010). Structure and function of an iterative    sized by a chimeric polyketide synthase composed of fungal pentaketide and
polyketide synthase thioesterase domain catalyzing Claisen cyclization in aﬂa-    heptaketide synthases. Tetrahedron Lett. 43, 843–846.
toxin biosynthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 6246–6251.               Watanabe, A., Fujii, I., Sankawa, U., Mayorga, M.E., Timberlake, W.E., and
Kubo, Y., Suzuki, K., Furusawa, I., and Yamamoto, M. (1985). Melanin biosyn-    Ebizuka, Y. (1999). Re-identiﬁcation of Aspergillus nidulans wA gene to code
thesis as a prerequisite for penetration by appressoria of Colletotrichum    for a polyketide synthase of naphthopyrone. Tetrahedron Lett. 40, 91–94.
lagenarium: site of inhibition by melanin-inhibiting fungicides and their action   Watanabe, A.,  Fujii,  I., Tsai, H.-F., Chang, Y.C., Kwon-Chung, K.J., and
on appressoria. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 23, 47–55.                          Ebizuka, Y. (2000). Aspergillus fumigatus alb1 encodes naphthopyrone syn-
Langfelder, K., Streibel, M., Jahn, B., Haase, G., and Brakhage, A.A. (2003).    thase when expressed in Aspergillus oryzae. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 192, 39–44.
Biosynthesis of fungal melanins and their importance for human pathogenic                                                                         Wheeler, M.H., and Klich, M.A. (1995). The effects of tricyclazole, pyroquilon,
fungi. Fungal Genet. Biol. 38, 143–158.                                                                                  phthalide, and related fungicides on the production of conidial wall pigments
Li,  Y., Image,  I.I., Xu, W., Image,  I., Tang,  Y., and Image,   I.  (2010).   by Penicillium and Aspergillus species. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 52, 125–136.
Classiﬁcation, prediction, and veriﬁcation of the regioselectivity of fungal poly-                                                                         Wheeler, M.H., Abramczyk, D., Puckhaber, L.S., Naruse, M., Ebizuka, Y.,
ketide synthase product template domains. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 22764–22773.                                                                                                         Fujii,  I., and Szaniszlo, P.J. (2008). New biosynthetic step in the melanin
Liu, G.Y., and Nizet, V. (2009). Color me bad: microbial pigments as virulence   pathway of Wangiella (Exophiala) dermatitidis: evidence for 2-acetyl-1,3,6,8-
factors. Trends Microbiol. 17, 406–413.                                     Tetrahydroxynaphthalene as a novel precursor. Eukaryot. Cell 7, 1699–1711.
Machida, M., Asai, K., Sano, M., Tanaka, T., Kumagai, T., Terai, G., Kusumoto,   Woo, P.C.Y., Tam, E.W.T., Chong, K.T.K., Cai, J.J., Tung, E.T.K., Ngan, A.H.Y.,
K.-I., Arima, T., Akita, O., Kashiwagi, Y., et al. (2005). Genome sequencing and    Lau, S.K.P., and Yuen, K.-Y. (2010). High diversity of polyketide synthase
analysis of Aspergillus oryzae. Nature 438, 1157–1161.                      genes and the melanin biosynthesis gene cluster in Penicillium marneffei.
Nardini, M., and Dijkstra, B.W. (1999). a/b hydrolase fold enzymes: the family   FEBS J. 277, 3750–3758.
keeps growing. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 9, 732–737.                         Zhang, W., Li, Y., and Tang, Y. (2008). Engineered biosynthesis of bacterial
Nosanchuk, J.D., and Casadevall, A. (2006). Impact of melanin on microbial    aromatic polyketides in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105,
virulence and clinical resistance to antimicrobial compounds. Antimicrob.   20683–20688.
Agents Chemother. 50, 3519–3528.                                       Zhou, H., Gao, Z., Qiao, K., Wang, J., Vederas, J.C., and Tang, Y. (2012).
Okamoto, S., Sakurada, M., Kubo, Y., Tsuji, G., Fujii, I., Ebizuka, Y., Ono, M.,   A fungal ketoreductase domain that displays substrate-dependent stereo-
Nagasawa, H., and Sakuda, S. (2001). Inhibitory effect of aﬂastatin A on    speciﬁcity. Nat. Chem. Biol. 8, 331–333.


1534  Chemistry & Biology 19, 1525–1534, December 21, 2012 ª2012 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved