
[PDF physical page 1]
                                                       Engineering Microbiology 5 (2025) 100211



                                                  Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

                           Engineering Microbiology


                                           journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/engmic


Original Research Article

Functional heterologous expression of the reversible Cu -decarboxylase
from the lichen, Cladonia uncialis

Harman Gill, John L. Sorensen ∗

Department of Chemistry, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg R3T 2N2, Canada



a r t i c l e    i n f o            a b s t r a c t


Keywords:                                         Despite the isolation of over 1000 known bioactive lichen mycobiont-derived secondary metabolites (SMs), un-
Isolation                                         derstanding the genetic basis of their biosynthesis remains elusive. Biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) have been
Secondary                                            tentatively linked to chemical structures, with core genes such as polyketide synthases (PKSs) surrounded by
Bioactive compounds                               accessory genes like decarboxylases. In this study, we focused on a decarboxylase gene from the genome of the
Polyketides
                                                   lichen cladonia uncialis (named as Cu -decarboxylase) to elucidate its role in SM biosynthesis. A 963 bp gene was
Carboxylation
Decarboxylation                                  cloned from C. uncialis and expressed in Escherichia coli (BL21(DE3) cells using the pQE80L expression vector. The
                                                     resulting 35 kDa protein was puriﬁed by applying a Ni+ -NTA column using an FPLC system. Functional activity
                                                  assays revealed the decarboxylation and reversible carboxylation of resorcinol to 2,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid and
                                                    orcinol to orsellinic acid. This suggests a potential role for this Cu -decarboxylase in SM biosynthesis.
                                               Furthermore, the lack of activity on substrates like anthranilic acid and aniline highlighted the importance of
                                                 the phenolic OH group in facilitating these reactions. The 3D protein structure was predicted with AlphaFold3,
                                              based on sequence similarity with a known decarboxylases and revealed the importance of a zinc cofactor for
                                                 the catalytic activity of the enzyme. The optimization of the reaction conditions, particularly for orsellinic acid
                                               production from orcinol, may enhance conversion rates and oﬀer a viable route for industrial-scale production
                                                     of bioactive compounds. This study marks the ﬁrst known instance of functional heterologous expression of a
                                              non-codon-optimized gene isolated from lichen in E. coli .



1. Introduction                                                  from lichenized fungi include Escherichia coli (E. coli), Aspergillus oryzae
                                                                 (NSAR1), and Saccharomyces cerevisiae [ 4–8 ].
   Lichens are slow-growing, complex miniature ecosystems formed by       These approaches have met with limited success with only two in-
the mutual assemblage between a fungal partner (mycobiont) and an     stances in which depside polyketide synthases (PKSs) were functionally
algal and/or cyanobacterial partner (photobiont) [ 1 , 2 ]. They have colo-     expressed in heterologous systems [ 6 , 7 ]. The direct functional expres-
nized and adapted to diverse ecological, niches ranging from the mildest     sion of genes from the lichen genome remains elusive. One previous
conditions of home gardens to extremely harsh conditions, such as Arc-    example of success with a tailoring gene was the heterologous expres-
tic tundra or desert regions [ 3 ].                                           sion of the pyrG gene from the lichen Solorina crocea, which encodes an
   The exploration of lichen mycobiont-derived secondary metabolites     orotidine 5 ′ -monophosphate decarboxylase, in Aspergillus nidulans [ 9 ] ,
(SMs) has resulted in the discovery of over 1000 compounds; however,     resulting in a uridine-independent strain. This study demonstrated the
conclusive links between these SMs and biosynthetic genes remain elu-      feasibility of expressing a lichen gene in a heterologous host, but func-
sive. Recent advances in next-generation sequencing technology, anno-     tional in vitro protein expression has yet to be achieved.
tation tools, and synthetic biology have expedited the identiﬁcation and       The biosynthesis of SMs are controlled by genes that are often lo-
putative linkage of biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) to the chemical     cated at the same genomic locus are co-regulated, [ 10 ] and are orga-
structures of SMs. These studies have revealed that there are more BGCs     nized around a core gene, such as polyketide synthases (PKS). The core
in lichen genomes than there are known SMs from lichenized fungi.    gene in turn is ﬂanked by various ancillary genes, such as decarboxy-
This hidden metabolic potential provides the motivation to link puta-      lase, methyltransferase, P450 oxidases, and other tailoring reactions that
tive genes with their functions through heterologous expression in a het-     contribute to the structural modiﬁcation of this core product of the PKS
erologous host. Some of the host organisms used to characterize BGCs     [ 5,11,12 ]. One of the commonly observed tailoring genes encodes for




  ∗ Corresponding author.
    E-mail address: john.sorensen@umanitoba.ca (J.L. Sorensen) .

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engmic.2025.100211
Received 3 December 2024; Received in revised form 21 May 2025; Accepted 22 May 2025
Available online 25 May 2025
2667-3703/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Shandong University. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)


[PDF physical page 2]
H. Gill and J.L. Sorensen                                                                                                                         Engineering Microbiology 5 (2025) 100211


                                                                                                                     Fig. 1. Gene clusters ( Cu-nr-pks-5 ) that con-
                                                                                                                        tain a type 1 non-reducing polyketide syn-
                                                                                                                thase (PKS) in C. uncialis . This cluster comprises
                                                                                             two genes: a PKS gene predicted for orsellinic
                                                                                                                acid biosynthesis and a  tailoring gene, Cu -
                                                                                                               decarboxylase, predicted to facilitate the con-
                                                                                                                version of orsellinic acid to orcinol.





enzymes that belong to the decarboxylases family. These tailoring en-     2. Materials and methods
zymes play a crucial role in catalyzing the removal of a carboxyl group
from various phenolic compounds. Intriguingly, it has been observed     2.1. General methods
that some decarboxylases can exhibit reversible catalytic activity by in-
troducing/removing of a carboxylate group from organic compounds.        Luria-Bertani Broth and Agar were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
This reversible catalytic activity has been extensively explored in bac-    and prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cloning and
teria [ 13–18 ], but remain unexplored in lichens.                          transformation of recombinant plasmids were performed using the In-
   Using a homology searching approach, our group showed the tax-     Fusion Snap Assembly and Gibson Assembly® Cloning Kits were pro-
onomic identiﬁcation, de-novo sequencing, and annotation of various    cured from Takara and New England Biolabs, respectively. All PCR
biosynthetic gene clusters from C. uncialis [ 11,19 ] . Among these clus-     reagents were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. Primers were
ters , we identiﬁed a BGC named Cu-nr-pks-5 , consisting primarily of two    purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies. The gene sequencing
genes: a gene that encodes for a polyketide synthase (PKS) that appears    was performed by Euroﬁns genomics. All chemicals used were of an-
to produce orsellinic acid and an accessory gene that encodes for a Cu -     alytical grade and were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. 2,4-
decarboxylase ( Fig. 1 ). The PKS gene cu-nr-pks-5 (AUW31139) appears    dihydroxybenzoic acid, resorcinol, orcinol, orsellinic acid, anthranilic
to be a type I non-reducing polyketide synthase, lacking any observ-     acid, and aniline standards were purchased from Alfa Aesar, Fischer
able reducing domains. The tailoring gene was annotated as encoding     Scientiﬁc, Sigma Company, and Biosynth Carbosynth, Sigma-Aldrich,
for a Cu -decarboxylase enzyme that was predicted to convert orsellinic     Sigma-Aldrich, respectively. FPLC (fast protein liquid chromatography)
acid to orcinol [ 19 ]. Homology mapping indicated the possibility for    and HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatography) were performed
the reversible role of the Cu -decarboxylase gene based on a comparison     in the Chemistry Department, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB,
with a previously reported enzyme identiﬁed in a species of Rhizobium    Ca using the instrumentation as described below.
Gram-negative bacteria [ 20 ].
   Previous arduous attempts at heterologous expression in A. oryzae     2.2. Isolation and cloning of a putative Cu-decarboxylase gene from the
of the Cu-nr-pks-5 gene encoding the PKS from this cluster were unsuc-     lichen C. uncialis
cessful [ 21 ]. In the present study, we investigated the expression of the
lichen accessory gene Cu -decarboxylase in E. coli , along with its poten-       The biosynthetic gene cluster ( cu-nr-pks-5 ) was ampliﬁed from C.
tial to catalyze enzymatic reactions involving aromatic phenols.              uncialis gDNA using the PCR method. The ampliﬁed cluster was then
   Moreover, it is also known that several decarboxylase enzymes em-     placed into the fungal expression plasmid, pUSA, using a recombination
ploy a divalent metal ion to facilitate their catalytic activity. For in-     cloning method [ 19 ].
stance, Gamma-resorcylate decarboxylase from Rhizobium sp. strain       The 963 bp Cu -decarboxylase gene from the pUSA vector (contain-
MTP-10,005 utilizes Zn2 + [ 22 ], 3-keto-l-gulonate 6-phosphate decar-     ing cu-nr-pks-5 BGC of C. uncialis ) was ampliﬁed using DreamTaq PCR
boxylase require Mg2 + [ 23 ], and 4-oxalocrotonate decarboxylase re-    Master Mix 2X (Thermo Scientiﬁc). The following primer set was used:
quire Mg2 + or Mn2 + [ 24 ] for their function. Similarly, the activity of de-    forward primer atcacggatccgagaacctgtacttccaaggtacc ATGATTACGCTC-
carboxylase enzyme from Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens was solely dependent   GAAG and reverse primer aggagtccaagctcagctaatt ATCGAAGCTTTTAT-
on a metal divalent cation [ 25 , 26 ]. These ﬁndings suggest the poten-   CAAACAGCCGGCATATTTATTTTCAG. The lowercase letters underlined
tial role of metals as cofactors in decarboxylase from C. uncialis . In this     indicate the terminal homology sequences on the primer, which are
study, both AlphaFold3 prediction with high conﬁdence and homology    based on the plasmid sequence. The ampliﬁcation reaction was per-
modeling of the Cu -decarboxylase enzyme from Cladonia uncialis con-    formed using an Eppendorf Mastercycler personal (Eppendorf AG, Ham-
sistently identiﬁed a zinc metal binding site, supporting the potential     burg, Germany). The reaction was set as follows: 95 °C for 2 min; 30
involvement of zinc ions in the catalytic activity of the enzyme [ 22 ].       cycles of 94 °C for 15 s, 60 °C for 20 s, and 68 °C for 30 s; and a ﬁnal
   Herein, we report the successful expression of this Cu -decarboxylase     extension at 68 °C for 5 min. The PCR product was puriﬁed using a Nu-
in E. coli and demonstrate the reversible carboxylation of aromatic phe-    cleoSpin® Gel and PCR Clean-up kit (Macherey-Nagel, Germany) and
nols in the presence of zinc ion. This enzyme catalyzes a reaction with    then ligated into the pQE80L vector using a Gibson Assembly® Cloning
great commercial potential as we discuss below. To the best of our     Kit (New England Biolabs). The resultant ligated plasmid was chemi-
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst report of the successful functional heterolo-     cally transformed into E.coli DH5 𝛼cells. Following conﬁrmation of in-
gous expression of a native lichen gene in E. coli and the production of     tegration of the correct insert by counter selection on agar using ampi-
a catalytically active protein.                                                        cillin (25 ug/mL) and PCR, the bacterial expression vector pQE80L-His-


                                                                        2


[PDF physical page 3]
H. Gill and J.L. Sorensen                                                                                                                         Engineering Microbiology 5 (2025) 100211


DeCO2 containing a T5 promoter regulated by IPTG and an N-terminal    mology and analogY recognition engine. The resulting 3D protein model
His6 tag upstream of the Cu -decarboxylase gene was retransformed into     of the Cu -decarboxylase enzyme was visualized using Jmol. The family
the E. coli BL21(DE3) cells (Sigma-Aldrich). The authenticity of the in-     lineage prediction generated by Phyre with high conﬁdence was sub-
serted gene sequence was also conﬁrmed with Sanger sequencing (Eu-     sequently submitted to the Scope-Structural Classiﬁcation of Proteins
roﬁns Genomics).                                                        database. This database compares the Cu -decarboxylase enzymes fam-
                                                                                          ily lineage against a repository of known protein structures in a protein
2.3. Heterologous expression of the Cu-decarboxylase gene in E. coli           database bank (PDB) determined by X-ray crystallography.

  A single bacterial colony was used to inoculate 20 mL of LB medium     2.5.2. Metal binding site identiﬁcation in the Cu-decarboxylase gene
containing ampicillin (100 𝜇g/mL) and incubated overnight at 37  °C      A multiple sequence alignment of the Cu -decarboxylase gene from C.
while shaking at 250 rpm. This overnight culture was transferred to 2 L      uncialis was performed with structurally related decarboxylases identi-
(OD600 0.05) of Luria broth with 100 𝜇g/mL ampicillin and fermented    ﬁed through Scope results. The sequences of decarboxylases from Rhodo
at 37 °C with shaking at 250 rpm until the optical density of the cul-    pseudomonas palustris, Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens , and Rhizobium sp. were
ture at 600 nm reached an absorbance of approximately 0.6 AU The cul-     retrieved using the UniProt database. This database helped identify the
ture was then induced with isopropyl ‐𝛽-d-thio-galactopyranoside (IPTG)    amino acid sequences of the protein binding sites within these decar-
at a ﬁnal concentration of 1 mM, and fermentation was continued at     boxylases. To further investigate metal coordination with these amino
35  °C for an additional 16 h. The induced cells were then harvested     acids, the sequence was visualized using UCSF Chimera [ 28 ]. The metal
by centrifugation, resuspended in SDS loading buﬀer, and subjected to     binding site was annotated based on its highest sequence similarity with
SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) to assess protein     the decarboxylase of Rhizobium sp. This analysis provided insights into
expression.                                                              the metal ion interactions of these decarboxylases.

2.4. Cell lysis and protein puriﬁcation
                                                                                 2.5.3. AlphaFold3 analysis
                                                                      AlphaFold Server, powered by AlphaFold 3, is an online tool that
2.4.1. Cell lysis
                                                                        generates highly accurate predictions of biomolecular structures and
   The bacterial cells were collected by centrifugation at 5000 × g
                                                                              interactions [ 29 ]. To investigate the structure of Cu -decarboxylase
(Thermo Scientiﬁc TM Sorvall TM) for 10 min at 4  °C. The obtained
                                                                from C. uncialis and identify potential metal binding sites, the amino
pellet was analyzed via 10 % SDS-PAGE electrophoresis to determine
                                                                         acid sequence of the enzyme was submitted to the AlphaFold Server
target protein expression. Subsequently, the pellet was resuspended in
                                                                                          ( https://alphafoldserver.com ). The resulting structural predictions were
cold H1 buﬀer (20 mM Tris-HCL, 200 mM NaCl, and 0.02 % Na3 N,                                                                      subsequently downloaded and visualized using ChimeraX software for
pH = 8.0), followed by the addition of 1.0 mM phenyl methyl sulfonyl
                                                                             further analysis [ 30 ]. Additionally, the AlphaFold-predicted structure
ﬂuoride (PMSF) to protect the expressed proteins from being broken
                                                                              of Cu -decarboxylase was superimposed with the gamma-resorcylate
down by proteolytic enzymes. The resuspended cells were placed on ice,
                                                                      decarboxylase from Rhizobium sp .(Q60GU1) using UCSF Chimera to
and the cell membrane was lysed by sonication (50 % amplitude, 20 s
                                                                            validate the metal binding  site predicted with multiple sequence
pulses at 45 s intervals for 12 cycles) using an ultrasonic homogenizer
                                                                       alignment.
(Branson model 150T). A second centrifugation step was performed at
30,000 × g (Thermo Scientiﬁc TM Sorvall TM) for 30 min at 4  °C.
                                                                                 2.5.4. Phylogenetic analysis of putative Cu-decarboxylase gene
The cell debris was discarded, and the supernatant was ﬁltered with
                                                              To identify structural  similarity of the gene encoding the Cu -
a 0.22 𝜇m ﬁlter before puriﬁcation. The resulting soluble fraction was
              +                                                        decarboxylase, amino acid sequences of proteins with known structuralsubjected to Ni2  aﬃnity chromatography using the AKTA pure system
                                                                                characteristics pertinent to the decarboxylase function were retrieved
(GE Healthcare).
                                                                from the UniProt database. The retrieved protein sequences were used to
2.4.2. Protein puriﬁcation                                                  construct a phylogenetic tree using MEGA 11 (v. 7.0) [ 31 ] software, em-
   For enzyme puriﬁcation, all procedures were performed in a cold     ploying the Neighbor-Joining method and the poisson correction model
room at 4 °C. The protein was puriﬁed with an AKTA pure (GE Health-     [ 32 ]. The arginine-decarboxylase (P28629) from E. coli and the cytoso-
care) using a HisTrap HP 1 mL column (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL,      lic GTP-dependent phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (P07379) from
USA). The supernatant was loaded onto the column, and stepwise elu-     Rattus norvegicus were selected as outgroup. The branch conﬁdence was
tion was carried out at a ﬂow rate of 1 mL min–1 using the follow-     estimated using 1000 bootstrap replicates of the interior branch test
ing eluents: 25 mL of eluent A (20 mM potassium phosphate, 50 mM     [ 33 , 34 ].
imidazole, and 500 mM NaCl [pH 7.5 adjusted by HCl]) for wash-
ing out unbound proteins, and 25 mL of eluent B (20 mM potassium     2.6. Enzyme-catalyzed reactions
phosphate, 500 mM imidazole, and 500 mM NaCl [pH 7.0 adjusted by
HCl]) for elution of His-tagged Cu -decarboxylase. The fractions were     2.6.1. Decarboxylation assay
analyzed via 10 % SDS-PAGE electrophoresis to conﬁrm protein puriﬁ-      A reaction mixture (ﬁnal volume, 300 𝜇L) containing 10 mM sub-
cation. Fractions containing the Cu -decarboxylase protein (Figure S2)      strate, 100 𝜇g mL-1 puriﬁed enzyme, and 0.067 M HyCloneTM Phosphate
were combined and dialyzed with 10 mM potassium phosphate buﬀer    Buﬀered Saline (PBS) (pH 7.0), with and without 10 mM zinc chloride,
(pH 7.0) and then concentrated using an Amicon Ultra-2 Centrifugal    was placed into a microtube, and the mixture was incubated at 30 C
Filter, 10 kDa MWCO (MilliporeSigmaTM ). Protein concentration was     or at 4  °C for 16 h with shaking (250 rpm). In addition, a series of
determined using a Coomassie (Bradford) protein assay [ 27 ] and the     negative control reactions, such as substrate + buﬀer (SB), buﬀer + en-
enzyme solution was stored at − 20 °C until use.                     zyme (BE), buﬀer + Zinc (BZ) and buﬀer only (B), using water (H2 O)
                                                                          instead of phosphate buﬀer, were performed to conﬁrm the enzyme
2.5. In silico structure determination of the Cu-decarboxylase gene from         activity.
the lichen C. uncialis
                                                                                 2.6.2. Carboxylation assay
2.5.1. Protein homology recognition engine V 2.0 (Phyre2) analysis of        A reaction mixture (ﬁnal volume, 300 𝜇L) identical to that described
Cu-decarboxylase gene                                                        in the Section 2.6.1 has an amount of 3 M KHCO3 added to the mixture.
   The predicted protein sequence of the Cu -decarboxylase enzyme     Following the addition of an equal amount of 5 M HCL, the reaction mix-
from C. uncialis (A0A1Z1C438) was submitted to the Phyre2 protein ho-     tures were centrifuged at 4 °C, 12,000 × g , 20 min, and then a volume of


                                                                        3


[PDF physical page 4]
H. Gill and J.L. Sorensen                                                                                                                         Engineering Microbiology 5 (2025) 100211


50 𝜇L of the resulting supernatant was analyzed by HPLC as described     3.2. In silico structure determination of the Cu -decarboxylase gene from
below. Negative control reactions (no enzyme) were carried out by sub-     the lichen C. uncialis
stituting water for the phosphate buﬀer under the same conditions.
                                                                                 3.2.1. Homology modeling via Phyre2
2.7. Analytical analysis of the samples                                  The software package Phyre2 was used to identify other proteins
                                                                             that were similar to our expressed protein and to generate a predicted
   Analysis of the enzyme assay was carried out on a Waters HPLC Sepa-     3-dimensional folding structure. The results revealed that the predicted
rations Module 2695 system equipped with a PDA Detector Model 2996    3D structure exhibited 34 % identity with 100 % conﬁdence with
by injecting 50 𝜇L of the supernatant using an autosampler. The column     the metallo-dependent hydrolase superfamily and the PP1699/LP2961-
was a 𝜇Bondapak® Waters C18 (3.9 × 300 mm) with a particle diam-     like family (Figure S3 A). A homology search of the PP1699/LP2961-
eter of 15–20 𝜇m with 125 Å pores. A gradient of Milli-Q water and     like family through the Scope database showed that it matches with
methanol was used as the mobile phase (solvent A was distilled water     three  structurally known  proteins, 2 amino-3-carboxymuconate  6-
with 0.1 % formic acid, and solvent B was methanol) at a ﬂow rate of    semialdehyde decarboxylase NbaD (Q83V25), 4-oxalomesaconate hy-
1 ml/min. The UV signal was monitored at 250 nm, and spectra were     dratase LigJ (Q6NOR4), thermophilic reversible gamma-resorcylate de-
collected from 200 to 400 nm.                                           carboxylase (Q60GU1), and two putative hydrolases (Q88M75, and
   Authentic standards for 2,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid (retention time:    Q88TJ2) (Figure S3 B). The predicted protein structure exhibited a TIM
20.22 min), resorcinol (retention time: 8.27 min), orcinol (retention     beta/alpha barrel fold (Figure S3) that is consistent with this superfam-
time: 19.46 min), orsellinic acid (retention time: 33.10 min), anthranilic      ily of proteins.
acid (retention time: 21.81 min), and aniline (retention time: 3.91 min)
were used for comparison.                                                     3.2.2. Metal binding site analysis
                                                                     Based on the reported activities of other decarboxylase enzymes, we
                                                                     expected to observe a metal binding site in our lichen Cu -decarboxylase.
3. Results
                                                           To conﬁrm the presence of a metal binding site in our Cu -decarboxylase
                                                     we used multiple sequence alignment using the software package
3.1. Cloning and expression of the Cu-decarboxylase gene from the lichen
                                                                         UniProt. The thermophilic reversible gamma-resorcylate decarboxylase
C. uncialis
                                                                                          ( Rhizobium sp.) was visualized using the UCSF Chimera software. In the
                                                                          native enzyme, a single Zn2 + ion is liganded by Glu8, His10, His164,
   The Cu -decarboxylase gene was successfully ampliﬁed and cloned
                                                                  Asp287, and a water molecule at the active site center [ 25 ]. Multiple
into the bacterial expression plasmid pQE80L (Figure S1). Sanger
                                                                   sequence alignment revealed that the Glu8, His10, His164, and Asp287
sequencing  of  the  recombinant pQE80L-His-DeCO2  plasmid  con-
                                                                           residues of gamma-resorcylate decarboxylase ( Rhizobium sp.) corre-
ﬁrmed  that the  lichen gene, Cu -decarboxylase, was  correctly  in-
                                                                sponded to the binding sites Glu5, His7, His150, and Asp274 ( Fig. 3 A)
serted into the plasmid without the introduction of mutations. Then,
                                                                              in the Cu -decarboxylase enzyme from C. uncialis . This alignment facili-
the Cu -decarboxylase protein expression was analyzed using SDS-
                                                                           tated the proposal of the putative structural model for a decarboxylase
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). The analysis of induced
                                                            enzyme from C. uncialis ( Fig. 3 B).
cells showed a prominently overexpressed protein band with a molecu-
lar mass of ∼35 kDa ( Fig. 2 ). This protein band was consistent with the
                                                                                 3.2.3. AlphaFold3 analysis
molecular mass ( ∼33.4 kDa) deduced from the translated amino acid se-
                                                                The AlphaFold 3 prediction model of the Cu -decarboxylase from
quence of the Cu -decarboxylase gene which also includes the 0.84 kDa
                                                                          C. uncialis identiﬁed a zinc metal binding site with high conﬁdence
from the His6 tag.
                                                              (ipTM = 0.98, pTM = 0.94). The predicted structure was visualized using
   After conﬁrming the successful expression of the Cu -decarboxylase
                                           +                     ChimeraX, revealed that the zinc binding site is coordinated by ﬁveprotein, the soluble fraction was puriﬁed using Ni2  aﬃnity chromatog-
                                                                              residues: Histidine 7, Histidine 150, Aspartic acid 274, Glutamate 5,
raphy. A protein band corresponding to ∼35 kDa was observed in the
                                                              and Histidine 210. This analysis highlighted the speciﬁc amino acids
imidazole elution fractions ( Fig. 2 ).
                                                                             that are involved in zinc ion coordination for a metal protein interac-
                                                                             tion ( Fig. 4 A).
                                                                               Additionally, the protein structure from Rhizobium sp. and the
                                                                       AlphaFold-predicted structure of Cu -decarboxylase were superimposed
                                                                       using UCSF Chimera ( Fig. 4 B). The results revealed that the zinc bind-
                                                                         ing site and key amino acids of Cu -decarboxylase (Glu5, His7, His150,
                                                              and Asp274) overlapped between the two structures ( Rhizobium sp. and
                                                          Cu -decarboxylase), further supporting the role of these amino acids in
                                                                                     facilitating catalysis.
                                                                The combined Phyre2 and AlphaFold 3 analysis conﬁrmed the TIM
                                                                      beta/alpha barrel fold in the structure of the Cu -decarboxylase protein
                                                              and showed the presence of zinc-metal binding site with high conﬁ-
                                                                       dence.


                                                                                 3.2.4. Phylogenetic tree analysis
                                                  We next constructed a phylogenetic tree to place the sequence of
                                                                   our enzyme in the evolutionary context and to further conﬁrm the ho-
                                                              mology results generated above. We used, as a comparator set, a se-
Fig. 2. SDS-PAGE (10 %) analysis of the Cu -decarboxylase protein. Lane 1: pro-      ries of twenty proteins with some previous structural studies that had
tein ladder (kDa); lane 2: uninduced cells; lane 3 and 4: induced cells and 5    been conducted. Our text sequence was the gene that encodes for the
and 6: puriﬁed fractions collected post-elution (with 500 mM) of imidazole.    Cu -decarboxylase enzyme that was identiﬁed in the genome of the
Cells were induced with 1 mM IPTG, revealing a protein band with a molec-     lichen C. uncialis (A0A1Z1C438). The analysis revealed a signiﬁcant
ular mass of ∼35 kDa in lane 3 and 4. The predicted molecular mass of the     evolutionary and functional relationship between the Cu -decarboxylase
Cu -decarboxylase protein was 35 kDa.                                  and other decarboxylases of fungal and bacterial origin. Speciﬁcally,


                                                                        4


[PDF physical page 5]
H. Gill and J.L. Sorensen                                                                                                                         Engineering Microbiology 5 (2025) 100211





Fig. 3. (A) Multiple sequence alignment of structurally related proteins from 1: Rhodo pseudomonas palustris 2: Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens , 3: Cladonia uncialis, 4:
Rhizobium sp. (B) Putative Zn2 + metal ion binding site in decarboxylase from C. uncialis based on multiple sequence alignment matching with thermophilic reversible
gamma-resorcylate decarboxylase ( Rhizobium sp.).





                                                                        5


[PDF physical page 6]
H. Gill and J.L. Sorensen                                                                                                                         Engineering Microbiology 5 (2025) 100211





Fig. 4. (A) AlphaFold3 generated predicted protein structure of the Cu -decarboxylase enzyme, highlighting the Zinc binding site coordination with amino acid
residues. The structure was derived from the translated amino acid sequence. (B) Overlay of the AlphaFold-predicted Cu -decarboxylase structure with the known
protein structure from Rhizobium sp., visualized using UCSF Chimera.


the analysis showed an 84 % node similarity between the C. un-     3.3. Substrate speciﬁcity
cialis Cu- decarboxylase and gamma-resorcylate decarboxylases from Po-
laromonas sp. (Q12BV1) and Rhizobium sp. (Q60GU1), also known as     3.3.1. Decarboxylation
2,6-dihydroxybenzoate decarboxylase. Additionally it also showed sim-     We initially sought to determine the substrate scope of the decar-
ilarity with 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate decarboxylases from Fusarium odor-     boxylation reaction catalyzed by this enzyme. We observed the gene
atissimum (N1S495) and Aspergillus oryzae RIB40 (P80402). This high     that encodes for this enzyme co-localized with a polyketide synthase
degree of similarity suggests a close evolutionary relationship and po-     that appears to encode for orsellinic acid biosynthesis. We therefore car-
tentially similar functional roles among these enzymes ( Fig. 5 ) .             ried out a limited substrate scope focusing on a series of related pheno-


                                                                        6


[PDF physical page 7]
H. Gill and J.L. Sorensen                                                                                                                         Engineering Microbiology 5 (2025) 100211





Fig. 5. Evolutionary relationship of the C. uncialis Cu -decarboxylase gene (A0A1Z1C438) and structurally related decarboxylase-encoding genes retrieved from
uniport database. This phylogenetic tree was constructed using the Neighbor-Joining method in MEGA11 software.



lic benzoates. We examined the decarboxylation reaction of orsellinic    buﬀer with no enzyme also resulted in no detectable orsellinic acid pro-
acid, 2,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid, and anthranilic acid (Figure S5). The     duction ( Fig. 7 A). We could also observe the conversion of resorcinol to
results from this experiment are summarized in Fig. 6 and reported as     2,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid in the presence of this enzyme. In contrast
the area under the curve for the peak generated by HPLC analysis of the     to the orsellinic acid, we observed the highest yield of product ( ∼25 %
enzyme assays. Our initial results indicated that the enzyme readily cat-     conversion) when the assay was held at 30 °C when zinc was added to
alyzed the decarboxylation of orsellinic acid to orcinol. This conversion     the enzyme ( Fig. 7 B). When the assay with both zinc and enzyme present
was signiﬁcantly enhanced by the addition of zinc at 30  °C, achiev-    was held at 4 °C only a trace of 2,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid was observed
ing approximately 82 % conversion compared to only 8 % without zinc     (Figure S6 B). Interestingly in the absence of exogenous zinc we could
( Fig. 6 A). We could also observe the enzyme catalyzed decarboxylation     observe ∼12 % conversion of resorcinol to 2,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid
of 2,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid to resorcinol but only in the presence of      ( Fig. 7 B). In the absence of enzyme, no product could be detected at
zinc and with a considerably lower yield ( ∼6 %)( Fig. 6 B). No conver-     either temperature (Figure S6 A and S6 B). We also attempted the car-
sion could be detected in the absence of zinc or at 4 °C either with or     boxylation of aniline to anthranilic acid (Figure S6 E), however under
without zinc added. Control experiments were also performed in which      all conditions tested we could observe no conversion to product.
phosphate buﬀer was replaced with water to evaluate the conversion.       These results are signiﬁcant as they demonstrate the reversible na-
However, no activity was observed when water was used in place of     ture of this enzyme and suggest that it might be an eﬀective catalyst
the phosphate buﬀer. Additionally, spontaneous conversion of orsellinic     for the synthesis of substituted carboxylic acids. This is a particularly
acid to orcinol occurred in controls at 30  °C, but at a slower rate of    meaningful result as the laboratory synthesis of orsellinic acid from or-
approximately 5 %, with no spontaneous conversion observed at 4 °C     cinol involves multiple steps with air and moisture sensitive reagents.
( Fig. 6 A). Anthranilic acid, in contrast to the other substrates, did not    The use of this enzyme can achieve the same outcome in a single step
undergo any detectable decarboxylation under the experimental condi-    with bicarbonate as the main reagent.
tions, even with the addition of zinc or temperature variations (Figure
S5 E).                                                                          3.4. Proposed mechanism

3.3.2. Carboxylation                                                           3.4.1. Proposed mechanism of decarboxylation
  We then sought to examine the reversible nature of the chemical re-     We speculated that the mechanism of the decarboxylation reac-
action catalyzed by this enzyme. We used the aromatic phenols orcinol     tion would require the zinc atom to play a pivotal role in  facili-
and resorcinol to determine if these substrates could be converted into     tating the catalytic process ( Fig. 8 ). Based on the crystal structure
the corresponding substituted benzoic acid. To provide a source for the     of the closely related sequence of reversible 2,6-dihydroxybenzoate
carboxylate group we chose to add 3 M potassium bicarbonate (KHCO3 )     (gamma-resorcylate) decarboxylase from Rhizobium sp [ 22 ] with Cu -
to the assay buﬀer. Based on our observation of a metal binding site in     decarboxylase of C. uncialis , we predict that the divalent zinc ion in C.
the enzyme structure we also set out to determine the eﬀect of exoge-      uncialis Cu -decarboxylase coordinates with the active site residues Glu5,
nous zinc on the carboxylation reaction. To our satisfaction we observed     His7, and His150. The zinc ion would potentially form an ion pair with
conversion of orcinol to orsellinic acid with ∼7 % yield in the presence     the carboxylate of the substrate. We also speculate that the carboxylate
of both enzyme and zinc at 4 °C ( Fig. 7 A). We did observe a very small     of Asp274 would play a role as a proton shuttle during the tautomeriza-
conversion ( < 2 %) of orcinol to orsellinic acid in the presence of both     tion of the phenol group ortho to the carboxylate. We also suggest that
enzyme and zinc when we helped the reaction at 30 °C (Figure S6 D).     the imidazole group of His210 might sit in a position to act as a general
The absence of zinc in the enzyme assay completely abolished any trace     acid in this process with a water molecule acting as a proton shuttle. This
of orsellinic acid production. A control experiment with substrate in     step is summarized in step ( 1 ) in Fig. 8 . This results in the formation of


                                                                        7


[PDF physical page 8]
H. Gill and J.L. Sorensen                                                                                                                         Engineering Microbiology 5 (2025) 100211





Fig. 6. Analysis of enzyme catalysis for the conversion of orsellinic acid to orcinol at 30  °C (A), and 2,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid to resorcinol at 30  °C (B). The
enzyme catalysis reactions were analyzed by comparing the area under the curve for the product peaks in the HPLC chromatograms obtained with and without the
addition of zinc. The chromatograms were recorded at a wavelength of 250 nm.



the tautomer shown in structure ( 2 ), which undergoes decarboxylation,     strate ( 1 ), in this case orcinol, the carbonate can potentially displace
re-aromatization, and protonation to yield orcinol, as shown in structure     the carboxylate of Asp274 on the zinc as shown in structure ( 2 ). This
( 3 ). This also leaves an open valence on the zinc that would be ready    would set up an interaction that would facilitate the attack on the car-
to accept another molecule of substrate. The proton of this carboxylic    bonyl of the carbonate via a tautomerization of the ortho phenol group
acid of the substrate would potentially used to reprotonate the nitrogen     as described in structure ( 3 ). We speculate that re-aromatization would
atom of His210, possibly using the water molecule as a proton shuttle.     be rapid ( 4 ) and with the transfer of a proton to the tetrahedral inter-
                                                                   mediate ( 5 ). The collapse of this tetrahedral intermediate would form
3.4.2. Proposed mechanism of carboxylation                                the carboxylic group ( 6 ) with the concomitant release of a molecule of
  We also speculated on the mechanism of the carboxylation process     water. The release of the ﬁnal product could be facilitated by protona-
catalyzed by this Cu -decarboxylase enzyme. In particular we sought to     tion of the ortho phenol ( 7 ), resulting in the formation of orsellinic acid
explain the necessary interaction between the carbonate molecule and      ( 8 ) ( Fig. 9 ). The full conﬁrmation of this mechanism would require a
the divalent zinc. We proposed that after binding of the phenolic sub-     separate detailed mechanistic study.


                                                                        8


[PDF physical page 9]
H. Gill and J.L. Sorensen                                                                                                                         Engineering Microbiology 5 (2025) 100211





Fig. 7. Comparative analysis of enzyme catalysis for conversion of (A) orcinol to orsellinic acid at 4 °C and (B) resorcinol to 2,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid at 30  °C.
The enzyme catalysis reactions were analyzed by comparing the area under the curve in the HPLC chromatograms obtained with and without the addition of zinc.
The chromatograms were recorded at a wavelength of 250 nm.


4. Discussion                                                             furacea in Saccharomyces cerevisiae [ 6 ], resulting in the production of
                                                                           lecanoric acid. Another report by [ 7 ] demonstrated the functional het-
   Several lichen genes have been indirectly linked to their tentative     erologous expression of a novel lichen polyketide biosynthetic gene clus-
functions through genome mining strategies, such as comparative ho-     ter (BGC) from the lichen mycobiont Stereocaulon. alpinium in a plant-
mology mapping, transcriptional proﬁling, and phylogenetic analyses.     pathogenic fungus Ascochyta rabiei resulting in the production of de-
However, attempts to validate these associations through heterologous     tectable amounts of atranorin.
expression in Aspergillus spp. or E. coli have met with only limited suc-     We previously reported (Bertrand et al., 2019) the attempted expres-
cess. There have been only two recent reports in which polyketide     sion of the polyketide synthase at the core of his gene cluster ( cu-nr-pks-
synthases (PKSs) have been successfully expressed in heterologous sys-    5 ), which we predicted to be responsible for orsellinic acid biosynthe-
tems. One study demonstrated the heterologous expression of a codon-      sis. In this previous work we observed transcription of the gene but no
optimized gene, pfur17–0229 , from the perfume lichen Pseudevernia fur-     detectable natural product formation for reasons that still do not ap-


                                                                        9


[PDF physical page 10]
H. Gill and J.L. Sorensen                                                                                                                         Engineering Microbiology 5 (2025) 100211





                      Fig. 8. Proposed mechanism for the decarboxylation of an ortho-acid by the Cu -decarboxylase enzyme from C. uncialis.





                                                          Fig. 9. Proposed Mechanism for Carboxylation.



pear apparent. Despite this failure we sought to explore the function     We were able to successfully induce the expression of the Cu -
of the adjacent gene that appeared to encode for a Cu -decarboxylase.     decarboxylase gene and subsequent puriﬁcation using NTA Ni2 + aﬃnity
This gene was only 963 bp in length giving a predicted size of the re-    chromatography at 4 °C yielded a protein with an approximate molec-
sulting protein of 35 kDa. Furthermore, the lack of observable introns     ular mass of 35 kDa as determined by SDS-PAGE chromatography. We
led us to speculate that this gene might be amenable to expression in E.    observed protein degradation when we attempted protein puriﬁcation
coli using standard techniques. To that end, we ampliﬁed and cloned     at 30  °C, as analyzed by SDS-PAGE (Figure S2). Literature reports on
this gene into the pQE80L expression plasmid, chosen for its T5 lac     the puriﬁcation of reversible resorcylate decarboxylase from Rhizobium
promoter, which allows moderate expression levels, making it a bet-     sp [ 20 ] and reversible 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid decarboxylase from
ter choice for potentially toxic proteins. Since it was unknown whether     Fusarium oxysporum [ 35 ] were also carried out at 4 °C, suggesting that
the produced protein would be toxic to E. coli , the plasmids inclusion    lower temperatures may help in maintaining protein stability during
of the lacIq gene helps repress foreign gene expression until induced by     puriﬁcation.
IPTG. Additionally, the N-terminal His6 tag facilitates puriﬁcation (The       The predicted 3D structure of the puriﬁed protein revealed a
QIA expressionist -ﬁfth edition).                                  TIM beta/alpha barrel fold, suggesting homology with the metallo-


                                                                       10


[PDF physical page 11]
H. Gill and J.L. Sorensen                                                                                                                         Engineering Microbiology 5 (2025) 100211


dependent hydrolase superfamily. The decarboxylase protein structure    and further research will be needed to elucidate the mechanisms and
from Rhizobium sp [ 22 ] and the AlphaFold-predicted structure of Cu -     implications.
decarboxylase were superimposed using UCSF Chimera ( Fig. 5 ). The       The gene coding for this decarboxylase appears in the genome of
results revealed that the zinc binding site and key amino acids of Cu -     C. uncialis ﬂanking a gene that encodes for a polyketide synthase that is
decarboxylase (Glu5, His7, His150, and Asp274) overlapped between     predicted to produce orsellinic acid. Since orcinol is a well-known lichen
the two structures.                                                        natural product [ 39–41 ] our results may suggest that there is a dedicated
   This enzyme was part of a small biosynthetic gene cluster that     decarboxylase that has a role in biosynthesis. It appears that although
had at the core a gene encoding for a PKS that was predicted to     orsellinic acid can undergo spontaneous decarboxylation it may not be
produce orsellinic acid. We therefore set out to determine if this Cu -    an eﬃcient enough process for the lichen fungi. Lichen have adapted to
decarboxylase enzyme could catalyze the decarboxylation of orsellinic     thrive in cold and harsh environments and part of the discussion is how
acid. We observed that, indeed, the decarboxylation of orsellinic acid     these fungi can operate metabolism under these conditions. The use of
was accelerated in the presence of both enzyme and zinc ( Fig. 6 A).     dedicated enzymes to accelerate reactions that, under other conditions
We also observed some background spontaneous decarboxylation of    would be spontaneous, may be one of the adaptation mechanisms.
orsellinic acid, but the presence of both enzyme and zinc resulted in        This is also the ﬁrst report of the functional expression of a decar-
a considerable increase in the production of orcinol under the same     boxylase enzyme from a lichen-forming fungus. Additionally, this is also
conditions. We also observed that this enzyme can decarboxylate 2,4-     the ﬁrst report of the functional expression of a post-PKS tailoring en-
dihydroxybenzoic acid, a substrate that did not undergo any observable    zyme from a lichen. This report may suggest that there would be util-
spontaneous  reactions.  In  contrast, gamma  resorcylate decarboxy-      ity in pursuing the functional expression of other tailoring genes that
lase, the enzyme with the highest similarity to Cu- decarboxylase,    have been observed in the lichen genome [ 11 ]. These tailoring enzymes
speciﬁcally  catalyze the conversion  of 2,6-dihydroxybenzoate and    may be a source of eﬀective biocatalysts that have some commercial po-
2,3-dihydroxybenzoate to resorcinol but does not facilitate the decar-      tential. For example, orcinol is a commodity chemical readily available
boxylation of 2,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid [ 20 ]. Perhaps unsurprisingly    with costs on the order of a few cents per milligram, Orsellinic acid on
this enzyme had a requirement for an atom of zinc to be present for     the other hand is considerably more expensive with costs on the order
fully eﬃcient catalysis, an observation consistent with other known     of a dollar per milligram. The use of an enzyme catalyzed reaction to
decarboxylases.                                                    produce orsellinic acid therefore has considerable commercial potential.
  A key novel ﬁnding  of our study  is  the enzymes  ability  to    The conversion of orcinol to orsellinic acid using conventional organic
eﬃciently catalyze reverse reactions, converting resorcinol to 2,4-     synthesis involves several steps involving air and moisture-sensitive
dihydroxybenzoic acid and orcinol to orsellinic acid. Interestingly, the     reagents.
enzyme activity showed a temperature-dependent shift, with the highest        In addition to orsellinic acid synthesis, this decarboxylase enzyme
yield of orsellinic acid observed at 4 °C, while 30 °C resulted in the opti-    might have broader industrial applications. For example, the Kolbe-
mal production of 2,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid. The absence of detectable     Schmitt is a well-known conventional carboxylation reaction of sali-
orsellinic acid at 30 °C may be explained by its rapid decarboxylation     cylic acid derivatives [ 42 ]. However, the chemical reaction is a highly
back to orcinol at this temperature. This temperature-sensitive behavior    energy-consuming and requires strong basic conditions at high tempera-
highlights the enzymes versatility and suggests potential applications in     ture/pressure [ 43 ]. In contrast, the enzymatic carboxylation and decar-
biocatalysis and metabolic engineering through precise control of reac-     boxylation could provide the best solution to accelerate such reactions.
tion conditions.                                                     Moreover, the lack of regioselectivity in these synthetic reactions leads
   While we were disappointed to not observe any reaction with an-     to the formation of numerous by-products, which poses practical chal-
thranilic acid or aniline, it was not entirely unexpected. These results     lenges in product separation [ 43 ]. The best alternative for attaining high
are consistent with previous studies, which suggests that the presence     regioselectivity and eco-friendly carboxylation of phenolic compounds
of a phenolic hydroxyl group (OH) is essential for carboxylation or de-    would be the use of decarboxylase enzymes.
carboxylation metallo-dependent enzymatic reactions [ 36 ]. Based on       With further optimization, this enzyme holds potential in vari-
these results, we proposed a mechanism for enzymatic decarboxylation    ous ﬁelds, including pharmaceutical, natural product biosynthesis, and
( Fig. 8 ) that involves a tautomerization to the keto form of the phenol     bioremediation. Future research should focus on elucidating the enzy-
which provides an electron sink for the decarboxylation. The mecha-    matic mechanisms and regulatory pathways associated with decarboxy-
nism of carboxylation ( Fig. 9 ) also invokes the involvement of the phe-     lase activity in lichens. Exploring the genetic organization of biosyn-
nolic OH group, again via a keto-enol tautomerization. We also spec-     thetic gene clusters and conducting feeding experiments with labeled
ulate that the ortho- OH group is involved in directing the substrate to     substrates could elucidate the intricate processes of lichen SMs biosyn-
bind to the zinc atom in a way to facilitate the capture of an enzyme-      thesis. Additionally, investigating the potential applications of a decar-
bound carbonate. While conﬁrming these mechanisms for this speciﬁc     boxylase and other enzymes in the biotechnology and pharmaceutical
Cu -decarboxylase would require further detailed studies, they align well     industries may lead to the development of novel biocatalysts that can
with previous ﬁndings [ 37 ] and provide valuable insights into the role    accomplish diﬃcult to achieve reactions.
of phenolic groups in metalloenzyme catalysis.
   This is the ﬁrst report of a reversible decarboxylase from a lichen-
                                                                           5. Conclusion
forming fungus, although such enzymes have been extensively reported
from bacteria [ 13–18 ]. This suggests the possibility of horizontal gene
                                                                           This study achieved the ﬁrst successful cloning, expression, and char-
transfer from bacteria to lichenized fungi, which may have enabled
                                                                             acterization of a Cu -decarboxylase gene from C. uncialis . These results
the acquisition of new capabilities, such as the production of novel
                                                      may suggest a role for this enzyme in the biosynthesis of natural prod-
secondary metabolites (SMs). For instance, in a comprehensive anal-
                                                                            ucts by lichen fungi. The full biotechnological potential of this enzyme
ysis of 829 fungal genomes, [ 37 ], identiﬁed the presence of > 20,000
                                                                          as a biocatalyst has yet to be fully realized.
prokaryotic genes in fungal genomes, highlighting HGT’s contribution
to fungal genetic diversity. Moreover, [ 38 ] identiﬁed two horizontally
acquired genes in Trebouxiophyceae associated with lichenization: a glu-    Data Availability Statement
tathione S-transferase (involved in the oxidative stress response, and
desiccation tolerance) and a glycoside hydrolase 8, GH8 (promotes         All data presented in this manuscript, including plasmids and gene
lichen symbiosis by degrading the fungal cell wall). However, reports     sequences, is available free of charge by contacting the corresponding
of gene transfer between bacteria and lichenized fungi are limited,     author.


                                                                       11


[PDF physical page 12]
H. Gill and J.L. Sorensen                                                                                                                         Engineering Microbiology 5 (2025) 100211


Declaration of Competing Interest                                             [11] R.L. Bertrand, M. Abdel-Hameed, J.L. Sorensen, Lichen Biosynthetic Gene Clusters
                                                                                                  Part II: Homology Mapping Suggests a Functional Diversity, Journal of Natural Prod-
                                                                                                     ucts 81 (4) (2018) 732–748, doi: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.7b00770 .
   The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial      [12] L. Martinet, A. Naômé, B. Deﬂandre, M. Maciejewska, D. Tellatin, E. Tenconi,
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence           N. Smargiasso, E. de Pauw, G.P. van Wezel, S. Rigali, A Single Biosynthetic Gene
the work reported in this paper.                                                             Cluster Is Responsible for the Production of Bagremycin Antibiotics and Ferroverdin
                                                                                                  Iron Chelators, mBio 10 (4) (2019) e01230 -19, doi: 10.1128/mBio.01230-19 .
                                                                                      [13] Y. Ishii, Y. Narimatsu, Y. Iwasaki, N. Arai, K. Kino, K. Kirimura, Reversible and
CRediT Authorship Contribution Statement                                        nonoxidative 𝛾-resorcylic acid decarboxylase: Characterization and gene cloning of
                                                                                        a novel enzyme catalyzing carboxylation of resorcinol, 1, 3-dihydroxybenzene, from
                                                                                    Rhizobium radiobacter, Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 324
  Harman Gill: Writing – original draft, Investigation, Formal analy-            (2) (2004) 611–620 .
sis. John L. Sorensen: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Concep-      [14] K. Kino, Y. Hirokawa, R. Gawasawa, R. Murase, R. Tsuchihashi, R. Hara, Screening,
tualization.                                                                          gene cloning, and characterization of orsellinic acid decarboxylase from Arthrobac-
                                                                                                              ter sp. K8 for regio-selective carboxylation of resorcinol derivatives, Journal of
                                                                                            Biotechnology 323 (2020) 128–135 .
Acknowledgments                                                               [15] K. Kirimura, H. Gunji, R. Wakayama, T. Hattori, Y. Ishii, Enzymatic Kolbe–Schmitt
                                                                                                   reaction to form salicylic acid from phenol: enzymatic characterization and gene
                                                                                                  identiﬁcation of a novel enzyme, Trichosporon moniliiforme salicylic acid decar-
  We would like to acknowledge Dr. Hamidreza Karbalaeiheidari (De-            boxylase, Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 394 (2) (2010)
partment of Chemistry, U of Manitoba), for his guidance in cloning, and          279–284 .
                                                                                      [16] C. Wuensch, J. Gross, G. Steinkellner, A. Lyskowski, K. Gruber, S.M. Glueck, K. Faber,
Dr. Nediljko Budisa (Department of Chemistry, U of Manitoba) for pro-            Regioselective ortho-carboxylation of phenols catalyzed by benzoic acid decarboxy-
viding the expression plasmid and granting access to the FPLC instru-             lases: a biocatalytic equivalent to the Kolbe–Schmitt reaction, RSC Advances 4 (19)
ment in their lab.                                                                      (2014) 9673–9679 .
                                                                                      [17] C. Wuensch, T. Pavkov-Keller, G. Steinkellner, J. Gross, M. Fuchs, A. Hromic,
   Financial support from an NSERC Discovery Grant (RGPIN-2017–           A. Lyskowski, K. Fauland, K. Gruber, S.M. Glueck, Regioselective Enzymatic
04958) to JLS for this research is gratefully acknowledged. Funding to           𝛽-Carboxylation of para-Hydroxy-styrene Derivatives Catalyzed by Phenolic Acid
HG from the U of Manitoba Faculty of Science Enhancement of Graduate           Decarboxylases, Advanced Synthesis & Catalysis 357 (8) (2015) 1909–1918 .
                                                                                      [18] M. Yoshida, T. Oikawa, H. Obata, K. Abe, H. Mihara, N. Esaki, Biochemical and
Stipends Program is acknowledged.                                                       genetic analysis of the 𝛾-resorcylate (2, 6-dihydroxybenzoate) catabolic pathway in
                                                                                    Rhizobium sp. strain MTP-10005: Identiﬁcation and functional analysis of its gene
                                                                                                               cluster, Journal of Bacteriology 189 (5) (2007) 1573–1581 .
Supplementary Materials                                                       [19] R.L. Bertrand, M. Abdel-Hameed, J.L. Sorensen, Lichen Biosynthetic Gene Clusters.
                                                                                                  Part I. Genome Sequencing Reveals a Rich Biosynthetic Potential, Journal of Natural
   The following supporting information is available; Figure S1: Map           Products 81 (4) (2018) 723–731, doi: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.7b00769 .
                                                                                      [20] M. Yoshida, N. Fukuhara, T. Oikawa, Thermophilic, Reversible 𝛾-Resorcylate De-
of the pQE30 plasmid visualized using SnapGene software; Figure S2:           carboxylase from Rhizobium sp. Strain MTP-10005: Puriﬁcation, Molecular Char-
SDS gel post-puriﬁcation using AKTA pure; Figure S3: (A) Homology            acterization, and Expression, Journal of Bacteriology 186 (20) (2004) 6855–6863,
results of Cu -decarboxylase (B) PP1699/LP2961-like homology results             doi: 10.1128/JB.186.20.6855-6863.2004 .
                                                                                      [21] R.L. Bertrand, J.L. Sorensen, Lost in Translation: Challenges with Heterologous Ex-
through SCOPe- Structural Classiﬁcation of Proteins (C) Phyre gener-
                                                                                                  pression of Lichen Polyketide Synthases, ChemistrySelect 4 (21) (2019) 6473–6483,
ated predicted protein structure of the Cu- decarboxylase enzyme based             doi: 10.1002/slct.201901762 .
on the translated amino acid sequence; Figure S4: Substrate used in      [22] M. Goto, H. Hayashi, I. Miyahara, K. Hirotsu, M. Yoshida, T. Oikawa, Crystal Struc-
the study of carboxylation and decarboxylation reactions facilitated by            tures of Nonoxidative Zinc-dependent 2,6-Dihydroxybenzoate ( 𝛾-Resorcylate) De-
                                                                                               carboxylase from Rhizobium sp. Strain MTP-10005, Journal of Biological Chemistry
the Cu - decarboxylase enzyme from C. uncialis ; Figure S5 and Figure S6:         281 (45) (2006) 34365–34373, doi: 10.1074/jbc.M607270200 .
HPLC chromatograms alongside UV spectra at 250 nm for the enzyme      [23] E.L. Wise, W.S. Yew, J. Akana, J.A. Gerlt,  I. Rayment, Evolution of Enzymatic
catalyzed decarboxylation reaction and carboxylation reaction respec-             Activities in the Orotidine 5‘-Monophosphate Decarboxylase Suprafamily: Struc-
                                                                                                          tural Basis for Catalytic Promiscuity in Wild-Type and Designed Mutants of 3-
tively.                                                                                           Keto-l-gulonate 6-Phosphate Decarboxylase, Biochemistry 44 (6) (2005) 1816–1823,
   Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in             doi: 10.1021/bi0478143 .
the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.engmic.2025.100211 .                    [24] T.M. Stanley, W.H. Johnson, E.A. Burks, C.P. Whitman, C.C. Hwang, P.F. Cook, Ex-
                                                                                                  pression and stereochemical and isotope eﬀect studies of active 4-oxalocrotonate
                                                                                                decarboxylase, Biochemistry 39 (4) (2000) 718–726, doi: 10.1021/bi9918902 .
References                                                                        [25] T. Li, H. Iwaki, R. Fu, Y. Hasegawa, H. Zhang, A. Liu, 𝛼-Amino- 𝛽-carboxymuconic-
                                                                                            𝜀 -semialdehyde Decarboxylase (ACMSD) Is a New Member of the Amidohydrolase
 [1] M. Grimm, M. Grube, U. Schiefelbein, D. Zühlke, J. Bernhardt, K. Riedel, The           Superfamily, Biochemistry 45 (21) (2006) 6628–6634, doi: 10.1021/bi060108c .
      Lichens’ Microbiota, Still a Mystery? Frontiers in Microbiology 12 (2021) 623839,      [26] T. Li, A.L. Walker, H. Iwaki, Y. Hasegawa, A. Liu, Kinetic and Spectroscopic Char-
      doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.623839 .                                                               acterization of ACMSD from Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens Reveals a Pentacoordinate
 [2] F. Lutzoni, J. Miadlikowska, Lichens, Current Biology: CB 19 (13) (2009) R502–          Mononuclear Metallocofactor, Journal of the American Chemical Society 127 (35)
     R503, doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.04.034 .                                                  (2005) 12282–12290, doi: 10.1021/ja0532234 .
 [3] P. Matos, P. Pinho, G. Aragón, I. Martínez, A. Nunes, A.M.V.M. Soares, C. Bran-      [27] M.M. Bradford, A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram
     quinho, Lichen traits responding to aridity, Journal of Ecology 103 (2) (2015) 451–            quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding, Analytical Bio-
     458, doi: 10.1111/1365-2745.12364 .                                                      chemistry 72 (1976) 248–254, doi: 10.1006/abio.1976.9999 .
 [4] D. Armaleo, X. Sun, C. Culberson, Insights from the ﬁrst putative biosynthetic gene      [28] E.F. Pettersen, T.D. Goddard, C.C. Huang, G.S. Couch, D.M. Greenblatt, E.C. Meng,
      cluster for a lichen depside and depsidone, Mycologia 103 (4) (2011) 741–754 .                T.E.  Ferrin, UCSF Chimera —A  visualization system  for  exploratory  research
 [5] H. Gill, J.L. Sorensen, J. Collemare, Lichen Fungal Secondary Metabolites: Progress          and analysis, Journal of Computational Chemistry 25 (13) (2004) 1605–1612,
      in the Genomic Era Toward Ecological Roles in the Interaction,  in: B. Scott,            doi: 10.1002/jcc.20084 .
      C. Mesarich (Eds.), Plant Relationships: Fungal-Plant Interactions, Springer Inter-      [29] J.Abramson, J. Adler, J. Dunger, R. Evans, T. Green, Pritzel, A., Ronneberger, O.,
      national Publishing, 2023, pp. 185–208, doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-16503-0_7 .                 Willmore, L., Ballard, A.J., Bambrick, J., Bodenstein, S.W., Evans, D.A., Hung, C.C.,
 [6] J.T. Kealey, J.P. Craig, P.J. Barr, Identiﬁcation of a lichen depside polyketide syn-             O’Neill, M., Reiman, D., Tunyasuvunakool, K., Wu, Z., Ž emgulyt ė, A., Arvaniti, E.,
     thase gene by heterologous expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Metabolic En-     … Jumper, J.M. (2024). Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions
     gineering Communications 13 (2021) e00172, doi: 10.1016/j.mec.2021.e00172 .              with AlphaFold 3. Nature, 630(8016), 493–500. doi:10.1038/s41586-024-07487-w .
 [7] W. Kim, R. Liu, S. Woo, K.B. Kang, H. Park, Y.H. Yu, H.H. Ha, S.Y. Oh, J.H. Yang,      [30] E.C. Meng, T.D. Goddard, E.F. Pettersen, G.S. Couch, Z.J. Pearson, J.H. Morris,
     H. Kim, Linking a Gene Cluster to Atranorin, a Major Cortical Substance of Lichens,            T.E. Ferrin, UCSF ChimeraX: Tools for structure building and analysis, Protein Sci-
     through Genetic Dereplication and Heterologous Expression, mBio 12 (3) (2021)           ence 32 (11) (2023) e4792, doi: 10.1002/pro.4792 .
     e01111–e01121 .                                                                 [31] K. Tamura, G. Stecher, S. Kumar, MEGA11: molecular Evolutionary Genetics Anal-
 [8] W. Yi, Z. Neng, Y. Xiaolong, H. Mei, H. Jae-Seoun, Y. Yuming, W. Juan, Heterologous             ysis Version 11, Molecular Biology and Evolution 38 (7) (2021) 3022–3027,
      transcription of a polyketide synthase gene from the lichen forming fungi Usnea            doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab120 .
      longissima, Research Journal of Biotechnology 11 (10) (2016) 16–21 .                  [32] E. Zuckerkandl, L. Pauling, Evolutionary divergence and convergence in pro-
 [9] S.J. Sinnemann, Ó.S. Andrésson, D.W. Brown, V.P. Miao, Cloning and heterologous             teins, in: Evolving Genes and Proteins, Elsevier, 1965, pp. 97–166. https://www.
     expression of Solorina crocea pyrG, Current Genetics 37 (5) (2000) 333–338 .                sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9781483227344500176 .
[10] K. Yang,  J. Tian, N.P. Keller, Post-translational modiﬁcations drive secondary      [33] J. Dopazo, Estimating errors and conﬁdence intervals for branch lengths in phylo-
     metabolite biosynthesis in Aspergillus: a review, Environmental Microbiology 24            genetic trees by a bootstrap approach, Journal of Molecular Evolution 38 (3) (1994)
      (7) (2022) 2857–2881, doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.16034 .                                  300–304, doi: 10.1007/BF00176092 .


                                                                       12


[PDF physical page 13]
H. Gill and J.L. Sorensen                                                                                                                         Engineering Microbiology 5 (2025) 100211


[34] A. Rzhetsky, M. Nei, Statistical properties of the ordinary least-squares, generalized            lutionary origins of lichenization in chlorophyte algae, Nature Communications 15
      least-squares, and minimum-evolution methods of phylogenetic inference, Journal           (2024) 4452, doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-48787-z .
      of Molecular Evolution 35 (4) (1992) 367–375, doi: 10.1007/BF00161174 .             [39] S. Huneck, NATURE OF LICHEN SUBSTANCES, in: The Lichens, Elsevier, 1973,
[35] X. Zhang, J. Ren, P. Yao, R. Gong, M. Wang, Q. Wu, D. Zhu, Biochemical characteri-           pp. 495–522, doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-044950-7.50020-9 .
      zation and substrate proﬁling of a reversible 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid decarboxy-      [40] P. Papadopoulou, O. Tzakou, C. Vagias, P. Kefalas, V. Roussis, 𝛽-Orcinol Metabo-
      lase for biocatalytic Kolbe-Schmitt reaction, Enzyme and Microbial Technology 113              lites from the Lichen Hypotrachyna revoluta, Molecules 12 (5) (2007) Article 5,
     (2018) 37–43, doi: 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2018.02.008 .                                            doi: 10.3390/12050997 .
[36] S. Bierbaumer, M. Nattermann, L. Schulz, R. Zschoche, T.J. Erb, C.K. Winkler,      [41] B.  Rankovi ć  (Ed.),  Lichen  Secondary  Metabolites:  Bioactive  Properties and
    M. Tinzl, S.M. Glueck, Enzymatic Conversion of CO2: From Natural to Artiﬁcial           Pharmaceutical Potential, Springer International Publishing, 2019, doi: 10.1007/
      Utilization, Chemical Reviews (2023), doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00581 .                  978-3-030-16814-8 .
[37] F. Liu, S.H. Wang, R. Cheewangkoon, R.L. Zhao, Uneven distribution of prokaryote-      [42] S.M. Glueck, S. Gümüs, W.M. Fabian, K. Faber, Biocatalytic carboxylation, Chemical
     derived horizontal gene transfer in fungi: a lifestyle-dependent phenomenon, mBio            Society Reviews 39 (1) (2010) 313–328 .
    16 (1) (2024) e02855 -24, doi: 10.1128/mbio.02855-24 .                              [43] H. Gilman, H.B. Willis, T.H. Cook, F.J. Webb, R.N. Meals, Dibenzofuran. XVIII. Iso-
[38] C. Puginier, C. Libourel, J. Otte, P. Skaloud, M. Haon, S. Grisel, M. Petersen,           meric Metalation Products of Some Phenols and their Methyl Ethers1, Journal of the
      J.G. Berrin, P.M. Delaux, F. Dal Grande, J. Keller, Phylogenomics reveals the evo-          American Chemical Society 62 (3) (1940) 667–669 .





                                                                       13