
[PDF physical page 1]
Chemistry & Biology
Previews


Bringing Protein Engineering
and Natural Product Biosynthesis Together


Ralph A. Cacho1 and Yi Tang1,2,*
1Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
2Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
*Correspondence: yitang@ucla.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2013.01.005

In this issue of Chemistry & Biology, Zhang and colleagues developed a yeast cell surface display strategy to
effectively evolve the substrate speciﬁcity of DhbE, one of the adenylation domains of the bacillibactin
synthetase complex. The method yields DbhE variants that have dramatically altered substrate speciﬁties
toward unnatural aryl substrates.



Nonribosomal   peptide   synthetases   strategy to effectively evolve the sub-   nine  to  L-leucine (Stachelhaus  et  al.,
(NRPSs) are large multimodular enzymes   strate speciﬁcity of one of the A domains   1999). Subsequent examples included
that are responsible for the biosynthesis    in  the  bacillibactin NRPS. They were   switching the speciﬁcity of an A domain
of important bioactive molecules such as   able to dramatically alter the A domain    in the surfactin synthetase from L-aspar-
penicillin, cyclosporine, and daptomycin.   speciﬁcity  toward  unnatural  aromatic   tate to L-asparagine (Eppelmann et al.,
NRPSs catalyze the successive formation   building blocks. This approach is gener-   2002) and  recently  the production  of
of peptide bonds using aminoacyl adeny-    ally applicable  to  different A domain/   calcium-dependent    antibiotic   (CDA)
lates. Each module of the NRPS has mini-   substrate combinations, and may signiﬁ-   analogs through mutagenesis of an A
mally  three domains:  the  adenylation   cantly  increase  the  repertoire  of A   domain  in  the CDA NRPS  (Thirlway
domain (A), which speciﬁcally activates   domains that can be used in the construc-   et al., 2012).
an amino acid and transfers it to the thio-   tion of synthetic NRPSs.                    Notwithstanding these successes  in
lation domain (T) in an ATP-dependent    An enabling breakthrough for under-   modiﬁcation of A domain speciﬁcity, it is
fashion; and a condensation domain (C)   standing and engineering the speciﬁcity   evident that this domain represents an
that catalyzes the peptide bond formation   of A domains is the ﬁrst high-resolution   ideal target for engineering by directed
between the T domain-tethered amino-   crystal  structure  of  a  phenylalanine-   evolution approaches, such as large scale
acyl group and  the  growing  peptide   speciﬁc A  domain  (PheA)  from  the   saturation mutagenesis at multiple posi-
chain. The linear juxtaposition of several   gramicidin synthetase 1  (Conti  et  al.,   tions within the 10-aa code. Access to
modules constitutes an assembly-line-   1997). The crystal structure revealed that   signiﬁcantly   larger  sequence  space,
like machinery  in which  the  growing  PheA shares a highly conserved domain   coupled with a high-throughput screening
peptide increases in size by one residue   arrangement with ﬁreﬂy luciferase, which   strategy, should lead to variants that have
after each module.                                is  also an adenylating enzyme. PheA   dramatically altered substrate speciﬁcity.
  This elegantly simple biochemical logic   contains a large N-terminal subdomain   This is evidenced in the highly successful
of NRPSs has made these megasynthe-   and a  smaller  C-terminal subdomain,   engineering of the aminoacyl-tRNA syn-
tases attractive targets for protein engi-   with the active site nestled at the inter-   thetases that control ﬁdelity of the transla-
neering toward production of hybrid prod-   faces of these two subdomains. Based   tion system, which has led to the expan-
ucts. The A domain, in particular, has   on  the  PheA  structural  information,   sion of the 20 natural amino acid genetic
been focused on because of its role in   several groups  identiﬁed the residues   code (Wang et al., 2001). The ﬁrst demon-
selection of the individual building blocks.   within the A domain binding pocket that   stration of directed evolution of A domain
Classical domain swapping approaches   control  substrate  speciﬁcity   (Challis  was that of the A-T didomain AdmK from
have led to fruitful combinatorial biosyn-   et  al., 2000; Stachelhaus et  al., 1999).   the andrimid pathway. Through saturation
thesis  of analogs as demonstrated  in   Structure-guided sequence alignment of   mutagenesis of three residues within the
engineering of the daptomycin synthetase   a large number of A domain sequences   10-aa code, followed by a product-based
(Baltz et  al., 2005). Directed evolution,    in the database led to the assignment of   screening of 14,330 clones using liquid
which is an extremely powerful approach   a ten amino acid (10-aa) code that can   chromatography-tandem  mass  spec-
in the engineering of desired  traits of  be used to predict A domain substrate   trometry, the substrate tolerance of the
target enzymes, has not been widely   speciﬁcity. Moreover,  the 10-aa code  A domain was expanded from L-valine
used on  natural  product  biosynthetic   has served as a guide  in engineering   to L-isoleucine, L-leucine, L-alanine, or
enzymes, largely due to the lack of effec-   substrate   speciﬁcity   of   adenylation   L-phenylalanine  (Evans  et   al.,  2011).
tive screening strategies. In this issue of   domains through rational mutagenesis,   Whereas this is a signiﬁcant breakthrough
Chemistry & Biology, Zhang et al. (2013)   as ﬁrst demonstrated in altering the amino    in NRPS engineering, the use of MS-
developed a yeast cell surface display   acid speciﬁcity of PheA from L-phenylala-   based screening is clearly the rate-limiting

                                                Chemistry & Biology 20, January 24, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved  3


[PDF physical page 2]
                                                                    Chemistry & Biology
                            Previews





Figure 1. Scheme of the Directed Evolution Study of DhbE
(A) DhbE is a stand-alone adenylation domain that activates 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid in the biosynthesis of the siderophore bacillibactin. Zhang et al.
(2013) utilized a chemical probe that mimics the acyl-adenylate intermediate of DhbE and screened using ﬂuorescence assisted cell sorting (FACS) to isolate
desired mutants.
(B) Crystal structure of DhbE (accession number 1MDB) showing the sites targeted for saturation mutagenesis by Zhang et al. (2013) for the directed
evolution study.



factor in exploring additional sequence   sisting of an acyl-adenosyl-monosulfa-   Ala333, and Val337) were chosen for satu-
space.                              mate  (acyl-AMS)  covalently  linked  to   ration mutagenesis (Figure 1B). Asn235
  Toward developing a high throughput   biotin were synthesized. The acyl-AMS   and Val337 were part of the 10-aa code,
screening method for engineering the A   moiety is a nonhydrolyzable mimic of the   while His234 and Ala333 were shown to
domain, Zhang et  al. (2013) employed   acyl-AMP intermediate  that acts as a  be in proximity of the binding pocket.
a yeast-surface displayed method that    ‘‘bait’’ to bind DhbE, while the  biotin   The synthesized acyl-AMS of 3-HBA and
has been successfully used in the evolu-   moietyallows conjugation to aﬂuorophore  2-ABA were then incubated with DhbE
tion of a wide range of polypeptides,   tethered to streptavidin. Therefore, in this   mutants  displayed on  yeast  surface.
such as antibody fragments (Boder and   design, cells displaying DhbE, as shown   Thereafter, streptavidin bound to phyco-
Wittrup, 1997). Their target was the stand-   by binding of ﬂuorescent anti-myc anti-   erythrin was incubated with the yeast cells
alone DhbE A domain, which is part of the   body, and those that bind to the acyl-   to capture the DhbE mutants that bind the
NRPS  machinery  for  biosynthesis  of  AMS probe, as shown by conjugation of   acyl-AMS probes. Using FACS to screen
the siderophore bacillibactin in Bacillus   the ﬂuorescent streptavidin probe, can   through 5 3 106 colonies, the authors
subtilis. The goal is to expand the sub-   be captured through FACS (Figure 1A).   were able to isolate a DhbE mutant (KZ4)
strate speciﬁcity of DhbE from the natural  To prove that the acyl-AMS based probe   that  has  an  11-fold  higher  kcat/KM
2,3-dihydroxybenzoic  acid  (DHB).  To   can bind to DhbE, a salicylyl-AMS probe,  compared to wild-type DhbE toward 3-
display DhbE and generated mutants,    in lieu of the redox sensitive DHB, was  HBA and 3-fold lower kcat/KM compared
wild-type DhbE was ﬁrst genetically fused   synthesized and was shown to select for   to  wild-type DhbE toward DHB, thus
to Aga2p, which allows the transport and   the cells that display DhbE. Two other   switching its selectivity 30-fold. On the
adhesion of the fusion protein to the yeast   chemical probes that contain 3-hydroxy-   other hand, the KZ12 mutant has a 6.2-
cell  surface.  Furthermore, DhbE was   benzoate (3-HBA) and anthranilate  (2-   fold higher kcat/KM compared to wild-
fused to an N terminus HA tag and a C   ABA) were also synthesized and were   type DhbE toward 2-ABA, and an 11-
terminus myc tag, which can be recog-   subsequently used for the FACS-based   fold lower kcat/KM compared to wild-type
nized by anti-HA and anti-myc antibodies,   selection of mutants. The chemical probe  DhbE toward DHB, which accounts for
respectively. This enabled the use of ﬂuo-   design also allows one to screen a variety   a dramatic 206-fold switch in selectivity
rescence assisted cell sorting (FACS) with   of unnatural substrates by simply chang-   toward 2-ABA. Thus, Zhang et al. (2013)
a ﬂow cytometer to capture the yeast cells   ing the acyl-AMS portion of the probe to   were able to prove that yeast cell surface
displaying full-length DhbE.                the targeted acyl group.                    display coupled with FACS is an effective
  In  order  to  capture  DhbE  fusion    Based on the X-ray crystal structure of   high-throughput screening method for the
proteins that can bind to the desired  DhbE (May et al., 2002) and the 10-aa   directed evolution of NRPS A domains.
substrate or acyl-adenylate, probes con-   code,  four  residues  (His234, Asn235,   This method can be extended to any

4  Chemistry & Biology 20, January 24, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved


[PDF physical page 3]
Chemistry & Biology
Previews




pairing of A domain and substrate through   This important work has only scratched   Eppelmann, K., Stachelhaus,  T., and Marahiel,
                                                                                            M.A. (2002). Biochemistry 41, 9718–9726.
the  preparation  of  the  corresponding   the surface.  It is anticipated that addi-
acyl-AMS  probe. The  next  challenge    tional ingenious approaches can signiﬁ-                                                                                                Evans, B.S., Chen, Y., Metcalf, W.W., Zhao, H.,
would be to further evolve the rest of the   cantly improve our abilities to tailor the   and Kelleher, N.L. (2011). Chem. Biol. 18, 601–607.
NRPS assembly line to process the unnat-   properties  of  these  enzymes  toward
ural building block efﬁciently.             customized  synthesis  of  target  small   May, J.J., Kessler, N., Marahiel, M.A., and Stubbs,
                                                                                                M.T. (2002). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 12120–
  The marriage of directed evolution and   molecules.                                    12125.
natural product biosynthesis is a tanta-
lizing union toward production of ‘‘unnat-                                                     Stachelhaus, T., Mootz, H.D., and Marahiel, M.A.
                                    REFERENCES                                        (1999). Chem. Biol. 6, 493–505.ural’’  natural products. The  difﬁculties
associated with high throughput screen-                                                          Thirlway, J., Lewis, R., Nunns, L., Al Nakeeb, M.,                                                         Baltz, R.H., Miao, V., and Wrigley, S.K. (2005). Nat.
ing of desired phenotypes have severely    Prod. Rep. 22, 717–741.                               Styles, M., Struck, A.-W., Smith, C.P., and Mickle-
limited progresses in this regard. Zhang                                                            ﬁeld, J. (2012). Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 51,
                                                                                            7181–7184.
et al. (2013) demonstrated that powerful   Boder, E.T., and Wittrup, K.D. (1997). Nat. Bio-
                                                      technol. 15, 553–557.
techniques,  such  as  yeast  surface                                             Wang, L., Brock, A., Herberich, B., and Schultz,
display, which are widely used  in the    Challis, G.L., Ravel, J., and Townsend, C.A. (2000).   P.G. (2001). Science 292, 498–500.
protein engineering ﬁeld, can be effec-   Chem. Biol. 7, 211–224.
                                                                                             Zhang, K., Nelson, K.M., Bhuripanyo, K., Grimes,
tively designed to allow rapid screening    Conti, E., Stachelhaus, T., Marahiel, M.A., and    K.D., Zhao, B., Aldrich, C.C., and Yin, J. (2013).
of enzymes  in secondary metabolism.    Brick, P. (1997). EMBO J. 16, 4174–4183.         Chem. Biol. 20, this issue, 92–101.



Small Molecule Disruption of B. subtilis Bioﬁlms
by Targeting the Amyloid Matrix


Emma K. Andersson1 and Matthew Chapman2,*
1Department of Chemistry, Umea˚ University, 90187 Umea˚, Sweden
2Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1048, USA
*Correspondence: chapmanm@umich.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2013.01.004


Small molecule inhibitors of amyloid aggregation have potential as treatment for a variety of conditions. In
this issue of Chemistry & Biology, Romero and colleagues use amyloid-dependent B. subtilis bioﬁlm
formation to screen for amyloid inhibitors, identifying compounds that not only inhibit B. subtilis bioﬁlm
formation but also ones that disrupt preformed bioﬁlms.


Amyloid ﬁbers are historically associated     However, a growing number of ‘‘func-     Amyloids  are  commonly  found  as
with diseases such as Alzheimer’s, Hun-    tional’’ amyloids have been identiﬁed that   the  major  protein component  of  the
tington, and the prion diseases. Many   are assembled by dedicated biogenesis   extracellular matrix in bacterial bioﬁlms.
proteins can adopt the amyloid confor-   systems. Functional amyloids and their   Bacteria within the bioﬁlm are protected
mation—essentially a  b-rich  repeating   assembly systems have been found in   from  environmental  insults,  including
structure where  the b  strands  orient   nearly all walks of cellular life, including   disinfectants  and  antibiotics,  making
perpendicular to the ﬁber axis. Ordered  mammals, fungi, and bacteria (Hammer   bioﬁlms a  major  concern  in  hospital
amyloid protein polymers upset cellular   et al., 2008, Fowler et al., 2007). Functional   and industrial settings. Therefore, factors
proteostasis because they can inappro-   amyloids contribute to  cellular biology   that  can   disrupt   bacterial  amyloid
priately  interact  with  membranes  or    in various ways, including regulation of   formation  would  be   potential  lead
sequester chaperone machinery. There-   melanin synthesis, information transfer,  compounds for targeting bacterial bio-
fore, the search is on for ways to amelio-   or as a structural component. Further-   ﬁlms or amyloid formation  in general.
rate amyloid-related diseases by targeting   more, some of these functional amyloid   The study presented  in  this  issue  of
amyloid  formation. A major  hurdle  in   systems provide a unique platform for   Chemistry & Biology by Romero et  al.
this endeavor is that disease-associated   understanding how  amyloid  formation   (2013) describes Bacillus subtilis pellicle
amyloid formation is sporadic and difﬁcult   can be directed and controlled so that   bioﬁlm as a model system to screen
to faithfully reproduce in model organisms.    cellular toxicity is minimized.                  for amyloid inhibitors. The extracellular

                                                Chemistry & Biology 20, January 24, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved  5