
[PDF physical page 1]
      NIH Public Access
          Author Manuscript
             Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.
                Published in final edited form as:
               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. 2011 ; 2: 211–236. doi:10.1146/annurev-chembioeng-061010-114209.
NIH-PA
Author        Metabolic Engineering for the Production of Natural Products             Lauren B. Pickens1,§, Yi Tang1,2,*, and Yit-Heng Chooi1,§
                1University of California Los Angeles, Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
                2University of California Los Angeles, Department of Chemistry and BiochemistryManuscript
            Abstract

                     Natural products and natural product derived compounds play an important role in modern
                      healthcare as frontline treatments for many diseases and as inspiration for chemically synthesized
                       therapeutics. With advances in sequencing and recombinant DNA technology, many of the
                      biosynthetic pathways responsible for the production of these chemically complex and
                     pharmaceutically valuable compounds have been elucidated. With an ever expanding toolkit of
                      biosynthetic components, metabolic engineering is an increasingly powerful method to improveNIH-PA                  natural product titers and generate novel compounds. Heterologous production platforms have
                    enabled access to pathways from difficult to culture strains; systems biology and metabolic
                   modeling tools have resulted in increasing predictive and analytic capabilities; advances inAuthor                 expression systems and regulation have enabled the fine-tuning of pathways for increased
                       efficiency, and characterization of individual pathway components has facilitated the construction
                     of hybrid pathways for the production of new compounds. These advances in the many aspects of
                    metabolic engineering have not only yielded fascinating scientific discoveries but also make it an
                      increasingly viable approach for the optimization of natural product biosynthesis.Manuscript


            Keywords
                      Strain Improvement; Secondary Metabolism; Combinatorial Biosynthesis


         INTRODUCTION

                               Natural products produced by plants, bacteria, and fungi have been a rich source of bioactiveNIH-PA
                          compounds for drug discovery and development (Figure 1). Natural products dominated
                                 early drug discovery as large screening programs were set up following the breakthroughAuthor                              isolation and medicinal application of penicillin in the 1940s (1). As of 1990 80% of drugs
                                  in use were natural products or natural product inspired (2). In more recent years this figure
                             has decreased in favor of synthetic compound libraries; however natural products still play
                            an important role in drug discovery. From the period 1981–2006, 52% of the new chemical
                                    entities approved by the FDA were natural products or natural product inspired (3). NaturalManuscript
                              products are also termed secondary metabolites, or those not required for growth of the
                             producing organisms. Unlike primary metabolites which are required for growth and are


                    *Corresponding Author: yitang@ucla.edu.
                   §Equal Contribution Authors.


[PDF physical page 2]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                  Page 2

                             mostly the same across the spectrum of living organisms, secondary metabolites can vary
                             widely from species to species and encompass a diverse array of complex chemical
                                   structures. Many of these compounds are structurally complex, containing multiple chiral
                                centers and labile connectivities, which make them difficult to synthesize chemically.
                               Biosynthesis and fermentative approaches are therefore important tools in the productionNIH-PA
                           and development of these compounds for pharmaceutical, agricultural and related
                                applications (4).Author
                               Natural product discovery and process development are very labor and resource intensive
                                   tasks. Metabolic engineering, which is the introduction of rational changes in the genetic
                         makeup of an organism to alter the metabolic profile or improve biosynthetic capabilities
                                     (5), has gained increasing interest as a way to develop high titer bioprocesses and produceManuscript                     new “non-natural” natural products. Advances in molecular biology techniques and
                           knowledge of metabolic pathways have enabled unprecedented amount of control over these
                           complex biosynthetic processes. The dramatic decreases in the cost of sequencing
                             technology has resulted in an exponential amount of genomic data available and led to the
                                  identification of many genes involved in natural product pathways. Genome-scale metabolic
                                reconstructions have been developed for many important organisms and can be used to
                             guide metabolic engineering by identifying distal targets for genetic modification and
                              avoiding unintended consequences which may not be clear by local pathway analysis aloneNIH-PA                                (6). Furthermore, advances in protein engineering have led not only to both improved
                         enzyme efficiency, but also custom-tailored enzyme functions (7). Using these tools and
                            more, metabolic engineering has been applied towards two main objectives in naturalAuthor                              product biosynthesis: 1) to increase the titer of the target compound, and 2) to modify the
                                 natural product scaffold for improved pharmacological properties. Although many of the
                            examples are compound-specific, we will discuss some general strategies used towards
                              achieving these two goals in this review.Manuscript
         METABOLIC ENGINEERING FOR STRAIN IMPROVEMENT

                               In nature, secondary metabolites are thought to have evolved to confer some selective
                             advantage to the producing organism (8). As the production of the secondary metabolites is
                               metabolically costly to the cell, the producing organisms have likely evolved to synthesize
                                    just enough of the secondary metabolite to have a selective advantage. However, from a
                               biotechnological perspective, these amounts are far lower than what is necessary for
                                   industrial scale production (9). Additionally, there has been an increasing number of soNIH-PA                                 called “cryptic pathways” discovered which do not actively produce any metabolites. These
                            pathways can be activated under certain conditions, many of which are unknown. Mining
                                the metabolites in these pathways therefore represents a new source of obtaining new naturalAuthor
                              products (10). These factors necessitate that producing organisms undergo significant strain
                           improvement in order to produce the desired metabolite at an industrial scale.

                                 Traditionally, strain improvement was achieved by screening for the highest native
                             producing strain and further improving the strain by rounds of mutation and selection (9). AManuscript
                                  classic example is penicillin. Intensive early screening resulted in isolation of a strain of
                               Penicillium chrysogenum that produced penicillin at 100-fold higher titer than Fleming’s



                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 3]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                  Page 3

                                  original strain. Additional strain improvement and screening based on this “black box”
                             approach further improved production; and industrial strains are now estimated to produce
                                   penicillin at 100,000-fold higher than the original strain (11). An advantage to this approach
                                       is that no knowledge of the biochemical pathways or genetics of the microorganism is
                             needed; one simply selects the mutant strains with the best properties. This process can beNIH-PA
                             time and resource intensive, however, as the rate of isolating a mutant with improved
                                 properties is estimated to be on the order of 1 in 10,000 (9). With advances in ourAuthor                          understanding of metabolic pathways and improving genetic tools, rational strain
                           improvement by metabolic engineering is a promising tool for improving natural product
                                   yield. There are many genetic strategies that can be used to redirect metabolic flux toward
                              production of a desired metabolite including, but not limited to: increasing the precursor
                               supply, overexpressing or increasing the efficiency of bottleneck enzymes, altering theManuscript                                regulation of gene expression, reducing flux toward unwanted byproducts or competing
                             pathways, and reconstituting entire pathways in a heterologous host (Figure 2). Most
                                successful cases utilize a combination of these strategies to achieve the best performance.
                             This section will cover methods employed for metabolic engineering of natural product
                            pathways for improved efficiency and yield, with a focus on biosynthesis in
                             microorganisms.

              Biosynthesis in Heterologous HostsNIH-PA
                         Of the strategies mentioned above, an important decision to make is whether to optimize the
                                native producing strain, or to transfer the desired pathway into a heterologous host for
                                optimization. A heterologous host may be desirable if the native producer does not growAuthor
                              well under industrial fermentation conditions, is genetically intractable, or is subjected to
                             long growth periods. The choice of a heterologous host is often determined by the source of
                                the pathway to be transferred and the type of metabolite produced.Manuscript                       Natural Products from Bacteria—Bacteria are responsible for 70% of the natural
                              product antibiotics produced by microorganisms. Of these, over 75% are produced by
                              actinomycetes which includes the prolific Streptomyces genus (12). The largest groups of
                                 natural products produced by bacteria are polyketides, such as erythromycin and
                                   tetracycline, nonribosomal peptides (NRPs) such as daptomycin and vancomycin, hybrid
                            polyketide/NRP antibiotics such as epothilone, and β-lactams such as cephamycin. Many
                              actinomycetes strains have been well-characterized and several have well-established
                           methods for genetic modification (13). However, the growth time of actinomycetes is stillNIH-PA                        slow compared to other bacteria. Additionally, not all strains perform well under industrial
                               conditions or are genetically tractable, making heterologous hosts an attractive option in
                         some cases.Author
                         The most common heterologous hosts for bacterial derived natural products are either
                              heterologous Streptomyces hosts or the well-characterized Escherichia coli. Streptomyces
                                hosts are advantageous as many already produce antibiotics and therefore have the pathways
                                  for necessary precursor molecules. Additionally Streptomyces bacteria are physiologicallyManuscript
                             very different from E. coli and some proteins from Streptomyces pathways have been unable
                                  to be successfully expressed in E. coli. An example is the KS-CLF heterodimer which is



                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 4]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                  Page 4

                                responsible for synthesis of the poly-β-ketone backbone during bacterial aromatic
                               polyketide synthesis and has so far not been successfully expressed in E. coli. Streptomyces
                                 lividans and Streptomyces coelicolor, among others, have been used for heterologous
                               expression as they have been well studied and have established protocols for genetic
                               manipulation. One consideration when using a Streptomyces strain as a heterologous host isNIH-PA
                                   that many established strains also produce their own antibiotics which then are in
                              competition for building blocks, or interfere with the transplanted heterologous pathway.Author                           Several engineered strains have been constructed including S. coelicolor CH999 (14), and S.
                                 lividans K4–114 (15) which have their native antibiotic pathways knocked out to create a
                               clean background for production of a new compound. For example, heterologous production
                           and ease of purification of NRP daptomycin in S. lividans was increased upon elimination of
                                the actinorhodin producing pathway (16). Another strategy is to select an industrial strainManuscript
                                   that has already been optimized through mutation and introduce a pathway of interest.
                             Recently Reynolds and coworkers utilized an industrial monesin producer, Streptomyces
                              cinnamonensis, to produce the polyketide antibiotic tetracenomycin in titers significantly
                               higher than the native producer (17). Many of the mutations are expected to be in genes
                                outside the antibiotic pathway and may be difficult to predict. Therefore starting with an
                               already optimized strain may be a shortcut to increasing yield of a product composed of
                                 similar building blocks.
NIH-PA                          Despite these advantages, E. coli still offers a much shorter growth time and easier genetic
                              manipulations than actinomycetes hosts and many bacterial natural product pathways have
                            been successfully expressed in E. coli, including type I modular polyketide synthasesAuthor                           (PKSs) (18–20), nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs) (21, 22), and hybrid PKS/NRPS
                             systems (23, 24). The first successful example of heterologous expression of a complex
                               polyketide pathway in E. coli was erythromycin (18). Erythromycin is produced by a type I
                           modular PKS consisting of three multi-domain modules DEBS 1 (370 kDa), DEBS 2 (380Manuscript                       kDa) and DEBS 3 (332 kDa) which together produce the macrolide core 6-
                              deoxyerythronolide B (6dEB). One consideration when using E. coli as a host is that not all
                               of the necessary biosynthetic components or substrates may be available. For polyketide
                                 biosynthesis, the PKS must be posttranslationally modified by a phosphopantetheine
                                 transferase (PPTase). To achieve this, the authors inserted the sfp PPTase gene into the E.
                                   coli chromosome. Additionally, E. coli does not produce the (2S)-methylmalonyl-CoA
                              extender unit required by DEBS, therefore two genes pccA and B from S. coelicolor were
                                 transferred to E. coli to convert propionyl-CoA to (2S)-methylmalonyl-CoA. AdditionalNIH-PA                           modifications to increase efficiency of the system included removing the propionate
                              catabolism pathway and upregulating propionyl-CoA ligase and biotin ligase to enhance
                               precursor supply. The resulting strain produced 6dEB at a rate of 0.1 mmol per gram ofAuthor                              cellular protein per day (18). Later the completely tailored erythromycin C was produced in
                              E. coli by adding genes encoding the deoxysugar biosynthetic pathway and tailoring
                          enzymes needed to convert 6dEB to erythromycin C, along with the gene to confer
                             erythromycin resistance. This resulted in successful production of erythryomycin C,
                              although at a much lower yield than the native producer (20). Like PKSs, NRPSs alsoManuscript
                                require posttranslational pantetheinylation of the individual thiolation domains to be fully
                                 functional. Watanabe and coworkers achieved total biosynthesis of antitumor NRP



                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 5]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                  Page 5

                            echinomycin by introducing a three plasmid system carrying the echinomycin biosynthetic
                             genes from Streptomyces lasaliensis, sfp, fabC encoding fatty acid acyl carrier protein, and a
                            gene conferring echinomycin resistance into E. coli (22). Although currently these strains do
                               not outcompete production in the native hosts, further strain improvement combined with
                                the advantages of working with E. coli may make this a viable system for future productionNIH-PA
                               of bacterial natural products and engineered analogs. Additional reviews can be found which
                                elaborate further on heterologous biosynthesis of bacterial natural products (25–28).Author
                           Natural Products from Fungi—Fungi are responsible for approximately 30% of
                               microbial natural products, a share which is on the rise due to increasing interest in fungal
                                 natural products (12). Major classes of fungal natural products are polyketides, peptide
                             based compounds such as NRPs and β-lactams, terpenoids and combinations of these (29).Manuscript                      Many of these are medicinally important such as the blockbuster cholesterol lowering drug
                                  lovastatin produced by a set of PKSs, the well-known β-lactams penicillin and
                               cephalosporin, and the cyclic peptide immunosuppressant cyclosporine. Heterologous
                               expression of these important metabolites has, however, not yet been utilized to the extent of
                                  bacterial natural products (29). Many fungi are already good hosts for secondary metabolite
                               production, as they grow well on cheap carbon sources, and have had great success with
                                   traditional strain improvement and process improvement strategies resulting in multi-gram
                               per liter yields of the desired pharmaceutical products (30).NIH-PA
                     An additional difficulty for heterologous expression of fungal gene clusters is the mRNA
                               processing that may be required to produce functional protein. This makes heterologousAuthor                           fungal strains an attractive option as one can bypass the time consuming task of removing
                                 introns and stitching genes by PCR that is required to ensure correct expression in E. coli
                           and yeast (31). Like the actinomycetes, several of the more robust, well characterized fungal
                                   strains may be good candidates for heterologous hosts for gene clusters which originate from
                         more recalcitrant strains. The first example of a metabolite produced by a fungal synthase inManuscript
                             a heterologous host is 6-methylsalicylic acid, which is synthesized by the multifunctional
                     PKS 6-methylsalicylic acid synthase (6-MSAS). Successful heterologous expression was
                             achieved in S. coelicolor CH999 (32), E. coli (33), Saccharomyces cerevisiae (33), and
                                Aspergillus nidulans (34). In all but the fungal host, the introns were removed from the gene
                             encoding 6-MSAS. Without any further optimization, yields from bacteria were around 60–
                          75 mg/L (32, 33), while production in A. nidulans was over 300 mg/L (34) and yeast
                            produced 1.7 g/L (twice that of native producer Penicillium patulum) (33). More recent
                            examples in E. coli and fungal hosts include the heterologous production of beauvericin inNIH-PA
                              E. coli (35) and reconstruction of the four gene pathway to produce tenellin in Aspergillus
                             oryzae (36). Heterologous hosts have also been used to express fungal synthases for in vitroAuthor                            study. The highly reducing iterative PKS LovB from the lovastatin pathway was recently
                              expressed and purified from an engineered S. cerevisiae strain (37). Though heterologous
                               expression of fungal metabolites is still in the development stage, these successes
                             demonstrate that heterologous hosts are a viable option for the overproduction of fungal
                                metabolites. For further details, the reader is referred to additional reviews on this topic (31,Manuscript
                               38, 39).





                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 6]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                  Page 6

                           Natural Products from Plants—Plants are also prolific producers of pharmaceutically
                              important metabolites including terpenoids such as artemisinin and paclitaxel, alkaloids such
                               as camptothecin, and polyketides such as flavonoids. Due to the long growth time, low
                                   yield, and environmental consequences of harvesting large volumes of plant biomass, there
                                       is a significant incentive to be able to produce these valuable compounds in microbial hosts.NIH-PA
                         The higher complexity of plants, however also introduces additional challenges. Arguably
                                the two most difficult challenges to overcome for heterologous production of plant naturalAuthor                           products in microbes are identifying all of the scattered genes responsible for biosynthesis of
                                the target compound, and achieving functional protein expression in the lower organism (a
                                  particular problem with plant cytochrome P450 tailoring enzymes). Despite these factors,
                                several plant metabolites have been successfully produced in both E. coli and yeast
                               including precursors to the medicinally important terpenoids paclitaxel (40, 41) andManuscript
                                artemisinin (42, 43), and alkaloid intermediate reticuline (44, 45).

                         The plant aromatic polyketides, such as the flavonoids and stilbenes, have also been
                                successfully produced in E. coli host using an artificial pathway construction approach, in
                           which genes from different pathways in different plants were combined to reconstruct a
                                functional pathway (46). For example, for the biosynthesis of flavanone naringenin in E.
                                     coli, the authors assembled a pathway consisting of a phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL)
                           from the yeast Rhodotorula rubra, a cinnamate/coumarate:CoA Ligase (ScCCL) from S.NIH-PA                             coelicolor, a chalcone synthase (CHS) from the licorice plant Glycyrrhiza echinata and
                             chalcone isomerase (CHI) from Pueraria lobata. This hybrid pathway produced naringenin
                                    at 57 mg/L (47).Author
                                Additionally, some progress has been made to address the problem of the plant derived
                            cytochrome P450 expression (48). Several groups have had success in improving P450
                               expression in E. coli, using strategies such as modifying the N-terminal membrane
                                recognition domain (49, 50). Once the target compound can be produced, one can takeManuscript
                             advantage of the range of tools and models available for well characterized hosts like E. coli
                           and S. cerevisiae. Therefore the choice of a heterologous host for any system should take
                                  into account both the host’s native or initial ability to produce the target and the ease or
                                    feasibility of which it can be engineered for increased yield.

              Increasing Precursor Supply

                               Increasing precursor supply has been successfully used for most of the major classes of
                                 natural products and can be applied both to native and heterologous producing strains.NIH-PA
                               Precursor supply is at the intersection of primary and secondary metabolism, as these
                               precursors are either primary metabolites or derived from primary metabolites. Malonyl-Author                  CoA is an important building block for the biosynthesis of polyketides, and is produced by
                               carboxylation of acetyl-CoA by the acetyl-CoA carboxylase complex (ACCase). Ryu and
                            coworkers engineered S. coelicolor for increased production of malonyl-CoA by
                              overexpressing the genes encoding ACCase. The result was a 6-fold increase in actinorhodin
                              production (51). In addition to overexpression of ACCase, Zha and coworkers combinedManuscript
                                several strategies to increase malonyl-CoA levels in E. coli such as overexpression of gene
                             encoding acetyl-CoA synthetases, knockout of competing pathways and elimination of



                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 7]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                  Page 7

                          malonyl-CoA degrading pathways for a 15-fold increase in intracellular malonyl-CoA (52).
                            Fowler et. al. utilized a model based approach to identify and verify new genetic
                              manipulations to increase flux to malonyl-CoA resulting in enhanced production of
                               flavonoids in E. coli (53). In addition to malonyl-CoA, type I polyketides utilize a variety of
                           acyl-CoA extender units such as methylmalonyl-CoA, ethylmalonyl-CoA and isobutyryl-NIH-PA
                        CoA. Gene inactivation and overexpression strategies have also been used to increase supply
                               of these building blocks for an increase in desired polyketide yield (54–56).Author
                             Terpenoid producing pathways utilize isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) as a building block
                                  to generate the longer terpenoid backbones of geranyl pyrophosphate (GPP), farnesyl
                             pyrophosphate (FPP), and geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP) precursors to terpenoid
                                 natural products. IPP is produced predominantly by the 2C-methyl-D-erythrotol-4-phosphateManuscript                     (MEP) or nonmevalonate pathway in prokaryotes and the chloroplasts of higher plants, and
                                the mevalonate (MVA) pathway in eukaryotes and the cytosol of higher plants (57).
                               Precursor engineering strategies in E. coli have either focused on improving production of
                                the endogenous MEP pathway or introduction of a heterologous MVA pathway for
                               increased IPP production. Engineering efforts focused on the MEP pathway have found that
                              overexpression of 1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate synthase (dxs), 1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-
                             phosphate reductase (dxr), and/or isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase (idi) resulted in
                               increased isoprenoid production (58–60). Martin and coworkers bypassed the nativeNIH-PA                         pathway, and instead introduced the MVA pathway from S. cerevisiae to E. coli, resulting in
                                 greatly increased production of isoprenoid precursors (42). Further optimization by
                              balancing individual enzyme expression relieved growth inhibition caused by accumulationAuthor                               of toxic 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) intermediate, and resulted
                                  in further increase of isoprenoid production (61). In yeast, the flux through the native MVA
                           pathway was increased by chromosomal integration of engineered form of 3-hydroxy-3-
                             methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGR), a bottleneck in the MVA pathway,Manuscript                             resulting in a five-fold increase in amorphadiene production (43). Further increases were
                             achieved by increasing the availability of acetyl-CoA, the primary metabolite starting point
                               of the MVA pathway, by overexpressing acetylaldehyde dehydrogenase and introducing an
                                 additional heterologous acetyl-CoA synthetases, thereby increasing flux from pyruvate to
                            acetyl-CoA (62).

                         The shikimate pathway is a vital part of the primary metabolism, providing precursors for
                              aromatic amino acid biosynthesis. Several classes of natural products utilize aromatic amino
                                acids or other metabolites derived from the shikimate pathway as precursors includingNIH-PA
                                flavonoids, alkaloids, and nonribosomal peptides (63). Increasing flux through the shikimate
                           pathway or downstream amino acid tailoring steps has been used successfully to increase
                                 natural product yields. Balhimycin is a glycopeptide antibiotic which shares the same 7-Author
                          amino acid backbone as the pharmaceutically important vancomycin, differing only in the
                                glycosylation patterns. 5 of the 7 amino acids that make up the aglycon are either directly or
                                  indirectly derived from the shikimate pathway. By overexpressing 3-deoxy-D-arabino-
                              heptulosonate7-phosphate (DAHP) synthase, the first enzyme in the shikimate pathway,Manuscript                             balhimycin specific productivity was increased by 250% (64).





                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 8]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                  Page 8

             Engineering Natural Product Pathways

                               In the event that the product titer is not precursor limited, increasing the efficiency and
                               expression of biosynthetic pathway enzymes may yield the greatest results. Analysis of
                                several strains that have been classically improved by mutagenesis and screening has shownNIH-PA                              that these strains carry multiple copies of the entire gene cluster (65–67). For example, high
                             producing strain P. chrysogenum BW1890 was found to have between 8 and 16 copies of
                                the gene cluster responsible for penicillin biosynthesis, resulting in up to 64-fold increase inAuthor                              penicillin production (66). While this may be the simplest way for nature to evolve gene
                             dosing strategies, this strategy may be somewhat wasteful as it increases expression of all
                                the biosynthetic enzymes rather than targeting bottlenecks in the pathway. Metabolic
                              engineering allows one to fine tune the expression of individual enzymes by gene dosing
                                  (68), transcriptional regulation (69), or protein engineering (70) approaches. For exampleManuscript
                              during the biosynthesis of penicillin in A. nidulans, it was found that aminoadipyl-cysteinyl-
                                valine synthetase (ACVS) was the bottleneck enzyme and overexpression of the gene
                             encoding ACVS resulted in 100-fold increase in ACVS expression and a corresponding 30-
                                fold increase in penicillin (71). Overexpression of genes encoding downstream tailoring
                          enzymes isopenicillin N synthetase (IPNS) and acyltransferase (ACYT), however resulted in
                             only a slight increase in penicillin (72). Interestingly, the opposite effect was seen for P.
                           chrysogenum where an acyltransferase encoded by penDE was shown to be the rate limiting
                         enzyme (73). During the biosynthesis of anticancer aromatic polyketide doxorubicin,NIH-PA
                                glycosylation was determined to be the rate limiting step. By overexpressing genes
                                responsible for deoxysugar biosynthesis and glycosyltransfer, Malla and coworkersAuthor                         observed a nearly 6-fold increase in doxorubicin production (74). Another important
                                consideration especially with the production of bioactive natural products, is that production
                                  levels may not only be limited by biosynthetic enzymes, but by the toxicity of the final
                          compound. At higher titers the native resistance mechanisms encoded in the pathway may
                               not be sufficient to protect the strain from the toxic effects of its own metabolite. AsManuscript
                             observed with doxorubicin biosynthesis, overexpression of resistance genes was required to
                               obtain further improvements in product yield to alleviate product inhibition of late stage
                                   tailoring enzyme DoxA, and toxic effects of doxorubicin (75).

              Manipulating the Regulatory Component of a Pathway

                               In many organisms, pathways specific regulators may be utilized to enhance production of
                                the resulting natural product. Many gene clusters identified in Streptomyces encode a
                             Streptomyces antibiotic regulatory protein (SARP) which has been shown to be a positiveNIH-PA
                                 regulator of antibiotic production (76). Overexpression of the SARP from the
                              fredericamycin producing gene cluster of Streptomyces griseus ATCC 49344 resulted in aAuthor                           nearly 6-fold increase in antibiotic production over the native strain (77). Overexpression of
                     SARP MtmR from the mithramycin gene cluster in Streptomyces argillaceus resulted in a
                               16-fold increase of mithramycin titer. Interestingly, in the same study authors found that
                    MtmR was also able to activate the actinorhodin producing pathway when heterologously
                              expressed in S. coelicolor (78). Using a similar approach in fungi, after transferring theManuscript                                  entire citrinin biosynthetic gene cluster from native host Monascus purpureus to A. oryzae,
                              overexpression of activator CtnA resulted in a 400-fold improvement over the heterologous



                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 9]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                  Page 9

                                   strain which carried only a single copy of ctnA (79). This also indicates the importance of
                                the native regulator when transferring an entire gene cluster which retains the original
                             promoters and control elements from one organism to another. This strategy has also been
                             used to turn on cryptic pathways in fungi (10), and has led to the identification of two novel
                                metabolites, aspyridone and asperfuranone, from A. nidulans (80, 81).NIH-PA

                              Regulation of secondary metabolite pathways can also include negative regulation by
                           pathway specific repressors. The gene cluster responsible for the biosynthesis of antibioticsAuthor
                              platensimycin and platencin from Streptomyces platensis MA7327 contains a GntR family
                                  transcriptional repressor. By inactivating the gene encoding this transcriptional repressor,
                           Smanski and coworkers improved the titer of platensimycin and platencin by 100-fold over
                                the wild type strain (82).Manuscript
             Tunable Control of Metabolic Pathway Components

                      When assembling a metabolic pathway from the ground up (gene by gene), there is
                                 additional opportunity to modulate gene expression at the individual gene level. In addition
                                  to varying copy number, the ability to control relative amounts of individual enzymes at the
                                  transcriptional and translational levels may be a promising approach to fine tune metabolic
                             pathways. Promoter libraries have been developed for both E. coli (83) and yeast (84) to
                              give a quantified range of expression levels. In prokaryotic systems such as E. coli, pathwayNIH-PA                         genes are often arranged as an operon under the control of a single promoter, therefore
                                 additional control mechanisms may be useful. Pfleger and coworkers developed a library of
                               tunable intergenic regions (TIGRs) that control expression levels by differences in mRNAAuthor
                             secondary structures, RNase cleavage sites and RBS sequestering sequences (85). Recently,
                                the Voigt group developed a method for predictable control of protein expression based on
                              design of RBS sequences (86). As mentioned earlier, finding the proper balance of enzyme
                                  levels was key to reducing toxicity observed during amorphadiene production in E. coli (61).Manuscript                         Determining the proper enzyme levels, however, is an additional challenge. In an example
                          by Hawkins & Smolke for the heterologous production of benzylisoquinoline alkaloids
                            (BIAs) in S. cerevisiae, the authors first utilized an inducible promoter system to titrate gene
                               expression one by one and determine optimal expression levels for each gene (45). These
                              optimal expression levels were then correlated to expression levels obtained by members of
                                the library of mutant TEF1 promoters developed by Nevoigt et. al (84) to construct a new
                                   strain with engineered promoters chosen to reflect the optimized enzyme expression levels
                                  (45). Another approach to determine imbalances in enzyme levels is to utilize “-omics” dataNIH-PA                             to determine effects that may not be immediately obvious from observing titer alone. Kizer
                           and coworkers utilized a transcriptomics and metabolomics approach to identify and
                               ameliorate an imbalance in carbon flux during isoprenoid biosynthesis (87).Author
              Protein Engineering

                            For enzymes with low turnover or poor expression, simply overexpressing the protein may
                               not be sufficient to generate high levels of product. Therefore, improving the enzymeManuscript                          through evolutionary or rational engineering methods may be desirable to increase the
                                 efficiency of the pathway. As discussed earlier, plant cytochrome P450s have been the target
                               of protein engineering efforts due to the poor expression and activity of the native enzymes



                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 10]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 10

                                  in E. coli and other heterologous hosts, resulting in increased production of the tailored final
                                product. Leonard and coworkers designed a chimeric bidomain P450 with a plant
                            cytochrome P450 from Glycine max tethered to a cytochrome P450 reductase (CPR) from
                            Catharansus roseus to imitate the architecture of the efficient, bifunctional bacterial
                         P450BM-3. The bifunctional protein alone had low conversion in vivo, however furtherNIH-PA
                               optimization of the leader sequence and N-terminal membrane anchor resulted in higher
                             flavonone conversion than the wild type P450/CPR pair expressed in yeast (49). Chang et.Author                                   al. successfully expressed a terpenoid P450 hydroxylase in E. coli by modification of the N-
                               terminal membrane anchor and optimization of the CPR redox partner (50). In another case
                               of rational engineering, homology guided point mutation was used to alter the active site of
                             levopimaradiene synthase for improved productivity (70). Directed evolution is also a
                             powerful tool to improve enzyme activity (88). The pigmented caratenoid lycopene has beenManuscript                             used successfully in several cases as a screening mechanism for directed evolution of
                          enzymes involved in terpene precursor biosynthesis to develop a strain capable of higher
                               terpenoid production (70, 89).

              Deletion of Competing Pathways

                               In addition to increasing enzyme activity, it may also be useful to downregulate or delete
                                  certain genes to eliminate competing pathways that may siphon off important precursors or
                                intermediates, or simply contribute to an unnecessary use of cellular resources. SeveralNIH-PA
                            examples were mentioned earlier with regard to increasing precursor supply by eliminating
                            pathways competing for primary metabolites. For example, endogenous yeast squalene
                              synthase encoded by erg9 also utilizes the sesquiterpene precursor farnesyl-pyrophosphateAuthor
                            (FPP) used by amorphadiene synthase. Thus knocking out the competing erg9 gene resulted
                                  in an increase in amorphadiene synthesis (90). During in vivo bioconversion of lovastatin
                               intermediate monacolin J to simvastatin using E. coli expressing heterologous
                                 acyltransferase LovD, it was found that E. coli could unexpectedly hydrolyze the syntheticManuscript                                  thioester substrate (91). The responsible hydrolase BioH was then knocked out to improve
                                simvastatin production (91). During doxorubicin biosynthesis, several genes encoded by the
                             dxr gene cluster were deleted to improve titer as the corresponding protein products acted on
                              doxorubicin to convert it to a less active derivatives (92).

                               In addition to obvious targets which directly act on natural product intermediates, gene
                                deletion may be used to make the heterologous system more efficient, for example by
                              balancing redox cofactors. Many natural product pathways encode NADPH dependentNIH-PA                       enzymes such as oxidoreductases which may place a metabolic burden on the cell as flux
                             through the pathway is increased. Chemler et. al. identified NADPH availability as a factor
                                 limiting high production of flavonoid (+)-catechins in E. coli. Utilizing a metabolicAuthor                            modeling approach, the authors identified combinations of gene knockouts to increase
                                   intracellular NADPH availability and increase flavonoid production by 2–4 fold (93). Due to
                                the involvement of NADP(H) in a large number of cellular enzymatic reactions, the
                                  effective solution space would be impossible to probe experimentally, making systemsManuscript                          biology an important tool to guide metabolic engineering strategies.





                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 11]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 11

                     An extension of the gene deletion strategy is the idea of creating a “genome-minimized”
                               host for the production of secondary metabolites. The idea is that by deleting “non-essential”
                             genes one can increase efficiency by directing cellular resources toward only those pathways
                                   that are necessary for survival and product biosynthesis. E. coli has been the main target of
                         genome minimization efforts resulting in strains with genome size up to 22% reduced fromNIH-PA
                               wild-type with no growth deficiency (30% reduction achieved with growth deficiency) and
                           improved genome stability and production of target metabolites (94). A genome minimizedAuthor                          Streptomyces host has recently been reported by Komatsu and coworkers. The genome of
                                   antibiotic producer Streptomyces avermillitis was reduced to 83% of its original size and
                          upon introduction of the streptomycin gene cluster, the reduced strain produced higher titers
                              than both the parent S. avermilitis carrying the heterologous gene cluster and the native
                              streptomycin producer Streptomyces griseus (95). These reports show promise that genomeManuscript
                             minimization may be a feasible tactic to streamline biochemical production, however there
                                       is still much about the workings of the cell that we do not know and large scale deletions
                       may come with unintended effects.

         METABOLIC ENGINEERING FOR STRUCTURAL DIVERSIFICATION

                               Natural products have evolved over millions of years to interact with biological targets. In
                                addition to acting on antimicrobial targets, the homology in many protein structural folds
                           and receptors across different organisms has allowed the exploitation of these smallNIH-PA
                             molecules to act on drug targets that are irrelevant to the producing organisms (96).
                           However, these natural products are often not optimized for human drug targets and mayAuthor                        have undesirable properties or side effects clinically (eg. toxicity, low oral availability etc.).
                               Therefore, many natural product-based drugs have minor structural modifications from the
                                  original natural product scaffold, which are often achieved by chemical methods. Some
                           well-known examples are rifamycin modified to rifampicin, paclitaxel to docetaxel,
                                  lovastatin to simvastatin, and geldanamycin to 17-DMAG (17-(2-Manuscript
                             dimethylamino)ethylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin). These semisynthetic drugs are the
                                   results of lead optimization in drug development programs, where an identified natural
                              product with biological activity (lead compound) is used as a starting point for various
                             chemical modifications to enhance its potency, selectivity, pharmacokinetic parameters and
                                other desirable properties. There is an increasing interest in the application of metabolic
                              engineering as a complementary tool for this purpose (97). In cases where the natural
                              products are highly complex, metabolic engineering may allow selective modifications of
                                 natural product scaffolds, which may be difficult to achieve by chemical means alone.NIH-PA
                            Another avenue for engineering natural product biosynthesis is to provide an alternative way
                                  to manufacture existing semisynthetic drugs. A classical example is the production of the
                                    clinical agent epirubicin by a single fermentation process using engineered StreptomycesAuthor
                                peucetius, eliminating the need for post-fermentation processing through the low-yielding
                               semisynthetic route (98). By integrating the downstream synthetic steps into biological
                               systems, it is possible to produce those semisynthetic drugs at lower cost and using greener
                               chemistry.Manuscript
                         The various strategies for increasing natural product diversity by metabolic engineering are
                            echoed in the modes of structural diversification observed in the evolution of natural product


                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 12]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 12

                                biosynthetic pathways. In nature, new structural variations are usually generated by 1) the
                                deletion or recruitment of new genes in the biosynthetic pathway or 2) mutations and
                             recombination in individual genes, which resulted in altered activity of the enzymes (99).
                             Metabolic engineering essentially allows us to accelerate and control the evolution processes
                                  to select for natural product analogs with useful biological activities. We will focus here onNIH-PA
                                the common metabolic engineering strategies useful for exploring the chemical space around
                                the bioactive natural product scaffolds, and their potential application in drug discovery andAuthor                         development.

           Gene Disruption and Mutasynthesis

                        One of the simplest strategies for introducing a structural change is via disruption of a
                                  particular gene that acts downstream in a pathway (usually a tailoring enzyme). A typicalManuscript
                           example is the generation of a macrolide analog without the epoxide functional group (4,5-
                             deepoxypimaricin) by disruption of a P450 epoxidase PimD in the pimaricin gene cluster
                                (100). Disruption of a ketoreductase gene in mithramycin pathway led to isolation of three
                                analogs, including mithramycin SK with an improved therapeutic index compared to the
                               parent drug (101). Two recent examples illustrate the application of targeted gene disruption
                                  to generate derivatives of pactamycin (102) and tautomycin (103), which are useful for
                                  structure-activity relationship (SAR) study. Significantly, one study used this approach to
                                  inactivate a monooxygenase gene in the pathway of the Hsp90 inhibitor macbecin toNIH-PA
                               generate an analog that does not contain the benzoquinone toxicophore (104). The novel
                            nonquinone macbecin analog has almost 100-fold improvement in Hsp90 binding affinity
                           and significantly reduced toxicity.Author

                             Beside deletion of whole genes, structural variation could also be introduced by inactivation
                               of individual domain within the multidomain modular megasynthases like PKSs and NRPSs.
                              Ketoreductase (KR) domain inactivation of PKSs had been used to generate analogs ofManuscript                            epothilones, potent cytotoxic agents with a semisynthetic derivative (ixabepilone) recently
                            approved as a chemotherapeutic drug (105). The polyene macrolide antibiotic, amphotericin
                             B, has also been subject to structural modifications by KR domain inactivation of the PKSs
                                  to generate analogs for SAR study (106). One analog, 7-oxo-amphotericin B, had good
                                antifungal activity and lower hemolytic activity than amphotericin B.

                        More often, this gene inactivation strategy is coupled with precursor feeding to generate new
                                   structural analogs, a technique commonly known as mutasynthesis. Precursor feeding
                                 exploits the promiscuity of some transfer enzymes to accept similar substrates. By disruptingNIH-PA
                                the gene that produces the natural substrate, a substitute (so called ‘mutasynthon’) could be
                               fed into the growth medium to generate new analogs. This has been successfully applied inAuthor                           generation of new analogs for broad classes of compounds, such as the rapamycins
                               (macrolides) (107), balhimycin (glycopeptides) (108) and novobiocin/chlorobiocin
                             (aminocoumarins) (109, 110), illustrating the versatility of this strategy. Recently, this
                             approach was used to generate nonbenzoquinone analogs of the Hsp90 inhibitor
                            geldanamycin (111, 112). By removing the biosynthetic genes for the starter unit 3-amino-5-Manuscript
                            hydroxybenzoic acid (AHBA) and feeding with various 3-aminobenzoic acids and related





                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 13]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 13

                                heterocycles, a chloro-substituited nonbenzoquinone analog with significantly improved
                                therapeutic properties was identified among other geldanamycin analogs (112).

                            Another good example is the mutasynthesis of flurosalinosporamide by disruption of the S-
                             adenosylmethionine (SAM)-dependent chlorinase (salL) and feeding with 5′-fluoro-5′-NIH-PA                            deoxyadenosine (5′-FDA) in the salinosporamide-producing Salinispora tropica (113). The
                                  resultant fluoro-substituted compound has reversible proteasome inhibitory activity, which
                                       is unlike its chloro-substituted parent salinosporamide. A fluorinase flA from StreptomycesAuthor
                                 cattleya was later inserted into the producing host to bypass 5′-FDA feeding (114).
                               Recently, O’Connor and co-workers demonstrated that mutasynthesis can also be employed
                                  in plants by gene-silencing methods. RNA mediated suppression of tryptamine biosynthesis
                                  in Catharanthus roseus followed by feeding with 5-fluorotryptamine yielded several fluoro-Manuscript                             substituted alkaloids (115). A short perspective on the application of mutasynthesis in drug
                              discovery and development is available (116).

            Pathway Engineering and Combinatorial Biosynthesis

                               In microorganisms, the most common modes of chemical diversification are horizontal
                                  transfer of whole or partial gene clusters following by divergence through the recruitment of
                        new genes and the loss of others. The results of this evolution as seen today are many
                                families of natural products with common structural cores but with assorted tailoringNIH-PA                                modifications, and some that consist of more than one core structures. The aromatic
                                polyketides, the acidic lipopeptides daptomycin/A54145, the macrolides, aminocourmarins
                           and the teicoplanin families of antibiotics are some of the examples. The homologies andAuthor
                              divergences observed among the genes encoding the pathways have given scientists the
                                  inspiration to reshuffle the genes and modules between closely related natural product
                            pathways to create new combinations. In 1985, Hopwood and coworkers first demonstrated
                                the feasibility of combinatorial biosynthesis using the pathway genes of three structurallyManuscript                             related polyketides. By introducing genes from the actinorhodin pathway in S. coelicolor
                                  into medermycin- and dihydrogranaticin-producing Streptomyces species, new hybrid
                           compounds, mederrhodin and dihydrogranatihordin, can be produced (117).

                  A pathway can often be manipulated by changing the combination of genes (or part of the
                              genes) involved in the biosynthesis to yield new product analogs, providing that the
                          enzymes at the downstream of the alteration point have sufficient promiscuity to tolerate the
                            changes in the substrate (118). This implies that introducing a change at the later steps of a
                           pathway often has higher success rate since fewer downstream enzymes are involved. MinorNIH-PA
                                   alteration at early points in the pathway can sometimes be tolerated by downstream enzymes
                               as long as it does not disrupt the overall core scaffold. Since the biosynthetic enzymes for aAuthor                          family of related molecules act on similar substrates or intermediates, the chances for
                                successfully producing chimeric molecules by swapping the genes within a family are
                               considerably higher. This highlights the importance for continuous discovery and
                                elucidation of new natural product pathways, and genome mining has emerged as a potential
                                  tool for such application. The engineering of the metabolic pathways can be performed inManuscript
                                the native host by iterative gene deletion and introduction of new genes, or in an appropriate
                              heterologous host by reconstitution of the combinatorial biosynthetic pathway. The use of



                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 14]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 14

                              heterologous host is preferred when the native host is slow-growing or cannot be easily
                             manipulated genetically (97, 119). The biosynthetic pathways can be first assembled or
                             modified in a cloning host, such as in E. coli, follow by introduction of the whole engineered
                           pathway into an appropriate heterologous host.NIH-PA
                         Engineering Modular Megasynthases—Bacterial PKSs and NRPSs are large modular
                          enzymes that catalyze multiple reactions in an assembly-line fashion. The modularity and
                               general colinearity of PKSs and NRPSs make them highly evolvable in nature, both at theAuthor
                          module and domain level (120). A good example is the iturin family of nonribosomal
                                 peptides. From the structure of iturin A, bacillomycin D and mycosubtilin, and their
                              corresponding NRPS genes, it is evident that the variation in the lower half of these
                             molecules is the result of mutation and intergenic rearrangement of adenylation (A) domainsManuscript                                  in the NRPSs (121). The three 16-membered macrolides (tylosin, spiramycin and
                              chalcomycin), also appear to be diverged from a common ancestral pathway as their
                              corresponding gene clusters share five similar PKS subunits (122). On the same token, these
                           modular megasynthases are particularly amenable to genetic engineering, and the pathways
                               of these structurally related scaffolds provide a valuable toolbox for combinatorial
                                 biosynthesis. Structural modification can be achieved by mixing and matching the
                            megasynthases at the subunit, module and domain level (Figure 3A and B). The most
                                studied groups of molecules are the macrolides and the lipopeptide antibiotics, which will beNIH-PA                         used as the main examples here.

                               In a landmark success about a decade ago, the group at Kosan Biosciences generated overAuthor                       50 analogs of 6-deoxyerythronolide B (6-dEB), by swapping the acyltransferases (ATs) and
                              β-carbon processing domains between 6-dEB and rapamycin PKS in an engineered
                              heterologous host (Figure 3A) (123). With the discovery of the geldanamycin gene cluster (a
                             macrolactam) in Streptomyces hygroscopicus (124), the researchers at Kosan Biosciences
                        made a series of AT domain swapping with rapamycin PKSs to generate a number ofManuscript
                                  derivatives, including one analog with a four-fold enhanced affinity for Hsp90 (125).
                            Another significant example is the direct production of a semisynthetic drug, ivermectin, in
                             a recombinant S. avermitilis strain harboring engineered PKSs. By substituting the DH and
                   KR domains of module 2 of the avermectin PKS with the DH, ER and KR domains of
                          module 13 from the rapamycin PKSs, 22,23-dihydroavermectins (ivermectin) were
                                successfully produced (126), provided a route for producing the drug using fermentation
                                alone. Besides exchanging the PKS domains, novel analogs can also be obtained by
                            exchanging the whole PKS subunits. By shuffling the PKS subunits from three related 16-NIH-PA
                         membered macrolide pathways mentioned above (tylosin, spiramycin and chalcomycin),
                              hybrid molecules which varied in methyl, ethyl or methoxy side chains at several positionsAuthor                        were produced (122).

                         The combinatorial biosynthesis effort to produce analogs of daptomycin, an antibiotic
                            approved in the United States for treatment of skin and skin structure infections, was
                             spearheaded by a group at Cubist Pharmaceuticals. The first successful production of hybridManuscript                            lipopeptides was achieved by exchanging the third NRPS subunits between the structurally
                                  related daptomycin, A54145 and calcium-dependent antibiotic (127). Coupling of whole-
                               subunit exchange with the deletion of the Glu12-methyltransferase gene, module exchange


                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 15]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 15

                           and natural side chain variation, more than 70 new lipopeptides have been generated (Figure
                              3B), most of which have antibacterial activities (127–129). Daptomycin and many of the
                              analogs have poor efficacy in the treatment of community-acquired pneumonia, likely due to
                                sequestration in pulmonary surfactant. The latest extension of the work involved the
                               generation of more analogs related to A54145 and daptomycin using similar combinatorialNIH-PA
                                 strategy to screen for improved antibacterial activity in the presence of bovine surfactant
                                (130). One of the new analogs obtained was highly active in the presence of surfactant, hadAuthor                       low acute toxicity, and showed some efficacy against Streptococcus pneumoniae in a mouse
                          model of pulmonary infection, demonstrating the potential application of this approach in
                             drug development.

                                           It is useful to note that in all the cases above, the molecules are assembled in a stepwiseManuscript                              linear fashion followed by a macrocyclization. The engineering of the PKSs and NRPSs
                           above altered mainly the individual starter or extension units, but did not change the overall
                               length and the final macrocyclic scaffold. Maintaining the overall core structure allows most
                               of the downstream tailoring enzymes to process the novel hybrid molecules and generate
                                  further structural diversity. For example, by combining the 6-dEB synthase domain-
                           swapping and variation in post-PKS tailoring, additional erythromycin and erythrolide
                              analogs have been generated (131), illustrating the power of such an approach. As the
                              engineering of both macrolide and lipopeptide pathways has been extensively reviewed, theNIH-PA                           reader is directed to the references for further details (97, 131–135).

                         Combinatorial Usage of Pathway Enzymes—Variations in tailoring genes are oftenAuthor                            responsible for the majority of the structural diversity observed for a given family of
                              molecules. For the reasons mentioned earlier, tailoring enzymes, which typically act at the
                                     later steps in a pathway, are good candidates for combinatorial biosynthesis. The tailoring
                          enzymes commonly encountered perform reactions such as glycosylation, acylation,
                                oxidation, reduction, methylation and prenylation. For example, many classes ofManuscript
                               glycosylated natural products contain variations in the deoxysugar moieties, which are
                              important for the biological activity of the molecules (136). Combinatorial engineering of
                                the glycosyltransferases from different pathways has allowed the generation of arrays of
                              analogs differing in the glycosylation patterns for several classes of natural products, such as
                                the glycopeptides related to vancomycin and teicoplanin, macrolides related to erythromycin
                           and tylosin, indolcarbazoles related to rebeccamycin, and the aromatic polyketide
                                anthracyclines and angucyclines (136, 137). Polyketides are among the natural product
                             groups that are most intensively pursued for combinatorial biosynthesis using tailoringNIH-PA
                          enzymes and the topic has been reviewed recently by Olano et al. (138)

                         The enzymatic toolbox available for modification of a common structural scaffold usuallyAuthor
                                 consists of genes encoding for the pathways of structural related compounds. For example,
                                the aminocoumarin novobiocin and clorobiocin share a common structural core but differ at
                                the C-8 position of the aminocoumarin moiety (a methyl or a chlorine group) and at the 3-
                  OH group of the deoxysugar (a carbamoyl moiety or methyl-pyrrole-2-carboxyl). ByManuscript                            replacing the methyltransferase gene in novobiocin pathway with the chlorinase in
                                clorobiocin pathway and vice versa, plus inactivation of the acyltransferase in clorobiocin
                             pathway, Heidi and coworkers could produce a series of new hybrid aminocoumarins (110)


                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 16]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 16

                               (Figure 3C), which provided valuable insights into the SAR of this class of gyrase and
                             topoisomerase IV inhibitors (139). Similarly, equipped with the genetic blueprints of two
                                  structurally related indolecarbazoles (staurosporine and rebeccamycin) and tryptophan
                              halogenases with different regioselectivity, Salas and co-workers were able to generate 32
                            rebeccamycin analogs by altering the patterns of glycosylation, methylation andNIH-PA
                                halogenations, in a heterologous Streptomyces albus host (140). Recent extension of the
                         work has led to the identification of two hybrid indolecarbazoles, which are potent andAuthor                             selective inhibitors of JAK2 and Ikkb kinases (141), underlying the potential of this strategy.
                        More recently, Hertweck and co-workers used an integrated approach combining
                              mutasynthesis (starter unit feeding), combinatorial biosynthesis (exchanging tailoring O-
                                methyltransferase), and biotransformation (oxidations) to generate a focused library of 15
                               aureothin analogs, in which a few have less cytotoxicity but improved antiproliferativeManuscript                                    activities (142).

                                 Artificial Pathway Construction—Due to the larger genomes and the scattered nature of
                                the pathway genes in plants, the number of completely elucidated natural product pathways
                                       is significantly lower compared to microorganisms where the pathway genes tend to cluster
                                 together. This limits the toolbox for metabolic engineering and combinatorial biosynthesis.
                           Using the artificial pathway approach with genes from different organisms, some success in
                               combinatorial biosynthesis of plant metabolites have been achieved in the type III PKSNIH-PA                             pathways. Horinouchi and his co-workers divided the flavanoid biosynthetic pathway into
                                 three components: substrate synthesis, polyketide synthesis, and post-PKS modification. By
                              varying these three components in separate plasmid systems, and coupled with precursor-Author
                                directed biosynthesis, an array of novel and known plant polyketides were generated (46,
                              143, 144). Significantly, several of the novel stilbenes showed inhibition against the
                               ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase activity of CYP1B1 (144). Similar combinatorial approaches
                            can be employed with the development of artificial pathway system for other plantManuscript                            metabolites, especially the alkaloids (145).

              Protein Engineering

                              Despite the successful examples above, researchers are often confronted by the problem
                           where the enzymes/domains downstream in the pathway have limited tolerance to the new
                                 substrate introduced by metabolic engineering. Protein engineering either by rational design
                               or directed evolution has been a useful tool for improving the efficiency and stability of the
                          enzymes for biocatalysis development and metabolic engineering for titer improvement. ForNIH-PA                             natural product diversification, they present as attractive tools for increasing the substrate
                              promiscuity or changing the substrate specificity of biosynthetic enzymes. For example,
                                directed evolution has been used by Thorson and co-workers to expand the substrateAuthor                              promiscuity of glycosyltransferases to accept alternate aglycon and sugar substrates (146,
                               147). In another instance, O’Connor and co-workers performed selective mutations at the
                              binding pockets of strictosidine synthase, a central enzyme in plant alkaloid biosynthesis, to
                           expand and alter the substrate specificity for mutasynthesis (148). The engineeredManuscript                              strictosidine synthase was transformed into C. roseus, resulting in transgenic plant cell
                                 culture that can produce a variety of unnatural alkaloid compounds with precursor feeding,
                              demonstrating the utility of enzyme engineering in mutasynthesis (149).



                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 17]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 17

                            For directed evolution, a large, high-quality library, and an efficient screening strategy are
                                   essential. Schmidt-Dannert et al. exploited the optical properties of colored carotenoids,
                           which allow screening of large number of enzyme variants visually (150). Directed
                               evolution of the phytoene desaturase, which synthesizes the conjugated double bonds, led to
                                  isolation of a pink variant producing the fully conjugated carotenoid tetradehydrolycopene.NIH-PA
                         The evolved pathway was extended to produce new cyclic carotenoids with a library of
                             lycopene cyclase variants generated by gene shuffling. A mutant cyclase, which producesAuthor                            the known red, cyclic carotenoid torulene via a novel pathway, was isolated in the visual
                               screen (150). Yoshikuni et al. also showed that it is possible to engineer a promiscuous
                                biosynthetic enzyme to produce specific products (151). They performed saturation
                             mutagenesis at the active site of a promiscuous γ-humulene synthase, which cyclizes
                               farnesyl-diphosphate into primarily γ-humulene, and searched for residues that alter productManuscript                                   specificity (plasticity residues). Using an algorithm-assisted approach, they were able to
                              engineer γ-humulene synthase variants that cyclize farnesyl-diphosphate specifically into
                             seven other products. Both examples above showed that enzyme engineering is potentially
                                useful in construction of artificial natural product pathways, where a missing enzyme in a
                           pathway can be “borrowed” from a closely related promiscuous enzyme.

                            For modular PKS and NRPS megasynthases, a problem exists where simple swapping of
                                functional domains often result in nonfunctional or heavily impaired chimerical enzymesNIH-PA                           (128, 152). The problem can be twofold: 1) the downstream domains are unable to accept
                                the modified substrate as exemplified in the attempt to alter the aromatic starter unit of
                              rifamycin by mutasynthesis (153), and 2) the domain swapping disrupts the quaternaryAuthor                                  interactions between protein domains as demonstrated in a mechanistic study for AT domain
                           swapping (152). Using the NRPS of the siderophore enterobactin as a model, Zhou et al.
                             demonstrated that just a few rounds of directed evolution can restore and even enhance the
                                   activity of the heavily-impaired chimerical enterobactin NRPS swapped with a non-cognateManuscript                               aryl-carrier protein (ArCP) domain (154). Fischbach et al. further demonstrated that limited
                             rounds of directed evolution can improve the activity of a chimerical NRPS swapped with a
                              heterologous A domain of the same substrate specificity as wild type, as well as a chimerical
                     NRPS with a heterologous A domain that activates a different substrate (155).

                           These recent studies suggest that both rational enzyme design and directed evolution can be
                               valuable tools for increasing enzyme promiscuity to tolerate modified substrate, altering
                         enzyme specificity to generate new structural diversity, and fine-tuning the protein
                                  interactions of exogenous domains in chimerical modular megasynthases. In nature, theNIH-PA
                             chemical diversity is likely to evolve in a similar way, where recruitment of a promiscuous
                         enzyme into a new pathway and intragenic recombination were followed by evolutionary
                                 fine-tuning. The increasing use of these powerful tools in the metabolic engineering of “non-Author
                                natural” natural products can be foreseen, and better understanding of how natural product
                           pathway evolved may lead to new approaches towards this goal.

         PERSPECTIVE AND CONCLUDING REMARKSManuscript
                                 Accessibility is one of the main hurdles in natural product drug discovery since many
                                 natural products are naturally produced in low yields in the native organisms, and sometimes



                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 18]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 18

                                  in multiple forms further complicating the identification, isolation, and structural
                                 elucidation. Furthermore, lead optimization with natural product scaffolds by chemical
                               modification is usually more difficult and laborious as they often possess a variety of
                                functional groups, which requires multiple protection and deprotection steps. Despite the
                                 large structural diversity and high hit rates, these undesirable properties have made naturalNIH-PA
                              products less attractive, and many pharmaceutical companies in the past had turned to
                               combinatorial synthetic libraries as source for drug discovery. These chemical methods,Author                         however, also have their limits, and the need for new therapeutics provides motivation to
                             develop new methods of producing novel compounds at industrial scale quantities.

                         The many examples discussed here have shown that metabolic engineering is a powerful
                                  tool that can be integrated into the natural product drug discovery and development process,Manuscript                        from lead optimization to industrial scale production of the molecules. Advances in our
                           knowledge of natural product biosynthetic pathways, and the metabolic and regulatory
                             networks at the genomic level have allowed for rational development of new compounds
                           and high producing strains where traditional methods have relied on purely empirical
                             methods. With the integration of the emerging systems and synthetic biology, the
                                application of metabolic engineering is expected to become increasingly powerful. Through
                              metabolic engineering, some natural products that can only obtained in low quantities, e.g.
                           from some plants and marine organisms, can now be produced in engineered heterologousNIH-PA                            hosts in quantities that are sufficient for industrial application.

                         Though traditional methods of chemical diversification and classical strain improvementAuthor                         remain powerful techniques, and currently outperform metabolic engineering approaches in
                             terms of the size of combinatorial libraries produced or the titer achieved for industrial
                             microorganisms, metabolic engineering can be a complementary approach to reduce the
                             time needed to optimize a strain, simplify the downstream chemical processing, or produce
                              analogs that would be difficult or expensive to access by chemical methods alone. ByManuscript
                            combining all these approaches we can more fully take advantage of all the rich biochemical
                                  diversity that nature has to offer.

          Acknowledgments

                             Due to space constraints, we apologize for any work that we were not able to cite. Research activities from our lab
                                          in this area are supported from funds from National Institute of Health, National Science Foundation, the Camille
                                  and Henry Dreyfus foundation, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and the David and Lucile Packard Foundation.
NIH-PA        ACRONYMS

                 PK           PolyketideAuthor
                  PKS          Polyketide synthase
                 NRP         Nonribosomal peptide
                  NRPS        Nonribosomal peptide synthaseManuscript
                      PPTase       phosphopantetheine transferase
                  KS           Ketosynthase



                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 19]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 19


                 AT          Acyl transferase
                DH          Dehydratase
                KR           KetoreductaseNIH-PA
                 ER          Enoyl reductase
                 ACP         Acyl carrier proteinAuthor
                  TE            Thioesterase
                C            Condensation
                A            AdenylationManuscript
                MEP         2C-methyl-D-erythrotol-4-phosphate
               MVA        Mevalonate
                  SAR          Structure activity relationship

         LITERATURE CITED

                                       1. Li JWH, Vederas JC. Drug discovery and natural products: end of an era or an endless frontier?
                                     Science. 2009; 325:161–5. [PubMed: 19589993]NIH-PA                                       2. Harvey AL. Natural products in drug discovery. Drug Discov Today. 2008; 13:894–901. [PubMed:
                                 18691670]
                                       3. Newman DJ, Cragg GM. Natural products as sources of new drugs over the last 25 years. J NatAuthor                                Prod. 2007; 70:461–77. [PubMed: 17309302]
                                       4. Demain AL, Adrio JL. Contributions of microorganisms to industrial biology. Mol Biotechnol.
                                  2008; 38:41–55. [PubMed: 18060538]
                                       5. Stephanopoulos, G.; Nielsen, J.; Aristodou, A. Metabolic Engineering. San Diego: Academic Press;
                                   1998.Manuscript                                  6. Oberhardt MA, Palsson BO, Papin JA. Applications of genome-scale metabolic reconstructions.
                            Mol Syst Biol. 2009; 5:320. [PubMed: 19888215]
                                       7. Savile CK, Janey JM, Mundorff EC, Moore JC, Tam S, et al. Biocatalytic asymmetric synthesis of
                                         chiral amines from ketones applied to sitagliptin manufacture. Science. 2010; 329:305–9. [PubMed:
                                 20558668]
                                       8. Challis GL, Hopwood DA. Synergy and contingency as driving forces for the evolution of multiple
                                   secondary metabolite production by Streptomyces species. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003;
                                  100(Suppl 2):14555–61. [PubMed: 12970466]
                                       9. Parekh, S. Strain improvement. In: Schaechter, M., editor. The desk encyclopedia of microbiology.
                               San Diego: Elsevier Academic Press; 2004. p. 960-73.NIH-PA                                   10. Scherlach K, Hertweck C. Triggering cryptic natural product biosynthesis in microorganisms. Org
                                Biomol Chem. 2009; 7:1753–60. [PubMed: 19590766]
                                   11. Rokem JS, Lantz AE, Nielsen J. Systems biology of antibiotic production by microorganisms. NatAuthor                              Prod Rep. 2007; 24:1262–87. [PubMed: 18033579]
                                   12. Berdy J. Bioactive microbial metabolites. J Antibiot. 2005; 58:1–26. [PubMed: 15813176]
                                   13. Hopwood, DA.; Kieser, T.; Bibb, M.; Buttner, M.; Chater, K. Practical Streptomyces Genetics.
                                  Norwich: John Innes Foundation; 2000.
                                   14. McDaniel R, Ebert-Khosla S, Hopwood DA, Khosla C. Engineered biosynthesis of novelManuscript                                   polyketides. Science. 1993; 262:1546–50. [PubMed: 8248802]
                                   15. Ziermann R, Betlach MC. Recombinant polyketide synthesis in Streptomyces: engineering of
                                  improved host strains. Biotechniques. 1999; 26:106–10. [PubMed: 9894599]



                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 20]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 20

                                   16. Penn J, Li X, Whiting A, Latif M, Gibson T, et al. Heterologous production of daptomycin in
                                    Streptomyces lividans. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2006; 33:121–8. [PubMed: 16261359]
                                   17. Li C, Hazzard C, Florova G, Reynolds KA. High titer production of tetracenomycins by
                                      heterologous expression of the pathway in a Streptomyces cinnamonensis industrial monensin
                                    producer strain. Metab Eng. 2009; 11:319–27. [PubMed: 19595787]
                                   18. Pfeifer BA, Admiraal SJ, Gramajo H, Cane DE, Khosla C. Biosynthesis of complex polyketides inNIH-PA
                                    a metabolically engineered strain of E. coli. Science. 2001; 291:1790–2. [PubMed: 11230695]
                                   19. Watanabe K, Rude MA, Walsh CT, Khosla C. Engineered biosynthesis of an ansamycin polyketide
                                       precursor in Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003; 100:9774–8. [PubMed: 12888623]Author                                   20. Peiru S, Menzella HG, Rodriguez E, Carney J, Gramajo H. Production of the potent antibacterial
                                      polyketide erythromycin C in Escherichia coli. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005; 71:2539–47.
                                [PubMed: 15870344]
                                   21. Gruenewald S, Mootz HD, Stehmeier P, Stachelhaus T. In vivo production of artificial
                                   nonribosomal peptide products in the heterologous host Escherichia coli. Appl Environ Microbiol.Manuscript                                2004; 70:3282–91. [PubMed: 15184122]
                                   22. Watanabe K, Hotta K, Praseuth AP, Koketsu K, Migita A, et al. Total biosynthesis of antitumor
                                   nonribosomal peptides in Escherichia coli. Nat Chem Biol. 2006; 2:423–8. [PubMed: 16799553]
                                   23. Mutka SC, Carney JR, Liu Y, Kennedy J. Heterologous production of epothilone C and D in
                                     Escherichia coli. Biochemistry. 2006; 45:1321–30. [PubMed: 16430229]
                                   24. Pfeifer BA, Wang CCC, Walsh CT, Khosla C. Biosynthesis of yersiniabactin, a complex
                                     polyketide-nonribosomal peptide, using Escherichia coli as a heterologous host. Appl Environ
                                      Microbiol. 2003; 69:6698–702. [PubMed: 14602630]
                                   25. Baltz RH. Streptomyces and Saccharopolyspora hosts for heterologous expression of secondary
                                      metabolite gene clusters. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010; 37:759–72. [PubMed: 20467781]NIH-PA
                                   26. Boghigian BA, Pfeifer BA. Current status, strategies, and potential for the metabolic engineering
                                       of heterologous polyketides in Escherichia coli. Biotechnol Lett. 2008; 30:1323–30. [PubMed:
                                  18488149]Author                                   27. Challis GL. Engineering Escherichia coli to produce nonribosomal peptide antibiotics. Nat Chem
                                         Biol. 2006; 2:398–400. [PubMed: 16850013]
                                   28. Zhang H, Wang Y, Pfeifer BA. Bacterial hosts for natural product production. Mol Pharmaceutics.
                                    2008; 5:212–25.
                                   29. Hoffmeister D, Keller NP. Natural products of filamentous fungi: enzymes, genes, and theirManuscript                                     regulation. Nat Prod Rep. 2007; 24:393–416. [PubMed: 17390002]
                                   30. Manzoni M, Rollini M. Biosynthesis and biotechnological production of statins by filamentous
                                      fungi and application of these cholesterol-lowering drugs. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2002;
                                    58:555–64. [PubMed: 11956737]
                                   31. Lubertozzi D, Keasling JD. Developing Aspergillus as a host for heterologous expression.
                                     Biotechnol Adv. 2009; 27:53–75. [PubMed: 18840517]
                                   32. Bedford DJ, Schweizer E, Hopwood DA, Khosla C. Expression of a functional fungal polyketide
                                      synthase in the bacterium Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). J Bacteriol. 1995; 177:4544–8.
                                [PubMed: 7635840]
                                   33. Kealey JT, Liu L, Santi DV, Betlach MC, Barr PJ. Production of a polyketide natural product inNIH-PA
                                     nonpolyketide-producing prokaryotic and eukaryotic hosts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1998;
                                    95:505–9. [PubMed: 9435221]
                                   34. Fujii I, Ono Y, Tada H, Gomi K, Ebizuka Y, et al. Cloning of the polyketide synthase gene atXAuthor                              from Aspergillus terreus and its identification as the 6-methylsalicylic acid synthase gene by
                                      heterologous expression. Mol Gen Genet. 1996; 253:1–10. [PubMed: 9003280]
                                   35. Xu Y, Orozco R, Wijeratne EMK, Gunatilaka AAL, Stock SP, et al. Biosynthesis of the
                                    cyclooligomer depsipeptide beauvericin, a virulence factor of the entomopathogenic fungus
                                   Beauveria bassiana. Chem Biol. 2008; 15:898–907. [PubMed: 18804027]Manuscript                              36. Heneghan MN, Yakasai AA, Halo LM, Song Z, Bailey AM, et al. First heterologous reconstruction
                                       of a complete functional fungal biosynthetic multigene cluster. ChemBioChem. 2010; 11:1508–12.
                                [PubMed: 20575135]



                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 21]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 21

                                   37. Ma SM, Li JWH, Choi JW, Zhou H, Lee KKM, et al. Complete reconstitution of a highly reducing
                                            iterative polyketide synthase. Science. 2009; 326:589–92. [PubMed: 19900898]
                                   38. Schümann J, Hertweck C. Advances in cloning, functional analysis and heterologous expression of
                                      fungal polyketide synthase genes. J Biotechnol. 2006; 124:690–703. [PubMed: 16716432]
                                   39. Schneider P, Misiek M, Hoffmeister D. In vivo and in vitro production options for fungal
                                    secondary metabolites. Mol Pharmaceutics. 2008; 5:234–42.NIH-PA
                                   40. Huang Q, Roessner CA, Croteau R, Scott AI. Engineering Escherichia coli for the synthesis of
                                        taxadiene, a key intermediate in the biosynthesis of taxol. Bioorg Med Chem. 2001; 9:2237–42.
                                [PubMed: 11553461]Author                                   41. Engels B, Dahm P, Jennewein S. Metabolic engineering of taxadiene biosynthesis in yeast as a first
                                        step towards Taxol (Paclitaxel) production. Metab Eng. 2008; 10:201–6. [PubMed: 18485776]
                                   42. Martin VJJ, Pitera DJ, Withers ST, Newman JD, Keasling JD. Engineering a mevalonate pathway
                                          in Escherichia coli for production of terpenoids. Nat Biotechnol. 2003; 21:796–802. [PubMed:
                                  12778056]Manuscript                              43. Ro D-K, Paradise EM, Ouellet M, Fisher KJ, Newman KL, et al. Production of the antimalarial
                                   drug precursor artemisinic acid in engineered yeast. Nature. 2006; 440:940–3. [PubMed:
                                  16612385]
                                   44. Minami H, Kim J-S, Ikezawa N, Takemura T, Katayama T, et al. Microbial production of plant
                                      benzylisoquinoline alkaloids. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008; 105:7393–8. [PubMed: 18492807]
                                   45. Hawkins KM, Smolke CD. Production of benzylisoquinoline alkaloids in Saccharomyces
                                         cerevisiae. Nat Chem Biol. 2008; 4:564–73. [PubMed: 18690217]
                                   46. Horinouchi S. Combinatorial biosynthesis of plant medicinal polyketides by microorganisms. Curr
                                Opin Chem Biol. 2009; 13:197–204. [PubMed: 19264534]
                                   47. Miyahisa I, Kaneko M, Funa N, Kawasaki H, Kojima H, et al. Efficient production of (2 S )-NIH-PA
                                     flavanones by Escherichia coli containing an artificial biosynthetic gene cluster. Appl Gen Mol
                                      Biotechnol. 2007; 68:498–504.
                                   48. Gillam EMJ. Engineering cytochrome P450 enzymes. Chem Res Toxicol. 2008; 21:220–31.Author                                [PubMed: 18067267]
                                   49. Leonard E, Koffas MAG. Engineering of artificial plant cytochrome P450 enzymes for synthesis of
                                       isoflavones by Escherichia coli. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2007; 73:7246–51. [PubMed:
                                  17905887]
                                   50. Chang MCY, Eachus RA, Trieu W, Ro D-K, Keasling JD. Engineering Escherichia coli forManuscript                                 production of functionalized terpenoids using plant P450s. Nat Chem Biol. 2007; 3:274–7.
                                [PubMed: 17438551]
                                   51. Ryu Y-G, Butler MJ, Chater KF, Lee KJ. Engineering of primary carbohydrate metabolism for
                                       increased production of actinorhodin in Streptomyces coelicolor. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2006;
                                    72:7132–9. [PubMed: 16950896]
                                   52. Zha W, Rubin-Pitel SB, Shao Z, Zhao H. Improving cellular malonyl-CoA level in Escherichia
                                           coli via metabolic engineering. Metab Eng. 2009; 11:192–8. [PubMed: 19558964]
                                   53. Fowler ZL, Gikandi WW, Koffas MAG. Increased malonyl coenzyme A biosynthesis by tuning the
                                     Escherichia coli metabolic network and Its application to flavanone production. Appl Environ
                                      Microbiol. 2009; 75:5831–9. [PubMed: 19633125]NIH-PA
                                   54. Cropp A, Chen S, Liu H, Zhang W, Reynolds KA. Genetic approaches for controlling ratios of
                                          related polyketide products in fermentation processes. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2001; 27:368–
                                       77. [PubMed: 11774002]Author                              55. Reeves AR, Brikun IA, Cernota WH, Leach BI, Gonzalez MC, et al. Engineering of the
                                 methylmalonyl-CoA metabolite node of Saccharopolyspora erythraea for increased erythromycin
                                       production. Metab Eng. 2007; 9:293–303. [PubMed: 17482861]
                                   56. Han SJ, Park SW, Kim BW, Sim SJ. Selective production of epothilone B by heterologous
                                      expression of propionyl-CoA synthetase in Sorangium cellulosum. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2008;
                                    18:135–7. [PubMed: 18239430]Manuscript
                                   57. Kuzuyama T. Mevalonate and nonmevalonate pathways for the biosynthesis of isoprene units.
                                      Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2002; 66:1619–27. [PubMed: 12353619]



                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 22]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 22

                                   58. Farmer WR, Liao JC. Precursor balancing for metabolic engineering of lycopene production in
                                     Escherichia coli. Biotechnol Prog. 2001; 17:57–61. [PubMed: 11170480]
                                   59. Kajiwara S, Fraser PD, Kondo K, Misawa N. Expression of an exogenous isopentenyl diphosphate
                                    isomerase gene enhances isoprenoid biosynthesis in Escherichia coli. Biochem J. 1997; 324:421–
                                           6. [PubMed: 9182699]
                                   60. Kim SW, Keasling JD. Metabolic engineering of the nonmevalonate isopentenyl diphosphateNIH-PA
                                        synthesis pathway in Escherichia coli enhances lycopene production. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2001;
                                    72:408–15. [PubMed: 11180061]
                                   61. Pitera DJ, Paddon CJ, Newman JD, Keasling JD. Balancing a heterologous mevalonate pathwayAuthor                                     for improved isoprenoid production in Escherichia coli. Metab Eng. 2007; 9:193–207. [PubMed:
                                  17239639]
                                   62. Shiba Y, Paradise EM, Kirby J, Ro D-K, Keasling JD. Engineering of the pyruvate dehydrogenase
                                    bypass in Saccharomyces cerevisiae for high-level production of isoprenoids. Metab Eng. 2007;
                                     9:160–8. [PubMed: 17196416]Manuscript                              63. Knaggs AR. The biosynthesis of shikimate metabolites. Nat Prod Rep. 1999; 16:525–60. [PubMed:
                                  10467741]
                                   64. Thykaer J, Nielsen J, Wohlleben W, Weber T, Gutknecht M, et al. Increased glycopeptide
                                     production after overexpression of shikimate pathway genes being part of the balhimycin
                                        biosynthetic gene cluster. Metab Eng. 2010; 12:455–61. [PubMed: 20570618]
                                   65. Yanai K, Murakami T, Bibb M. Amplification of the entire kanamycin biosynthetic gene cluster
                                     during empirical strain improvement of Streptomyces kanamyceticus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
                                    2006; 103:9661–6. [PubMed: 16766657]
                                   66. Smith DJ, Bull JH, Edwards J, Turner G. Amplification of the isopenicillin N synthetase gene in a
                                            strain of Penicillium chrysogenum producing high levels of penicillin. Mol Gen Genet. 1989;NIH-PA                                216:492–7. [PubMed: 2501652]
                                   67. Peschke U, Schmidt H, Zhang HZ, Piepersberg W. Molecular characterization of the lincomycin-
                                     production gene cluster of Streptomyces lincolnensis 78–11. Mol Microbiol. 1995; 16:1137–56.Author                             [PubMed: 8577249]
                                   68. Anthony JR, Anthony LC, Nowroozi F, Kwon G, Newman JD, et al. Optimization of the
                                    mevalonate-based isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway in Escherichia coli for production of the anti-
                                        malarial drug precursor amorpha-4,11-diene. Metab Eng. 2009; 11:13–9. [PubMed: 18775787]
                                   69. Keasling JD. Gene-expression tools for the metabolic engineering of bacteria. Trends Biotechnol.
                                    1999; 17:452–60. [PubMed: 10511704]Manuscript
                                   70. Leonard E, Ajikumar PK, Thayer K, Xiao W-H, Mo JD, et al. Combining metabolic and protein
                                      engineering of a terpenoid biosynthetic pathway for overproduction and selectivity control. Proc
                                      Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 107:13654–9. [PubMed: 20643967]
                                   71. Kennedy J, Turner G. δ-(L -α-Aminoadipyl)-L-cysteinyl-D-valine synthetase is a rate limiting
                               enzyme for penicillin production in Aspergillus nidulans. Mol Gen Genet. 1996; 253:189–97.
                                [PubMed: 9003303]
                                   72. Fernández-Cañón JM, Peñalva MA. Overexpression of two penicillin structural genes in
                                       Aspergillus nidulans. Mol Gen Genet. 1995; 246:110–8. [PubMed: 7823906]
                                   73. Veenstra AE, van Solingen P, Bovenberg RAL, van der Voort LHM. Strain improvement ofNIH-PA                                  Penicillium chrysogenum by recombinant DNA techniques. J Biotechnol. 1991; 17:81–90.
                                [PubMed: 1367496]
                                   74. Malla S, Niraula NP, Liou K, Sohng JK. Enhancement of doxorubicin production by expression ofAuthor                                      structural sugar biosynthesis and glycosyltransferase genes in Streptomyces peucetius. J Biosci
                                    Bioeng. 2009; 108:92–8. [PubMed: 19619853]
                                   75. Malla S, Niraula NP, Liou K, Sohng JK. Self-resistance mechanism in Streptomyces peucetius:
                                    Overexpression of drrA, drrB and drrC for doxorubicin enhancement. Microbiol Res. 2010;
                                   165:259–67. [PubMed: 19651502]
                                   76. Chen Y, Smanski M, Shen B. Improvement of secondary metabolite production in Streptomyces byManuscript
                                     manipulating pathway regulation. Appl Microbiol and Biotechnol. 2010; 86:19–25. [PubMed:
                                  20091304]




                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 23]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 23

                                   77. Chen Y, Wendt-Pienkowski E, Shen B. Identification and utility of FdmR1 as a Streptomyces
                                           antibiotic regulatory protein activator for fredericamycin production in Streptomyces griseus
                        ATCC 49344 and heterologous hosts. J Bacteriol. 2008; 190:5587–96. [PubMed: 18556785]
                                   78. Lombo F, Brana AF, Mendez C, Salas JA. The mithramycin gene cluster of Streptomyces
                                        argillaceus contains a positive regulatory gene and two repeated DNA sequences that are located
                                             at both ends of the cluster. J Bacteriol. 1999; 181:642–7. [PubMed: 9882681]NIH-PA
                                   79. Sakai K, Kinoshita H, Shimizu T, Nihira T. Construction of a citrinin gene cluster expression
                                   system in heterologous Aspergillus oryzae. J Biosci Bioeng. 2008; 106:466–72. [PubMed:
                                  19111642]Author                              80. Bergmann S, Schumann J, Scherlach K, Lange C, Brakhage AA, et al. Genomics-driven discovery
                                       of PKS-NRPS hybrid metabolites from Aspergillus nidulans. Nat Chem Biol. 2007; 3:213–7.
                                [PubMed: 17369821]
                                   81. Chiang YM, Szewczyk E, Davidson AD, Keller N, Oakley BR, et al. A gene cluster containing two
                                      fungal polyketide synthases encodes the biosynthetic pathway for a polyketide, asperfuranone, inManuscript                                   Aspergillus nidulans. J Am Chem Soc. 2009; 131:2965–70. [PubMed: 19199437]
                                   82. Smanski MJ, Peterson RM, Rajski SR, Shen B. Engineered Streptomyces platensis strains that
                                    overproduce antibiotics platensimycin and platencin. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2009;
                                   53:1299–304. [PubMed: 19164156]
                                   83. Alper H, Fischer C, Nevoigt E, Stephanopoulos G. Tuning genetic control through promoter
                                       engineering. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005; 102:12678–83. [PubMed: 16123130]
                                   84. Nevoigt E, Kohnke J, Fischer CR, Alper H, Stahl U, et al. Engineering of promoter replacement
                                          cassettes for fine-tuning of gene expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Environ Microbiol.
                                    2006; 72:5266–73. [PubMed: 16885275]
                                   85. Pfleger BF, Pitera DJ, Smolke CD, Keasling JD. Combinatorial engineering of intergenic regionsNIH-PA                                     in operons tunes expression of multiple genes. Nat Biotechnol. 2006; 24:1027–32. [PubMed:
                                  16845378]
                                   86. Salis HM, Mirsky EA, Voigt CA. Automated design of synthetic ribosome binding sites to controlAuthor                                    protein expression. Nat Biotechnol. 2009; 27:946–50. [PubMed: 19801975]
                                   87. Kizer L, Pitera DJ, Pfleger BF, Keasling JD. Application of functional genomics to pathway
                                      optimization for increased isoprenoid production. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2008; 74:3229–41.
                                [PubMed: 18344344]
                                   88. Fox RJ, Huisman GW. Enzyme optimization: moving from blind evolution to statistical
                                       exploration of sequence function space. Trends Biotechnol. 2008; 26:132–8. [PubMed: 18222559]Manuscript
                                   89. Wang, Cw; Oh, MK.; Liao, JC. Directed evolution of metabolically engineered Escherichia coli
                                          for carotenoid production. Biotechnol Prog. 2000; 16:922–6. [PubMed: 11101317]
                                   90. Paradise EM, Kirby J, Chan R, Keasling JD. Redirection of flux through the FPP branch-point in
                                  Saccharomyces cerevisiae by down-regulating squalene synthase. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2008;
                                    100:371–8. [PubMed: 18175359]
                                   91. Xie X, Wong WW, Tang Y. Improving simvastatin bioconversion in Escherichia coli by deletion
                                       of bioH. Metab Eng. 2007; 9:379–86. [PubMed: 17625941]
                                   92. Lomovskaya N, Otten SL, Doi-Katayama Y, Fonstein L, Liu X-C, et al. Doxorubicin
                                     overproduction in Streptomyces peucetius: cloning and characterization of the dnrU ketoreductaseNIH-PA                              and dnrV genes and the doxA cytochrome P-450 hydroxylase gene. J Bacteriol. 1999; 181:305–18.
                                [PubMed: 9864344]
                                   93. Chemler JA, Fowler ZL, McHugh KP, Koffas MAG. Improving NADPH availability for naturalAuthor                                 product biosynthesis in Escherichia coli by metabolic engineering. Metab Eng. 2010; 12:96–104.
                                [PubMed: 19628048]
                                   94. Sung, BH.; Lee, JH.; Kim, SC. Escherichia coli genome engineering and minimization for the
                                       construction of a bioengine. In: Lee, SY., editor. Systems Biology and Biotechnology of
                                      Escherichia coli. London: Springer Science_Business Media; 2009.
                                   95. Komatsu M, Uchiyama T, Omura S, Cane DE, Ikeda H. Genome-minimized Streptomyces host forManuscript
                                        the heterologous expression of secondary metabolism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 107:2646–
                                       51. [PubMed: 20133795]




                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 24]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 24

                                   96. Floss HG. Combinatorial biosynthesis - Potential and problems. J Biotechnol. 2006; 124:242–57.
                                [PubMed: 16414140]
                                   97. Baltz RH. Molecular engineering approaches to peptide, polyketide and other antibiotics. Nat
                                      Biotechnol. 2006; 24:1533–40. [PubMed: 17160059]
                                   98. Madduri K, Kennedy J, Rivola G, Inventi-Solari A, Filippini S, et al. Production of the antitumor
                                   drug epirubicin (4 ′-epidoxorubicin) and its precursor by a genetically engineered strain ofNIH-PA
                                    Streptomyces peucetius. Nat Biotechnol. 1998; 16:69–74. [PubMed: 9447597]
                                   99. Fischbach MA, Walsh CT, Clardy J. The evolution of gene collectives: How natural selection
                                        drives chemical innovation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008; 105:4601–8. [PubMed: 18216259]Author                                 100. Mendes M, Recio E, Fouces R, Luiten R, Martin J, et al. Engineered biosynthesis of novel
                                       polyenes: a pimaricin derivative produced by targeted gene disruption in Streptomyces
                                           natalensis. Chem Biol. 2001; 8:635–44. [PubMed: 11451665]
                                 101. Remsing LL, Gonzalez AM, Nur-e-Alam M, Fernandez-Lozano MJ, Brana AF, et al.
                                   Mithramycin SK, a novel antitumor drug with improved therapeutic index, mithramycin SA, andManuscript                                 demycarosyl-mithramycin SK: three new products generated in the mithramycin producer
                                      Streptomyces argillaceus through combinatorial biosynthesis. J Am Chem Soc. 2003; 125:5745–
                                        53. [PubMed: 12733914]
                                 102. Ito T, Roongsawang N, Shirasaka N, Lu W, Flatt PM, et al. Deciphering pactamycin biosynthesis
                                   and engineered production of new pactamycin analogues. ChemBioChem. 2009; 10:2253–65.
                                  [PubMed: 19670201]
                                 103. Ju J, Li W, Yuan Q, Peters NR, Hoffmann FM, et al. Functional characterization of ttmM unveils
                              new tautomycin analogs and insight into tautomycin biosynthesis and activity. Org Lett. 2009;
                                     11:1639–42. [PubMed: 19281218]
                                 104. Zhang M-Q, Gaisser S, Nur-E-Alam M, Sheehan LS, Vousden WA, et al. Optimizing naturalNIH-PA                                   products by biosynthetic engineering: discovery of nonquinone Hsp90 Inhibitors. J Med Chem.
                                     2008; 51:5494. [PubMed: 18800759]
                                 105. Tang L, Chung L, Carney JR, Starks CM, Licari P, et al. Generation of new epothilones byAuthor                                    genetic engineering of a polyketide synthase in Myxococcus xanthus. J Antibiot. 2005; 58:178–
                                        84. [PubMed: 15895525]
                                 106. Power P, Dunne T, Murphy B, Nic Lochlainn L, Rai D, et al. Engineered synthesis of 7-oxo- and
                                      15-deoxy-15-oxo-amphotericins: insights into structure-activity relationships in polyene
                                              antibiotics. Chem Biol. 2008; 15:78–86. [PubMed: 18215775]
                                 107. Khaw L, Bohm G, Metcalfe S, Staunton J, Leadlay P. Mutational biosynthesis of novelManuscript
                                    rapamycins by a strain of Streptomyces hygroscopicus NRRL 5491 disrupted in rapL, encoding a
                                          putative lysine cyclodeaminase. J Bacteriol. 1998; 180:809. [PubMed: 9473033]
                                 108. Weist S, Bister B, Puk O, Bischoff D, Pelzer S, et al. Fluorobalhimycin-A new chapter in
                                       glycopeptide antibiotic research. Angew Chem Int Edit. 2002; 41:3383–5.
                                 109. Galm U, Dessoy MA, Schmidt J, Wessjohann LA, Heide L. In vitro and in vivo production of
                              new aminocoumarins by a combined biochemical, genetic, and synthetic approach. Chem Biol.
                                     2004; 11:173–83. [PubMed: 15123279]
                                 110. Li SM, Heide L. New aminocoumarin antibiotics from genetically engineered Streptomyces
                                               strains. Curr Med Chem. 2005; 12:419–27. [PubMed: 15720250]NIH-PA                             111. Kim W, Lee JS, Lee D, Cai XF, Shin JC, et al. Mutasynthesis of geldanamycin by the disruption
                                        of a gene producing starter unit: generation of structural diversity at the benzoquinone ring.
                               ChemBioChem. 2007; 8:1491–4. [PubMed: 17661303]Author                             112. Menzella HG, Tran TT, Carney JR, Lau-Wee J, Galazzo J, et al. Potent non-benzoquinone
                                   ansamycin heat shock protein 90 inhibitors from genetic engineering of Streptomyces
                                       hygroscopicus. J Med Chem. 2009; 52:1518–21. [PubMed: 19231864]
                                 113. Eustaquio AS, Moore BS. Mutasynthesis of fluorosalinosporamide, a potent and reversible
                                            inhibitor of the proteasome. Angew Chem Int Ed. 2008; 47:3936–8.
                                 114. Eustaquio A, O’Hagan D, Moore B. Engineering fluorometabolite production: fluorinaseManuscript
                                       expression in Salinispora tropica yields fluorosalinosporamide. J Nat Prod. 2010; 73:378–82.
                                  [PubMed: 20085308]




                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 25]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 25

                                 115. Runguphan W, Maresh JJ, O’Connor SE. Silencing of tryptamine biosynthesis for production of
                                       nonnatural alkaloids in plant culture. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009; 106:13673–8. [PubMed:
                                   19666570]
                                 116. Weissman KJ. Mutasynthesis - uniting chemistry and genetics for drug discovery. Trends
                                        Biotechnol. 2007; 25:139–42. [PubMed: 17306390]
                                 117. Hopwood DA, Malpartida F, Kieser HM, Ikeda H, Duncan J, et al. Production of ‘hybrid’NIH-PA
                                            antibiotics by genetic engineering. Nature. 1985; 314:642–4. [PubMed: 3857464]
                                 118. de Boer AL, Schmidt-Dannert C. Recent efforts in engineering microbial cells to produce new
                                     chemical compounds. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2003; 7:273–8. [PubMed: 12714061]Author                                 119. Pfeifer BA, Khosla C. Biosynthesis of polyketides in heterologous hosts. Microbiol Mol Biol
                                    Rev. 2001; 65:106–18. [PubMed: 11238987]
                                 120. Cane DE, Walsh CT, Khosla C. Harnessing the biosynthetic code: combinations, permutations,
                                   and mutations. Science. 1998; 282:63–8. [PubMed: 9756477]
                                 121. Moyne AL, Cleveland TE, Tuzun S. Molecular characterization and analysis of the operonManuscript                                 encoding the antifungal lipopeptide bacillomycin D. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2004; 234:43–9.
                                  [PubMed: 15109718]
                                 122. Reeves CD, Ward SL, Revill WP, Suzuki H, Marcus M, et al. Production of hybrid 16-membered
                                      macrolides by expressing combinations of polyketide synthase genes in engineered Streptomyces
                                         fradiae hosts. Chem Biol. 2004; 11:1465–72. [PubMed: 15489173]
                                 123. McDaniel R, Thamchaipenet A, Gustafsson C, Fu H, Betlach M, et al. Multiple genetic
                                        modifications of the erythromycin polyketide synthase to produce a library of novel “unnatural”
                                          natural products. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1999; 96:1846–51. [PubMed: 10051557]
                                 124. Rascher A, Hu ZH, Viswanathan N, Schirmer A, Reid R, et al. Cloning and characterization of a
                                    gene cluster for geldanamycin production in Streptomyces hygroscopicus NRRL 3602. FEMSNIH-PA                                      Microbiol Lett. 2003; 218:223–30. [PubMed: 12586396]
                                 125. Patel K, Piagentini M, Rascher A, Tian ZQ, Buchanan GO, et al. Engineered biosynthesis of
                                    geldanamycin analogs for Hsp90 inhibition. Chem Biol. 2004; 11:1625–33. [PubMed: 15610846]Author                                 126. Gaisser S, Kellenberger L, Kaja AL, Weston AJ, Lill RE, et al. Direct production of ivermectin-
                                             like drugs after domain exchange in the avermectin polyketide synthase of Streptomyces
                                           avermitilis ATCC31272. Org Biomol Chem. 2003; 1:2840–7. [PubMed: 12968333]
                                 127. Miao V, Coeffet-Le Gal MF, Nguyen K, Brian P, Penn J, et al. Genetic engineering in
                                      Streptomyces roseosporus to produce hybrid lipopeptide antibiotics. Chem Biol. 2006; 13:269–Manuscript                                    76. [PubMed: 16638532]
                                 128. Nguyen KT, Ritz D, Gu JQ, Alexander D, Chu M, et al. Combinatorial biosynthesis of novel
                                            antibiotics related to daptomycin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:17462–7. [PubMed:
                                   17090667]
                                 129. Coeffet-Le Gal MF, Thurston L, Rich P, Miao V, Baltz RH. Complementation of daptomycin
                                   dptA and dptD deletion mutations in trans and production of hybrid lipopeptide antibiotics.
                                      Microbiology. 2006; 152:2993–3001. [PubMed: 17005980]
                                 130. Nguyen KT, He XW, Alexander DC, Li C, Gu JQ, et al. Genetically engineered lipopeptide
                                            antibiotics related to A54145 and daptomycin with improved properties. Antimicrob Agents
                                    Chemother. 2010; 54:1404–13. [PubMed: 20086142]NIH-PA                                 131. Rodriguez E, McDaniel R. Combinatorial biosynthesis of antimicrobials and other natural
                                         products. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2001; 4:526–34. [PubMed: 11587928]
                                 132. Baltz RH. Daptomycin: mechanisms of action and resistance, and biosynthetic engineering. CurrAuthor                              Opin Chem Biol. 2009; 13:144–51. [PubMed: 19303806]
                                 133. Park SR, Han AR, Ban YH, Yoo YJ, Kim EJ, et al. Genetic engineering of macrolide
                                          biosynthesis: past advances, current state, and future prospects. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2010;
                                     85:1227–39.
                                 134. Strieker M, Marahiel MA. The structural diversity of acidic lipopeptide antibiotics.
                               ChemBioChem. 2009; 10:607–16. [PubMed: 19156787]Manuscript
                                 135. Weissman KJ, Leadlay PF. Combinatorial biosynthesis of reduced polyketides. Nat Rev
                                       Microbiol. 2005; 3:925–36. [PubMed: 16322741]



                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 26]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 26

                                 136. Mendez C, Salas JA. Altering the glycosylation pattern of bioactive compounds. Trends
                                        Biotechnol. 2001; 19:449–56. [PubMed: 11602309]
                                 137. Luzhetskyy A, Bechthold A. It works: combinatorial biosynthesis for generating novel
                                        glycosylated compounds. Mol Microbiol. 2005; 58:3–5. [PubMed: 16164544]
                                 138. Olano C, Mendez C, Salas JA. Post-PKS tailoring steps in natural product-producing
                                      actinomycetes from the perspective of combinatorial biosynthesis. Nat Prod Rep. 2010; 27:571–NIH-PA
                                      616. [PubMed: 20352666]
                                 139. Flatman RH, Eustaquio A, Li SM, Heide L, Maxwell A. Structure-activity relationships of
                                    aminocoumarin-type gyrase and topoisomerase IV inhibitors obtained by combinatorialAuthor                                     biosynthesis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2006; 50:1136–42. [PubMed: 16569821]
                                 140. Sanchez C, Zhu LL, Brana AF, Salas AP, Rohr J, et al. Combinatorial biosynthesis of antitumor
                                       indolocarbazole compounds. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005; 102:461–6. [PubMed: 15625109]
                                 141. Sanchez C, Salas AP, Brana AF, Palomino M, Pineda-Lucena A, et al. Generation of potent and
                                           selective kinase inhibitors by combinatorial biosynthesis of glycosylated indolocarbazoles. ChemManuscript                          Commun. 2009:4118–20.
                                 142. Werneburg M, Busch B, He J, Richter ME, Xiang L, et al. Exploiting enzymatic promiscuity to
                                       engineer a focused library of highly selective antifungal and antiproliferative aureothin
                                       analogues. J Am Chem Soc. 2010; 132:10407–13. [PubMed: 20662518]
                                 143. Horinouchi S. Combinatorial biosynthesis of non-bacterial and unnatural flavonoids, stilbenoids
                                   and curcuminoids by microorganisms. J Antibiot. 2008; 61:709–28. [PubMed: 19194030]
                                 144. Katsuyama Y, Funa N, Miyahisa I, Horinouchi S. Synthesis of unnatural flavonoids and stilbenes
                                  by exploiting the plant biosynthetic pathway in Escherichia coli. Chem Biol. 2007; 14:613–21.
                                  [PubMed: 17584609]
                                 145. Leonard E, Runguphan W, O’Connor S, Prather KJ. Opportunities in metabolic engineering toNIH-PA                                                facilitate scalable alkaloid production. Nat Chem Biol. 2009; 5:292–300. [PubMed: 19377455]
                                 146. Williams GJ, Goff RD, Zhang C, Thorson JS. Optimizing glycosyltransferase specificity via “hot
                                        spot” saturation mutagenesis presents a catalyst for novobiocin glycorandomization. Chem Biol.Author                                 2008; 15:393–401. [PubMed: 18420146]
                                 147. Williams GJ, Zhang C, Thorson JS. Expanding the promiscuity of a natural-product
                                         glycosyltransferase by directed evolution. Nat Chem Biol. 2007; 3:657–62. [PubMed: 17828251]
                                 148. Chen S, Galan MC, Coltharp C, O’Connor SE. Redesign of a central enzyme in alkaloid
                                          biosynthesis. Chem Biol. 2006; 13:1137–41. [PubMed: 17113995]Manuscript                             149. Runguphan W, O’Connor SE. Metabolic reprogramming of periwinkle plant culture. Nat Chem
                                          Biol. 2009; 5:151–3. [PubMed: 19151732]
                                 150. Schmidt-Dannert C, Umeno D, Arnold FH. Molecular breeding of carotenoid biosynthetic
                                     pathways. Nat Biotechnol. 2000; 18:750–3. [PubMed: 10888843]
                                 151. Yoshikuni Y, Ferrin TE, Keasling JD. Designed divergent evolution of enzyme function. Nature.
                                     2006; 440:1078–82. [PubMed: 16495946]
                                 152. Hans M, Hornung A, Dziarnowski A, Cane DE, Khosla C. Mechanistic analysis of acyl
                                           transferase domain exchange in polyketide synthase modules. J Am Chem Soc. 2003; 125:5366–
                                        74. [PubMed: 12720450]
                                 153. Hunziker D, Yu TW, Hutchinson CR, Floss HG, Khosla C. Primer unit specificity in rifamycinNIH-PA
                                         biosynthesis principally resides in the later stages of the biosynthetic pathways. J Am Chem Soc.
                                     1998; 120:1092–3.
                                 154. Zhou Z, Lai JR, Walsh CT. Directed evolution of aryl carrier proteins in the enterobactinAuthor                                     synthetase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2007; 104:11621–6. [PubMed: 17606920]
                                 155. Fischbach MA, Lai JR, Roche ED, Walsh CT, Liu DR. Directed evolution can rapidly improve
                                         the activity of chimeric assembly-line enzymes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2007; 104:11951–6.
                                  [PubMed: 17620609]Manuscript





                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 27]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 27

NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript



                               Figure 1.
                           Major classes of natural products. PK – polyketide, NRP – non-ribosomal peptide.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript


NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript





                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 28]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 28

NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript


NIH-PA

                               Figure 2.Author                         General metabolic engineering strategies for improvement of product titer.
Manuscript


NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript





                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.


[PDF physical page 29]
                 Pickens et al.                                                                                                 Page 29

NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript


NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript





                               Figure 3.
                           Examples of pathway engineering and combinatorial biosynthesis to generate new analogs:NIH-PA                           A. exchange of 6-deoxyerythronolide synthase (DEBS) AT2 and KR6 domains with
                        rapAT2 and rapDH/KR4 domains from rapamycin synthase (RAPS) (123). B. exchange of
                            daptomycin Dpt module 11 and subunit DptD with corresponding module and subunit fromAuthor
                        A54145 pathway (LptABCD) (128). Loading module and subunit DptA are not shown as it
                                       is unchanged and the parent daptomycin structure is shown in Figure 1. C. swapping of
                                   tailoring genes clo-hal (halogenase) and novO (methyltransferase) between clorobiocin and
                             novobiocin pathways (110).Manuscript





                               Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 01.