
[PDF physical page 1]
Genetic Engineering of Taxol Biosynthetic
Genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae


JingHong M. DeJong,1 Yule Liu,1 Arthur P. Bollon,1 Robert M. Long,2
Stefan Jennewein,2 David Williams,2 Rodney B. Croteau2

1eXegenics, Inc., 2110 Research Row, Dallas, Texas 75235
2Institute of Biological Chemistry, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington
99164-6340; telephone: (509) 335-1790; fax: (509) 335-7643; e-mail: croteau@wsu.edu

Received 8 March 2005; accepted 22 July 2005

Published online 13 September 2005 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/bit.20694



Abstract: Baccatin III, an intermediate of Taxol biosynth-   INTRODUCTION
esis and a useful precursor for semisynthesis of the anti-
cancer drug, is produced in yew (Taxus) species by a    Taxol(WallandWani,1995) (generic namepaclitaxel,Fig. 1)
sequence of 15 enzymatic steps from primary meta-     is well-established as a potent antineoplastic drug with
bolism. Ten genes encoding enzymes of this extended    excellent activity against a range of cancers (Goldspiel,
pathway have been described, thereby permitting a                                                            1997). This taxane diterpenoid (taxoid), derived from yew
preliminary attempt to reconstruct early steps of taxane
                                                             (Taxus) species (Croom, 1995), continues to ﬁnd widediterpenoid (taxoid) metabolism in Saccharomyces cere-
visiae as a microbial production host. Eight of these taxoid    application in the treatment of additional cancer types (Skeel,
biosynthetic genes were functionally expressed in yeast    1999), for earlier use in disease intervention (Michaud et al.,
from episomal vectors containing one or more gene    2000), and in combination with other chemotherapeutic
cassettes incorporating various epitope tags to permit                                                            agents (Brown, 2003). Total syntheses of Taxol have been
protein surveillance and differentiation of those pathway
                                                          achieved by several elegant routes (see Kingston et al., 2002,enzymes of similar size. All eight recombinant proteins
were readily detected by immunoblotting using speciﬁc     for  recent  review)  but  the  approach  is  commercially
monoclonal antibodies and each expressed protein was    impractical (Borman, 1994; Xiao et al., 2003). The increased
determined to be functional by in vitro enzyme assay,   demand for the drug therefore shifted destructive isolation
although activity levels differed considerably between                                                     from the original, low-yielding source (the bark of the Paciﬁc
enzyme types. Using three plasmids carrying different
                                                        yew, Taxus brevifolia) to semisynthetic approaches (seepromoters and selection markers, genes encoding ﬁve
sequential pathway steps leading from primary  iso-    Wuts, 1998, for recent review). These approaches involve
prenoid metabolism to the intermediate taxadien-5a-    synthetic side chain attachment to the C13-position of more
acetoxy-10b-ol were installed in a single yeast host.     readily available, advanced taxoids, such as 10-deacetylbac-
Metabolite analysis showed that yeast isoprenoid pre-                                                                  catin III (Fig. 1), that can be isolated in higher yield from the
cursors could be utilized in the reconstituted pathway
                                                            needles of various Taxus species as a renewable resource. Thebecause products accumulated from the ﬁrst two engi-
neered pathway steps (leading to the committed inter-    supply of Taxol for the foreseeable future will continue to
mediate taxadiene); however, a pathway restriction was     rely on yew species or cell cultures derived therefrom (Cragg
encountered at the ﬁrst cytochrome P450 hydroxylation     et al., 1993; Ketchum and Gibson, 1996; Ketchum et al.,
step. The means  of overcoming  this  limitation are                                                         1999; Suffness, 1995), with the production of Taxol or
described in the context of further development of this
                                                                  suitable precursors in genetically engineered microorgan-novel approach for production of Taxol precursors and
related taxoids in yeast.  2005 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.          isms as a pharmaceutically desirable alternative (Suffness,
Keywords: Taxol; paclitaxel; taxadiene synthase; taxoid    1995; Sankawa and Itokawa, 2003). For these reasons, it is
hydroxylase; taxoid acyl transferase; Taxus; yew; Sac-    important to understand the biosynthesis of Taxol and its
charomyces cerevisiae; yeast                               underlying molecular genetics, with the view to improving
                                                           production yields by transgenic means.
  Correspondence to: R.B. Croteau                             The Taxolbiosynthetic pathwayis considered to require 19
  Yule Liu’s present address is Inhibitex, Inc., 8995 Westside Parkway,
                                                        enzymatic steps from the universal diterpenoid precursorAlpharetta, Georgia 30004.
  Arthur P. Bollon’s present address is HemoBiotech, Inc., 2110 Research    geranylgeranyl diphosphate (Jennewein and Croteau, 2001;
Row, Dallas, Texas 75235.                                    Walker and  Croteau, 2001) which  is  cyclized,  in  the
  Stefan Jennewein’s  present address  is  Institute  for Chemistry and    committed step, to taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene (Koepp et  al.,
Biochemistry, Technical University-Darmstadt, Petersenstr. 22, G45287    1995). This parental oleﬁn (Fig. 1) is then functionalized by a
Darmstadt, Germany.
                                                                    series of eight cytochrome P450-mediated oxygenations and  Contract grant sponsor: National Institutes of Health (National Cancer
Institute)                                              two CoA-dependent acylations, and undergoes oxidation
  Contract grant number: CA55254                                       at C9 and ring expansion to the oxetane function en route to



  2005 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.


[PDF physical page 2]
Figure 1.  Outline of Taxol biosynthesis from primary metabolism. The enzymes indicated are geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase (GGPPS) and taxadiene
synthase (TS). Ac, Bz, and OPP denote the acetate and benzoate groups, and the diphosphate moiety, respectively. IPP and DMAPP indicate isopentenyl
diphosphate and dimethylallyl diphosphate, respectively.


10-deacetyl baccatin III, to which the C10 acetate group is       In this study, we describe the independent functional
added and the side chain at C13 is then appended (in ﬁve    expression of eight Taxol biosynthetic genes in Sacchar-
additional steps) to afford Taxol.                          omyces cerevisiae using episomal vectors, and report on the
  Genes encoding enzymes for many steps of the Taxol     installation, in a single host strain, of ﬁve sequential steps
biosynthetic pathway have been isolated and functionally    leading from primary metabolism (i.e., from the isopentenyl
expressed in Escherichia coli, yeast, or Spodoptera cells (see    diphosphate and dimethylallyl diphosphate precursors for
Jennewein et al., 2004b, for recent review), including taxa-    isoprenoid  biosynthesis)  to  taxadien-5a-acetoxy-10b-ol.
4(5),11(12)-diene synthase, the cytochrome P450 taxoid    Based on metabolite analysis in this engineered yeast, we
2a-, 5a-, 7b-, 10b-, and 13a-hydroxylases responsible for    also discuss the implications of this preliminary attempt to
regiospeciﬁc oxygenation on the taxadiene core, the acyl/    reconstruct these early steps of taxane diterpenoid metabo-
aroyl CoA-dependent transferases responsible for esteriﬁca-     lism.
tion at the C2-O-, C5-O-, and C10-O-positions, and several
steps of C13-side-chain assembly. Although the exact order
                                        MATERIALS AND METHODS
of oxygenations and  acylations on  the taxadiene core
structure is not yet ﬁrmly established, sufﬁcient information
                                                    Materials
is available about the properties of the recombinant enzymes
to attempt reconstructing early steps of taxoid metabolism in   pESC-URA/TRP/LEU/HIS vectors were from Stratagene
a microbial host. Yeast was chosen for this purpose because    (La  Jolla,  CA), pYES  vectors  were  from  Invitrogen
considerable genetic information and the molecular tools are    (Carlsbad, CA), and p425GPD was from the American Type
available, including numerous selection markers, promoters,    Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). The mouse monoclonal
and episomal and integrative vectors, and because yeast has    antibodies anti-HA, anti-c-Myc, and anti-FLAG were from
been successfully employed as host for the engineered, multi-    Sigma (St. Louis, MO), and anti-VSVG and anti-Xpress were
step production of other (mevalonate-derived) terpenoids,    from Invitrogen. Puriﬁed recombinant proteins (Positope
including steroids (Duport et al., 1998; Szczebara et al.,    (Invitrogen) and BAP-FLAG (Sigma)) containing thevarious
2003) and carotenoids (Miura et al., 1998; Shimada et al.,    epitope tags were used as calibration standards for immuno-
1998; Yamano et al., 1994) arising from the triterpenoid and     blotting. The various amino acid dropout media were from
tetraterpenoid pathways, respectively. Very little work has    Qbiogen (Irvine, CA). Yeast Nitrogen Base Media without
been directed to the production of monoterpenoid, sesqui-    amino acids was from BD Biosciences (Palo Alto, CA) and
terpenoid or diterpenoid natural products in yeast (Jackson   YPD media was from Gibco/BRL (Carlsbad, CA). The
et al., 2003), although, notably, E. coli has been successfully    sources of other reagents, including substrates and reagents
engineered for the production of taxadiene, the ﬁrst dedicated     for the various enzyme assays, are described below in the
precursor of Taxol (Huang et al., 2001).                        appropriate sections.



                                    DEJONG ET AL.: ENGINEERING TAXOL BIOSYNTHESIS IN YEAST        213


[PDF physical page 3]
Construction of Yeast Expression Vectors         50-CCACTAGTGCTACTTGAATTGGATCAATATAAAC-
                                                                              30, was also used to amplify the same cDNA target (again
PCR primers were designed to amplify the corresponding    without the transit peptide). The SpeI treated amplicon was
cDNAs of the target genes while omitting the plastidial     transferred into pESCU-GGPPS to yield pESCU-GGPPS-TS
transit peptide where appropriate, modifying the N- or C-    encoding the truncated version of GGPPS with appended C-
terminus to append an epitope tag that did not inﬂuence    terminal C-myc epitope tag (under GAL1 control) as well as
activity, and adding suitable restriction sites. PCR fragments    the truncated version of TS with appended C-terminal FLAG
were ampliﬁed using standard cycling conditions (Innis et al.,    epitope tag (under GAL10 control), both in correct orienta-
1990) with Turbo Pfu polymerase as the hot start version     tion without any introduced nucleotide substitutions.
(Stratagene). All DNA fragments were veriﬁed by complete      For the taxadiene 5a-hydroxylase (THY5a), the forward
sequencing, and  the  various  expression  constructs  are    primer 50-CTGGACTAGTATGGACGCCCTGTATAAGA-
summarized in Table I.                              GCACA-30 and  the  reverse primer 50-CTTCTCGAGT-
  For geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase (GGPPS), the   CAAGCGTAGTCTGGGACGTCGTATGGGTAATTGAC-
forward primer 50-CAGGTACCGTTTGATTTCAACGAG-   TATGGTCTCGGGAAACAG-30 were used to amplify the
TATATGAAG-30 and the reverse primer 50-CGCTCGA-     full coding region from pBS-THY5a (Jennewein  et  al.,
GTCAGTTTTGCCTGAATGCAATGTA-30 were used  to    2004a)  with  C-terminally  fused HA  epitope  tag. The
amplify the structural gene in pYES (Hefner et al., 1998)     resulting  amplicon was  digested  with  SpeI/XhoI, and
but omit the segment specifying the N-terminal 98 residue     transferred  into p425GPD  to  yield  veriﬁed p425GPD-
plastidial  transit  peptide. The  resulting amplicon was   THY5a.
digested with KpnI/XhoI, and transferred into pYES2-NTA      For the taxoid 13a-hydroxylase (THY13a), the forward
to yield sequence veriﬁed pYES-GGPPS encoding the gene    primer 50-CGGGATCCATGGATGCCCTTAAGCAATTG-
with appended N-terminal Xpress epitope  tag. Another     30 and the reverse primer 50-CCGTCGACTTACTTACC-
primer set, with forward primer 50-CCGTCGACAT-GCAT-   CAGGCGGTTCATTTCGATATCAGTGTAAGATCTGGA
CATCATCATCATCATGGTTTTGATTTCAACG-AGTA-   ATAGAGTTTAATG-30 were used to amplify the full cDNA
TATGAAG-30 and  reverse primer 50-CGGTCGACGTT-    region from pYES2.1-THY13a (Jennewein et al., 2001) with
TTGCCTGA-ATGCAATGTAATC-30, was  also  used  to    C-terminally fused VSVG epitope tag. The amplicon was
amplify the same cDNA target (again without the transit     initially cloned into pCR2.1, and the insert then released by
peptide). The SalI treated amplicon was transferred into    BamHI/SalI digestion and transferred into pESC-HIS to
pESC-URA  to  yield sequence veriﬁed pESCU-GGPPS    yield veriﬁed pESCH-THY13a.
encoding the 50-truncated structural gene and appended C-      For the taxoid 10b-hydroxylase (THY10b), the forward
terminal c-Myc epitope tag.                                 primer 50-CCAAGAGAGCGGCCGCATGGATAGCTTCA-
  For  taxadiene  synthase  (TS),  the  forward  primer   TTTTTCTGAG-30 and the reverse primer 50-GGATCGA-
50-CAGGTACCTATGAGCAGCAGCACTGGCACTAGC-30   TAGGGATCTCGGAAAAAGTTTTATGG-30 were used to
and the reverse primer 50-CGGAATTCTCATACTTGAA-    amplify  the  full  coding  region  from pYES-THY10b
TTGGATCAATATA-30 were used to amplify the coding    (Schoendorf et al., 2001). The resulting PCR fragment was
sequence from pTB42.1 (Wildung and Croteau, 1996) but    digested with NotI/ClaI and transferred into pESCW-TAT
omit the segment specifying the N-terminal 60 residue    (see below) to yield sequenceveriﬁed pESCW-TAT-THY10b
plastidial transit peptide(Williams et al., 2000). The resulting     that contained the 5a-O-acetyl transferase with C-terminal c-
amplicon was digested with KpnI/EcoRI, and transferred   Myc epitope  tag (under GAL1  control) and  the 10b-
into pYES2-NTA to yield veriﬁed pYES-TS encoding the    hydroxylase bearing  the C-terminal FLAG epitope  tag
truncated structural gene with appended N-terminal Xpress    (under GAL10 control).
epitope tag. Another primer set, with forward primer 50-      For taxadienol 5a-O-acetyl transferase (TAT), the forward
CAGACTAGTATGCATCATCATCATCATCAT-GGTATG-    primer  50-CACTGAGGGCCCATGGAGAAGACAGATT-
AGCAGCAGCACTGGCACTAGC-30 and reverse primer   TACACGT-30 and the reverse primer 50-CGCACGTGTC-


Table  I.  Summary for the expression of eight taxoid biosynthetic pathway genes in yeast.

Enzyme/gene                                Abbreviation       Promoter            Epitope tag                    Construct designation

Geranylgeranyl disphosphate synthase        GGPPS        GAL1        Xpress (N); c-Myc (C)      pYES-GGPPS; pESCU-GGPPS-TS
Taxadiene synthase                       TS         GAL10        Xpress (N); FLAG (C)      pYES-TS; pESCU-GGPPS-TS
Taxadiene 5a-hydroxylase                 THY5a        GPD      HA (C)                p425GPD-THY5a
Taxadienol 5a-O-acetyl transferase            TAT         GAL1       c-Myc (C)               pESCW-TAT; pESCW-TAT-THY10b
Taxoid 10b-hydroxylase                  THY10b       GAL10     FLAG (C)              pESCW-TAT-THY10b
Taxoid 13a-hydroxylase                  THY13a        GAL1      VSVG (C)              pESCH-THY13a
Taxoid 2a-O-benzoyl transferase             TBT         GAL1       c-Myc (N)               pESCL-TBT; pESCL-TBT-DBAT
Taxoid 10b-O-acetyl transferase            DBAT        GAL10        Xpress (N); Xpress (N)     pYES-DBAT; pESCL-TBT-DBAT

   (N) and (C) denote the respective N-terminal and C-terminal epitope fusions. The construct designations are abbreviations of original names, the lineages of
which are described in Materials and Methods. The abbreviation DBAT derives from the original designation 10-deacetyl baccatin III 10b-O-acetyl transferase.



214       BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOENGINEERING, VOL. 93, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 5, 2006


[PDF physical page 4]
GACTACTTTAGCCACATATTTTTTCA-30 were used to    induction with 2% galactose. At the indicated intervals, cells
amplify the coding region of pCWoriþ-TAT (Walker et al.,    were  collected from  the  suspension by  centrifugation
2000). The amplicon was digested with ApaI/SalI, and    (3,000g, 10 min) and, for subsequent immunoblotting, were
transferred into pESC-TRP to yield pESCW-TAT encoding    disrupted in a minimum volumeof medium by vortexing with
the transferase with appended C-terminal c-Myc epitope tag.     glass beads (30 s, 4–8 times on ice). After brief centrifuga-
Sequencing revealed a silent mutation at nt634, and pESCW-     tion to remove glass beads and cellular debris, the resulting
TATwas used as the parent plasmid for coexpression with the    supernatants (crude protein extracts) were frozen in liquid
taxoid 10b-hydroxylase as described above.               N2 and stored at  808C, or were centrifuged at 140,000g
  For  the  taxoid 2a-O-benzoyl  transferase (TBT),  the    (90 min, 48C) to provide the membranous protein fraction
forward primer 50-AGACTCGAGGGCAGGTTCAATGTA-    and soluble protein fraction which were frozen and stored as
GATATG-30 and the reverse primer 50-CTAGCTAGCTTA-    before until used.
TAACTTAGAGTTACATATTTTAG-30 were used to amplify
the coding region of pCWoriþ-KW18/TAX2 (Walker and
                                              Immunoblotting
Croteau, 2000b). The amplicon was digested with XhoI/NheI
and  transferred  into pESC-LEU  to  yield pESCL-TBT    Protein concentrations in the various extracts were deter-
encoding the transferase with appended N-terminal c-Myc    mined with the Coomassie Plus Kit (Pierce Biotechnology,
epitope; sequencing revealed a silent mutation at nt72.         Rockford, IL), and appropriate aliquots were denatured (and
  For the taxoid (10-deacetyl baccatin III) 10b-O-acetyl    membranes solubilized) in 1  Laemmli buffer and separated
transferase  (DBAT),  the  forward  primer  50-CCGGA-    by SDS–PAGE  using  established  protocols (Laemmli,
TCCTGGCAGGCTCAACAGAATTTG-30 and the reverse    1970). The resolved proteins were transferred to PVDF
primer 50-GCTCTAGATCAAGGCTTAGTTACATATTTG-    membranes using the Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA) gel transfer
30 were used to amplify the coding region of pCWoriþ-DBAT    apparatus in Tris-glycine buffer for 1 h, and the resulting
(Walker and Croteau, 2000a). The resulting amplicon was    membranes were blocked with Pierce SuperBlock blocking
digested with BamHI/XbaI and transferred into pYES2-NTA     buffer. Primary antibodies (mouse monoclonal antibodies
to yield pYES-DBAT encoding the transferase with N-    speciﬁc for the indicated epitope tags (Table I)) were titered
terminally fused Xpress epitope. The insert was sequenced     in blocking buffer and used as suggested by the manufac-
and shown to contain three nucleotide substitutions from the     turers, and these procedures were followed by treatment with
original that altered Lys85 to Arg (AAA to AGA), Glu248 to    anti-mouse secondary antibodies (sheep polyclonal antibo-
Gly (GAA to GGA), and Leu269 to Phe (CTT to TTT). These    dies conjugated with horseradish peroxidase (Sigma)). The
amino acidsubstitutions do not reside in regionsthought to be     resulting membranes were washed with Tris-buffered saline
important for transferase catalysis (Walker and Croteau,    containing 0.5% (v/v) Tween 20, and then incubated with
2000a), and this mutant was functionally expressed in yeast    Pierce SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate
(see below) at activity levels comparable to those of the     for 5 min and exposed to X-ray ﬁlm for signal detection.
original clone expressed in E. coli and at the second highest
level of all of the pathway genes expressed in yeast (Walker
                                         Enzyme Preparation
and Croteau, 2000a). Therefore, pYES-DBAT was used for
further expression studies, and the insert was subsequently    Cells derived from 1 L cultures (preculture in SD-amino acid
transferred to pESCL-TBT (to yield pESCL-TBT-DBAT)    dropout medium and induction in SG-dropout or YPG
which  permitted  dual  expression  of  the  2-O-benzoyl    medium, as appropriate) were collected by centrifugation
transferase under GAL1 control with N-terminally fused c-    (3,000g, 10 min, 48C), washed with 20 mL water and 20 mL
Myc epitope and the 10-O-acetyl transferase under GAL10    spheroplast buffer (50 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.4,
control with N-terminally fused Xpress epitope.               containing 1.2 M  sorbitol and 1 mM DTT), and then
                                                        suspended in 10 mL spheroplast buffer containing 100 mg
                                                    Zymolyase 20-T (Sigma). This mixture was incubated at
Yeast Expression
                                                  378C for 1 h and the formation of spheroplasts was monitored
The expression protocol was  essentially  that from  the    microscopically. After adding 20 mL spheroplast buffer, the
pYES2/NT  Instruction Manual  (Invitrogen). Competent    spheroplasts were collected by centrifugation as before, and
YPH499 cells (mating type a; Stratagene) were prepared    the pelleted spheroplasts were washed with 40 mL spher-
with the S.c. EasyComp Transformation Kit (Invitrogen), and     oplast buffer and resuspended in 20 mL breaking buffer
1 mg of plasmid DNAwas used for transformation according    (50 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.4, 5% (v/v) glycerol, 1 mM
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Transformed yeast cells   EDTA, 1 mM PMSF and 1   protease inhibitor cocktail
were selected on plates of SD dropout medium, and colonies    (Sigma)). Cells were homogenized with 10 strokes in a
were used to inoculate liquid SD dropout medium for   Dounce homogenizer, cell debris was removed by centrifu-
overnight culture at 308C. After collection by centrifugation,    gation (4,000g, 10 min, 48C), and the supernatant was
the cells were suspended in 1 L of SG dropout medium to A600    centrifuged at 140,000g (105 min, 48C) to provide the
  0.4 and cultured at 308C in 2.5 L Erlenmeyer ﬂasks with    microsomal and soluble enzyme fractions. The microsomal
vigorous shaking (150 rpm) for up to 3 days (A600 > 2.0) after     pellet was resuspended in the minimum volume of breaking



                                    DEJONG ET AL.: ENGINEERING TAXOL BIOSYNTHESIS IN YEAST        215


[PDF physical page 5]
buffer by passage through a 27-1/2 gauge needle. Aliquots of
the soluble enzyme fraction or the resuspended microsomes
were diluted into the appropriate reaction buffer for the assay.


Enzyme Assays

The assay for GGPP synthase activity (GGPPS, Fig. 1) was
slightly modiﬁed from a published protocol (Hefner et al.,
1998). An aliquot of the soluble enzyme fraction (5–20 mg
protein) was diluted  into 50 mM Tris  buffer, pH  7.6,
containing 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM DTT, 0.1 mM sodium
orthovanadate, and 10% (v/v) glycerol. The reaction was
initiated by the addition of 50 mM each of the co-substrates
farnesyl diphosphate (this enzyme also efﬁciently utilizes
dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP) and geranyl dipho-
sphate (GPP) as allylic cosubstrates) and [4-14C]isopentenyl
diphosphate (IPP), the mixture was incubated for 20 min at
318C, and the assay was terminated by the addition of
methanolic conc. HCl (4:1, v/v) to inactivate the enzyme and
solvolyze allylic diphosphates (GGPP yields a mixture of
geranylgeraniol and geranyllinalool). The resulting solvo-
lysis products were  extracted  into pentane  for  aliquot
counting and veriﬁcation of identity by GC-MS (Hefner
et al., 1998).
  The assay for taxadiene synthase (TS, Fig. 1) was based on
established procedures (Williams et al., 2000). An aliquot of     Figure 2.  Reconstructed pathway from primary metabolism to taxadien-
the soluble enzyme fraction (10–100 mg protein) was diluted     5a-acetoxy-10b-ol. The enzymes indicated are GGPPS, taxadiene synthase
into 30 mM HEPES buffer, pH 8.5, containing 5 mM DTT,     (TS), cytochrome P450taxadiene 5a-hydroxylase(THY5a),taxadien-5a-ol-
5 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM sodium metabisulﬁte, 1 mM     O-acetyl transferase (TAT) and cytochrome P450 taxoid 10b-hydroxylase
                                                                 (THY10b). Ac, Bz, and OPP denote the acetate and benzoate groups, and the
MgCl2, and 10% (v/v) glycerol. The reaction was initiated by                                                                          diphosphate moiety, respectively. IPP and DMAPP indicate isopentenyl
the addition of 0.7 mCi [1-3H]geranylgeranyl diphosphate     diphosphate and dimethylallyl diphosphate, respectively.
(subsaturating), the mixture was incubated for 1 h at 328C,
and the assay was terminated by vigorously mixing with
hexane to extract the labeled taxadiene product. The hexane     extract was counted by liquid scintillation spectrometry. The
fraction was passed through a short column of silica gel and    remainder was divided in half, and each half was evaporated
anhydrous MgSO4 to separate oleﬁns and dry the sample in     to dryness under N2 for dissolution in CH3CN and separation
preparation for aliquot counting and GC-MS veriﬁcation of    and quantiﬁcation by reversed phase radio-HPLC or dis-
product identity.                                                solution in hexane for GC-MS veriﬁcation of identity of the
  In  the  coupled  assay (TS  with  coexpressed GGPP    taxadien-5a-ol product by previously described protocols
synthase) an aliquot of the soluble enzyme preparation    (Hefner et al., 1996; Jennewein et al., 2001; Lovy Wheeler
containing  both enzymes was  incubated  under GGPP     et al., 2001).
synthase assay conditions as described above (the incubation     The assays for cytochrome P450 taxoid 10b-hydroxylase
time at 318C was extended to 2 h), but product was isolated   (THY10b, see Fig. 2) and cytochrome P450 taxoid 13a-
and determined according to the TS assay.                    hydroxylase (THY13a, see Fig. 1) were based on established
  The assay for cytochrome P450 taxadiene 5a-hydroxylase    procedures (Jennewein et al., 2001; Schoendorf et al., 2001)
(THY5a, see Fig. 2) was based on established procedures    and were conducted identically to the assay for the taxoid
(Jennewein et  al., 2004a). An aliquot of the suspended    5a-hydroxylase (above), except that the buffer was 50 mM
microsomal fraction (500 mg protein) was diluted into 1 mL    Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, and the substrates were 50 mM  (  )-
of 50 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.5, containing 1 mM DTT,    [20-3H]taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-yl acetate (for THY10b)
200 mM NADPH, 2.5 mM FMN, 2.5 mM FAD, 5% (v/v)    and 50 mM  (  )-[20-3H]taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-ol (for
glycerol and a regenerating system (2 mM glucose 6-    THY13a). The products of the respective THY10b and
phosphate and 2 IU glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase).   THY13a reactions (taxadien-5a-acetoxy-10b-ol and taxa-
The reaction was initiated by the addition of 50 mM (  )-    dien-5a,13a-diol) were separated, quantiﬁed, and veriﬁed by
[20-3H]taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene in DMSO, the mixture was    radio-HPLC and GC-MS procedures as before.
incubated in air for 1 h at 328C in the dark, and the assay was     The assays for the taxoid acyl/aroyl transferases were
terminated by saturation with NaCl and extraction with 2 mL    based on a standard procedure for this enzyme type (Chau
hexane:ethyl acetate (4:1), v/v). An aliquot of the organic     et al., 2004) in which an aliquot of the soluble protein fraction



216       BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOENGINEERING, VOL. 93, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 5, 2006


[PDF physical page 6]
(100 mg protein) was diluted into 1 mL of 50 mM Mopso    and concentrated, and the concentrate was diluted with brine
buffer, pH 7.5, containing 3 mM DTT and 5 mM NaCl. The    as before but, in this case, was extracted with hexane. The
reaction was initiated by the addition of 100 mM of each co-    hexane extract was concentrated and subjected to GC-MS
substrate (only the CoA ester was labeled), incubated for 1 h    analysis using a method designed to separate terpenols and
at 318C, and terminated by saturation with NaCl and extra-     lightly functionalized taxoids. A Hewlett-Packard 6890 GC-
ction with 2 mL diethyl ether with centrifugation to separate   MSD system was employed using a ZB-5 capillary column
phases; an aliquot of the ether phase was then counted by    [Phenomenex (Torrance, CA); 30 m length; 0.25 mm inner
liquid scintillation spectrometry.                              diameter; coated with a 0.25 mm ﬁlm of phenyl (5%)
  For taxadienol 5a-O-acetyl transferase (TAT, see Fig. 2),    polysiloxane]. Cool on-column injection was used, with He
the co-substrates were (  )-taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-ol and   ﬂow rate of 0.7 mL/min and a temperature program from 40
[2-3H]acetyl CoA, and the product taxadien-5a-yl acetate     to 3208C at 208C/min. Spectra were recorded at 70 eV.
was quantiﬁed by radio-TLC and veriﬁed by GC-MS using    Product identities were conﬁrmed by comparison of retention
previously described protocols (Walker et al., 2000). For the    times and mass spectra to those of the authentic standards.
taxoid (10-deacetyl baccatin III) 10b-O-acetyl transferase
(DBAT, see Fig. 1 for the structure of baccatin III), the co-
                                        RESULTS
substrates were 10-deacetyl baccatin III and [2-3H]acetyl
CoA, and the product baccatin III was quantiﬁed by radio-
                                                 General Strategy
HPLC and veriﬁed by LC-MS using previously described
protocols (Walker and Croteau, 2000a). For the taxoid 2a-O-   The pathway to the Taxol intermediate baccatin III in Taxus
benzoyl transferase (TBT, see Fig. 1 for the structure of    species requires 15 biosynthetic steps from primary meta-
baccatin III), the co-substrates were [7-14C]benzoyl CoA and    bolism (Jennewein et al., 2004b) (Fig. 1) and, at the time of
the surrogate 2-debenzoyl-7,13-diacetyl baccatin III, and the     this project, eight genes encoding enzymes of this pathway
product 7,13-diacetyl baccatin III was quantiﬁed by radio-    had been isolated and the individual recombinant proteins
HPLC and veriﬁed by LC-MS using previously described    heterologously expressed and characterized. These genes
procedures (Walker and Croteau, 2000b).                     included those for GGPPS (Hefner et al., 1998), taxadiene
  All enzyme assays were run in triplicate and the averages    synthase (Wildung and Croteau, 1996), the cytochrome P450
are reported; standard errors were within 10% of the mean in    taxoid 5a-, 10b-, and 13a-hydroxylases (Jennewein et al.,
all cases. Transferase assays were carried out with crude    2001, 2004a; Schoendorf  et  al., 2001), the acyl Co-A-
soluble protein extracts in which host derived O- and S-    dependent taxoid 5-O- and 10-O-acetyl transferases (Walker
esterases may have contributed to (uncompensated) substrate    and Croteau, 2000a; Walker et al., 2000) and the 2-O-benzoyl
and product losses. Because of this potential interference, the     transferase (Walker and Croteau, 2000b).
transferase activity levels should be regarded as minimums.      Although the exact order of transformations beyond that
                                                             leading to taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-ol (Fig. 2) was not
                                                    known, and although genes encoding several biosynthetic
Metabolite Analysis
                                                                 steps were  still missing, we considered  it informative to
For the radio-labeling method, transformed YPH499 cells     install all eight available genes in yeast, thereby permitting
from 100 mL of culture medium were collected at 12 or 24 h    the expression and evaluation of four distinct enzyme types
post-induction, resuspended in 5 mL fresh SG-URA medium      (i.e., a prenyltransferase, diterpene cyclase, cytochrome
containing 30 mM (  )-[2-14C]mevalonolactone, and incu-    P450 oxygenase, and acyl  transferase)  in the intended
bated for 2 h at 308C with gentle shaking. The cells were then    production host. It was also deemed useful to attempt the
collected by centrifugation, washed with cold brine and then    reconstruction in the yeast host of a short, ﬁve step pathway
extracted with 10 mL of methanolic 5% (v/v) HCl using an    leading to taxadien-5a-acetoxy-10b-ol (Fig. 2). Substrate
ice-chilled Ten-Broeck homogenizer. The resulting extract     selectivity and kinetic studies with the relevant tagged and
(containing derived taxoids and the solvolysis products    non-tagged recombinant enzymes (Schoendorf et al., 2001;
of terpenoid  allylic diphosphate  esters) was cleared by    Walker et al., 2000), as well as cell-free studies with the
centrifugation, neutralized with NaOH, and concentrated    native enzymes from Taxus (Hefner et  al., 1996; Lovy
under vacuum. The concentrate was then diluted with brine    Wheeler et al., 2001; Walker et al., 1999), have demonstrated
and extracted with diethyl ether, and the ether extract was    the feasibility of this pathway reconstruction, although the
concentrated and subjected to radio-HPLC analysis using    relevance of taxadien-5a-acetoxy-10b-ol as an intermediate
procedures  designed  to  separate  terpenols and  lightly     in Taxol biosynthesis has not yet been conﬁrmed.
functionalized taxoids (Lovy Wheeler et al., 2001).            To this end, each gene was modiﬁed as necessary for
  In an alternate, higher resolution method for product    expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and each recombi-
analysis, transformed YPH499 cells from 700 mL of culture    nant protein was epitope tagged (without catalytic inﬂuence)
medium were collected by centrifugation at 8.5 h (A600 0.33),     to allow convenient monitoring by immunoblotting (Table I),
24 h (A600 0.92), and 65 h (A600 > 2.0) post-induction, and    which, along with enzyme activity assay and metabolite
were washed and extracted with methanolic HCl as before.     analysis, would permit evaluation of the successful installa-
The extract was again cleared by centrifugation, neutralized     tion of each target gene as well as of the overall feasibility of



                                    DEJONG ET AL.: ENGINEERING TAXOL BIOSYNTHESIS IN YEAST        217


[PDF physical page 7]
this approach for transferring taxoid biosynthetic capability
to the yeast host.


Expression of GGPPS and Taxadiene Synthase

GGPPS catalyzes the condensation of three isopentenyl
diphosphate (IPP)  units with  dimethylallyl diphosphate
(DMAPP), via the C10 and C15 intermediates, to yield the
universal, acyclic C20 precursor of the diterpenoids, which
is cyclized, in the committed step of taxoid biosynthesis,
to taxadien-4(5),11(12)-diene by taxadiene synthase (TS)
(Hefner et al., 1998; Hezari et al., 1995; Koepp et al., 1995).
Because the endogenous level of GGPPS in the yeast host
was expected to be low, genes for both Taxus GGPPS and TS
were installed to promote efﬁcient production of the cyclic
oleﬁn precursor which is a slow step of the pathway in Taxus
(Hezari et al., 1997). cDNAs encoding Taxus GGPPS (Hefner
et al., 1998) and TS (Wildung and Croteau, 1996) specify
preproteins bearing transit peptides that direct these enzymes
to plastids for import and processing. For expression in yeast,
the corresponding cDNAs were appropriately truncated and a
new ATG start site installed (M98 for GGPPS and M60 for
TS) to approximate translation of the mature (homodimeric)
enzymes; these ‘‘pseudomature’’ forms of GGPPS and TS
have been successfully expressed in Escherichia coli (Burke
and Croteau, 2002; Hefner et  al., 1998; Williams et  al.,
2000).
  The modiﬁed cDNAs for these two enzymes were then
transferred individually to pYES2NTA, under control of
GAL1/GAL10 promoters, to produce fusion proteins bearing
N-terminal Xpress epitope tags [the subunit size difference
(  36 kDa for GGPPS,   86 kDa for TS) permits ready
distinction by  immunoblotting],  and  yeast  cells were
individually transformed or cotransformed with the resulting
pYES-GGPPS and pYES-TS plasmids. Both Taxus GGPPS
and Taxus TS enzymes were readily detected in crude
extracts of the relevant transformed host by immunoblotting
as early as 4 h after inducing expression with galactose, and
expression levels remained high for at least 24 h post-
induction (Fig. 3A). No cross-reacting species were observed
in yeast cells transformed with empty vector and identically     Figure 3.  Immunoblotting and activity assays demonstrate the coex-
treated, or in cells transformed with both productive vectors     pression of GGPPS and TS inyeast. YPH499 cells harboring pYES-GGPPS
at time zero (i.e., pre-induction).                                 and pYES-TS (or empty vector control pYES2-NTA) were grown in SD-
                                                                                   uracil medium and harvested at the indicated times post-induction. Each
  Soluble protein extracts of these same cells (cotrans-
                                                                            lane in the immunoblot (A) contained 10 mg soluble protein which was
formed and control cells) were also assayed for GGPPS and     detected with anti-Xpress monoclonal antibody. The assays for GGPPS
TS  activities using established  bioanalytical procedures      activity (B) and the coupled activity for TS in the presence of GGPPS (C)
(Hefner et al., 1998; Williams et al., 2000). GGPPS activity     are described in the Materials and Methods. The open symbols in each
in cotransformed cells was easily measurable throughout the     panel represent the activity levels of the corresponding empty vector
                                                                                  controls.
24 h time-course, and, as anticipated, endogenous GGPPS
activity was relatively low in control yeast cells (Fig. 3B;
about 17% of their transformed counterparts at the 10 h
maximum). The activity proﬁle for TS was virtually identical    the corresponding GGPPS assay (Fig. 3C). This result (i.e.,
to that of GGPPS (but the total activity levels were estimated     that the product of GGPPS was efﬁciently utilized by TS)
at 10-fold less), and TS activity was not detectable in extracts    indicated that these two enzymatic steps can be operationally
of control cells (data not shown). Notably, TS activity was    linked in vitro, and led to the use of a dual GGPPS-TS co-
also observed in extracts of cotransformed cells (but not    expression vector to later demonstrate successful operational
control cells) at a level approximately 7% of that observed in    coupling in vivo (see below).



218       BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOENGINEERING, VOL. 93, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 5, 2006


[PDF physical page 8]
Expression of Three Cytochrome
P450 Taxoid Hydroxylases

Of  the 15  biosynthetic  steps required  for baccatin  III
formation, eight are presumed to be catalyzed by cytochrome
P450 oxygenases (Jennewein et al., 2004b). cDNAs encoding
three cytochrome P450 taxoid hydroxylases, which comprise
early steps in the biosynthesis of baccatin III, Taxol, and
related taxanes, have been isolated from Taxus species,
functionally  expressed  and  characterized.  These  are
the taxadiene 5a-hydroxylase (Jennewein et  al., 2004a),
the  taxoid 10b-hydroxylase (Schoendorf  et  al.,  2001),
and the taxoid 13a-hydroxylase (Jennewein et al., 2001)
which mediate the regio- and stereoselective insertion of
hydroxyl groups at the indicated positions on the taxadiene
core (see Fig. 1). The corresponding cDNAs were transferred
individually into yeast expression vectors for production as
C-terminal fusions bearing different epitope tags (Table I) to
permit distinction upon immunoblotting of these enzymes of
nearly identical size (  50 kDa). The gene for the cytochrome
P450 taxoid 5a-hydroxylase (seemingly the most active
hydroxylase in planta) was placed under control of the
constitutive GPD promoter and translated with a C-terminal
HA tag, whereas that for the 13a-hydroxylase was driven
by the inducible GAL1 promoter and translated with a C-
terminal VSVG tag. The gene for the taxoid-10b-hydro-
xylase, which  is  the most  robust  of  the  three upon
heterologous expression (Jennewein et al., 2005; Schoendorf
et al., 2001), was prepared as a C-terminal fusion with the
FLAG epitope and driven by the GAL10 promoter for co-     Figure 4.  Immunoblotting demonstrates expression and  localization
expression in the same vector with the taxadienol 5a-O-     of three cytochrome P450 taxoid hydroxylases in yeast. For the 10b-
acetyl transferase (see below) under control of the GAL1     hydroxylase (THY10b panel  A), which was coexpressed with  the
                                                                            taxadienol acetyl transferase (TAT), YPH499 cells harboring pESCW-
promoter and translated with appended C-terminal c-Myc                                                         TAT-THY10b or the empty vector control pESC-TRP (pESCW) were
epitope (Table I).                                              grown in SD/SG-Tryptophan medium and harvested at the indicated times
  Following transfer to the yeast host, and induction as     post-induction. Each lane of the immunoblot time course (A, lanes 1–10)
appropriate,  expression  of  the  three  hydroxylases was     contained 10 mg of the corresponding crude protein extract which was
monitored by immunoblotting of crude extracts over a 24–     detected with anti-FLAG monoclonal antibody. At the 24 h time point, the
                                                                       crude extract was subjected to ultracentrifugation and the corresponding
30 h time course. Each hydroxylase was readily detected by                                                                             soluble protein fractions  (sol, lanes 11 and 13, 10 mg protein) and
immunoblotting, with protein levels for the 10b-hydroxylase     microsomal fractions (ms, lanes 12 and 14, 10 mg protein) were identically
and 13a-hydroxylase increasing steadily throughout the time     analyzed. For the 13a-hydroxylase (THY13a, panel B), YPH499 cells
course (Fig. 4A and B) whereas that for the taxoid 5a-     harboring pESCH-THY13a  or  the empty  vector  control pESC-HIS
hydroxylase (under control of the constitutive GPD promo-    (pESCH) were grown in SD/SG-Histidine medium and harvested at the
                                                                             indicated times post-induction (note the inverted time axis). Each lane of
ter) peaked at 8 h and declined at 24 h in this case (Fig. 4C). A                                                                              the immunoblot time course (B, lanes 1–6) contained 25 mg of the
rationale for this 5a-hydroxylase expression pattern is not     corresponding crude protein extract which was detected with anti-VSVG
obvious as a more extended time course was observed in     monoclonal antibody. At the 24 h time point, the crude extract was
subsequent coexpression studies (see below). No cross-     subjected to ultracentrifugation and the corresponding soluble protein
reacting species were observed in control cells expressing the      fractions (sol, lanes 7 and 9, 10 mg protein) and microsomal fractions
                                                                        (ms, lanes 8 and 10, 7 mg protein) were identically analyzed. For the
corresponding empty vector, and fractionation of extracts                                                                       5a-hydroxylase (THY5a, panel C), YPH499 cells harboring p425GPD-
from the productive cells showed each hydroxylase to reside    THY5a or the empty vector control p425GPD were grown in SD-Leucine
exclusively in the microsomal fraction (consistent with    medium and harvested at the indicated times. Each lane of the immunoblot
targeting by the N-terminal membrane insertion sequence)     time course (C, lanes 1–6) contained 15 mg of the corresponding crude
and to be completely absent from the soluble protein fraction     protein extract which was detected with anti-HA monoclonal antibody. At
                                                                             the 24 h time point, the crude extract was subjected to ultracentrifugation
as anticipated (Fig. 4).                                                                  and the corresponding soluble protein fractions (sol, lanes 7 and 9, 15 mg
  Assay of the microsomes (at maximum protein production      protein) and microsomal fractions (ms, lanes 8 and 10, 15 mg protein) were
level by immunoblotting)  for  the  relevant hydroxylase      identically analyzed.
activity, using the appropriate labeled substrate and estab-
lished procedures for radio-HPLC monitoring of product



                                    DEJONG ET AL.: ENGINEERING TAXOL BIOSYNTHESIS IN YEAST        219


[PDF physical page 9]
formation, afforded easily measurable levels of the 13a-    reduce expression compared to non-tagged forms; data not
hydroxylase  (5.3 nmol/h/mg microsomal  protein), 10b-    shown). As indicated above,  the taxadienol 5-O-acetyl
hydroxylase  (1.6 nmol/h/mg microsomal  protein), and     transferase (under control of the GAL1 promoter and tagged
5a-hydroxylase (0.4 nmol/h/mg microsomal protein); no    with the c-Myc epitope) was prepared to co-express with the
activity (<0.01 nmol/h/mg microsomal protein in all cases)    taxoid 10b-hydroxylase.
was detected in microsomes prepared from the respective      Following  transfer  to  the  yeast  host and  induction,
control cells (expressing the corresponding empty vector).      expression of the three transferases was monitored by im-
  From  these  results,  it was concluded  that  all  three    munoblotting of crude extracts over a 24 h time course. Each
hydroxylases could be functionally expressed in yeast as     transferase was readily detected by immunoblotting over the
various epitope-tagged fusions (previous work had employed    time course (Fig. 5A–C), and no cross-reacting species were
only C-terminal poly-His tagging (Jennewein et al., 2001,    observed in control cells expressing the corresponding empty
2003, 2004a; Schoendorf et al., 2001)) butat levels somewhat    vector or in productive cells before induction (see, for
lower than those observed in previous studies (i.e., activity    example, Fig. 5A). Co-expression of the 10-O-acetyl trans-
levels of about 20 nmol/h/mg microsomal protein have     ferase with the 2-O-benzoyl transferase gave results very
been previously noted for the 10b- and 13a-hydroxylases     similar to those observed when each transferase was expres-
(Jennewein et al., 2005)). The mechanistically unusual 5a-    sed alone (Fig. 5B and C).
hydroxylase has proved to be the most difﬁcult to express
efﬁciently in heterologous systems, (Jennewein et al., 2004a)
and, in the present case, the 10b-hydroxylase was co-
expressed with the 5-O-acetyl transferase, a procedure which
did reduce measured activity somewhat because subsequent
expression of the 10b-hydroxylase alone showed an increase
in recombinant enzyme activity of the derived microsomes to
4.8 nmol/h/mg protein. Also, in the present instance, we
relied upon the endogenous yeast NADPH:cytochrome P450
reductase for electron transfer to these cytochrome P450s. In
previous studies with enhanced heterologous hosts, in which
a reductase from Arabidopsis (Pompon et al., 1996) or Taxus
(Jennewein et al., 2001, 2004a) was coexpressed to improve
the efﬁciency of electron coupling, activity levels, at least for
the 10b-hydroxylase (Jennewein et al., 2005), were substan-
tially higher (i.e., >150 nmol/h/mg protein).


Expression of Three Acyl/Aroyl
CoA-Dependent Transferases

Two acetyl transfers (to the 5-O- and 10-O-positions of the
taxane core) and one benzoyl transfer (to the 2-O-position)
are required to reach baccatin III (Jennewein et al., 2004b).
cDNAs encoding the relevant CoA-dependent taxoid 5a-O-
acetyl transferase (Walker et al., 2000), taxoid 10b-O-acetyl
transferase (Walker and Croteau, 2000a) and taxoid 2a-O-
benzoyl transferase (Walker and Croteau, 2000b) have been
isolated, and the full-length, unmodiﬁed forms have been     Figure 5.  Immunoblotting demonstrates expression of three taxoid acyl/
                                                                              aroyl transferases in yeast. For the taxadienol 5a-O-acetyl transferase (TAT,
functionally expressed in E.  coli and the operationally                                                                     panel A), which was coexpressed with  the  taxoid 10b-hydroxylase
soluble recombinant enzymes have been characterized.         (THY10b), YPH499 cells harboring pESCW-TAT-THY10b or the empty
  For the present purpose, the corresponding full-length     vector control pESC-TRP (pESCW) were grown in the appropriate medium
cDNAs were transferred individually into yeast expression     and harvested at the indicated times post-induction. Each lane of the
vectors for translation as C- or N-terminal fusion proteins     immunoblot time course (A, lanes 1–4 and 6–10) contained 10 mg of the
                                                                         corresponding soluble protein extract which was detected with anti-c-Myc
bearing different epitopes (Table I) to permit distinction upon                                                                    monoclonal antibody. For the taxoid 2a-O-benzoyl transferase (TBT, panels
immunoblotting of these enzymes of nearly identical size   B and C) and taxoid 10b-O-acetyl transferase (DBAT, panels B and C),
(  50 kDa). The 2-O-benzoyl transferase was placed under    YPH499 cells harboring pESCL-TBTor the empty vector control (see pESC,
control of the GAL1 promoter and translated with an N-     panel A), pYES-DBAT or the empty vector control pYES2NTA, or both
terminal c-Myc tag, whereas the 10-O-acetyl transferase was     vectors for coexpression were grown in the appropriate medium and
                                                                            harvested at the indicated times post-induction. Each lane of the immunoblot
placed under control of the GAL10 promoter and translated                                                                        time courses (B and C, lanes 1–6) contained 10 mg of the corresponding
with an N-terminal Xpress tag (C-terminal tagging of these     soluble protein extract which was detected with anti-c-Myc monoclonal
transferases with the same epitopes appeared to substantially     antibody (for TBT) and anti-Xpress monoclonal antibody (for DBAT).



220       BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOENGINEERING, VOL. 93, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 5, 2006


[PDF physical page 10]
  Assay of soluble enzyme preparations from each strain of
transformed yeast (at the 24 h post-induction period) for the
relevant transferase, using the appropriate labeled substrate
or surrogate substrate and established procedures for radio-
HPLC monitoring of product formation, afforded readily
measurable levels of activity for the taxadienol 5a-O-acetyl
transferase (47 nmol/h/mg soluble protein), 10-deacetyl-
baccatin  III  10b-O-acetyl  transferase  (53  nmol/h/mg
soluble  protein), and  taxoid 2a-O-benzoyl  transferase
(75 nmol/h/mg soluble protein); activity in soluble enzyme
preparations from the respective control cells (expressing
the corresponding empty vector) was negligible in all cases
(<0.5 nmol/h/mg soluble protein). From these preliminary
results, it was concluded that all three transferases could be
functionally expressed in yeast as epitope tagged forms,
and that activity levels measured in vitro were roughly
comparable to those determined previously when these
non-tagged Taxus enzymes were heterologously expressed
in E. coli (Walker and Croteau, 2000a,b; Walker et al.,     Figure 6.  Immunoblotting demonstrates expression of ﬁve enzymes for
2000).                                                                       the biosynthesis of taxadien-5a-acetoxy-10b-ol in yeast. YPH499 cells
                                                                  were co-transformed with pESCU-GGPPS-TS, pESCW-TAT-THY10b and
                                                            p425GPD-THY5a, selected on SD-Ura-Trp-Leu medium, induced in SG-
Expression of Five Early Pathway Steps                  Ura-Trp-Leu medium, and harvested at the indicated times post-induction.
                                                                Each  lane  of  the immunoblot time course contained 20 mg  of  the
In a preliminary effort to reconstruct taxoid biosynthesis     corresponding crude protein extract which was detected with anti-FLAG
in S. cerevisiae, cDNAs encoding ﬁve early pathway steps     monoclonal antibody  (for TS and THY10b), anti-c-Myc monoclonal
                                                                          antibody (for GGPPS and TAT), and anti-HA (for THY5a). The X-ray ﬁlms
leading from basic isoprenoid precursors (IPP and DMAPP)                                                                  were exposed for 1.5 min (top two panels) or for 5 min (bottom panel).
to taxadien-5a-acetoxy-10b-ol (Fig. 2) were installed for
co-expression in a single yeast stain. Thus, yeast cells were
initially transformed with three plasmids, pESCU-GGPPS-     To assess function of the reconstructed pathway, the
TS containing the requisite prenyltransferase and terpene    engineered yeast cells were ﬁrst administered [2-14C]meva-
cyclase, pESCW-TAT-THY10b containing the taxadienol     lonic acid for various times, thus relying on the endogenous
5a-O-acetyl transferase and cytochrome P450 taxoid 10b-    pathway for conversion to the IPP and DMAPP co-substrates
hydroxylase, and p425GPD-THY5a containing the cyto-     for GGPPS, and the resulting lipids were isolated for radio-
chrome P450 taxadiene 5a-hydroxylase. Except for the   HPLC analysis. Radio-labeled taxadiene was readily detec-
5a-hydroxylase, which was controlled by the constitutive    ted by this method, indicating that the mevalonate pathway
GPD promoter, the other four genes were driven by the in-   was operable and that GGPPS and TS were functionally
ducible GAL1/GAL10 promoters. Each expression vector    coupled in the yeast host. However, the conversion of
incorporated a different selection marker, and each recombi-    [2-14C]mevalonate to large amounts of steroidal compounds
nant protein bore a different epitope tag (Table I) to permit     in the host obscured the radio-chromatographic separation of
selective observation by SDS–PAGE based on the combina-    oxygenated taxoids.
tion of protein size and speciﬁc antibody recognition.             In  a  second,  higher  resolution GC-based  analytical
  Following induction, all ﬁve recombinant proteins were    approach, engineered cells were grown in either rich YPG
observed by immunoblotting with a  distinct production    or selective SG-URA media for up to 65 h post induction
maximum  at about 24  h, even  for  the taxadiene 5a-   (maximum product accumulation), and the cells were homo-
hydroxylase under control of the constitutive GPD promoter    genized in dilute acid to convert residual GGPP to a mixture
(Fig. 6). None of the recombinant enzymes was detectable    of geranylgeraniol and the rearranged product geranyllina-
at the pre-induction time point, and the apparent levels of     lool prior to lipid extraction and capillary GC-MS analysis
GGPPS, TS, the 5-O-acetyl transferase and 10b-hydroxylase     (Fig. 7). Taxadiene was again readily measurable, with
were higher than that of the 5a-hydroxylase throughout the    production levels of 0.7 mg/L in YPG media and 1.0 mg/L in
time course. To address this issue, the 5a-hydroxylase was     selective media (equivalent to roughly 0.5 mg taxadiene/g
placed under control of the inducible GAL1 promoter and the    dry wt cells by calibration with the authentic standard, and
induced expression of all ﬁve genes was again analyzed,    conﬁrmation by retention time coincidence and mass spectral
yielding a very similar time course proﬁle but with the level     identity), as were the products of GGPP solvolysis (produced
of the 5a-hydroxylase (at 24 h) approximately ﬁvefold higher     at levels roughly comparable to that of taxadiene, and
than previously observed under control of the GPD promoter    conﬁrmed by similar comparison to authentic standards).
(determined by comparative immunoblotting; results not    Taxadien-5a-ol (eluting at 12.68 min in Fig. 7) was produced
shown).                                                          in very small amounts (  25 mg/L), taxadien-5a-yl acetate



                                    DEJONG ET AL.: ENGINEERING TAXOL BIOSYNTHESIS IN YEAST        221


[PDF physical page 11]
                                                                  in vivo. This  result  indicates  that these two normally
                                                                      plastidial enzymes could be engineered to function in concert
                                                              as cytosolic catalysts in yeast, and that host precursor supply
                                                              of the isoprenoid precursors IPP and DMAPP was sufﬁcient
                                                         under these circumstances to support at least milligram
                                                           production levels of taxadiene without seriously compromis-
                                                            ing host growth or metabolism. Such production levels are
                                                               nevertheless substantially lower than the levels of taxoid
                                                           production in Taxus cell cultures (Ketchum and Gibson,
                                                         1996; Ketchum et al., 1999) butcomparable to the production
                                                              of the taxadiene precursor in engineered E. coli (Huang et al.,
                                                            2001). The production of roughly equivalent levels of GGPP
                                                                  (as evidenced by measurement of the solvolysis products
                                                             geranylgeraniol and geranyllinalool; see Fig. 7) also sug-
                                                            gested that the activity of GGPPS was not rate limiting under
                                                               these conditions, consistent with the relative rates of GGPPS
Figure 7.  Capillary GC-MS analysis of the lipid products generated by    versus TS estimated from in vitro measurement  (i.e., a
yeast cells harboring the three plasmids described in Figure 6 (for expression    roughly 10-fold difference).
of GGPPS, TS, THY5a, TAT, and THY10b)  at 65 h post-induction
                                                    The failure to detect but trace levels of taxadien-5a-ol in
(maximum product accumulation). Taxadiene and the solvolysis products
of GGPP (geranyllinalool and geranylgeraniol) are indicated. The large    the engineered host indicated that the reconstructed pathway
peaks eluting between 12.3 and 16.6 min are steroidal compounds that are   was restricted at the GPD-driven 5a-hydroxylation step. The
also produced by the wildtype yeast host; low levels of the solvolysis     in vitro studies, which likely represent a signiﬁcant under-
products of GGPP were also observed in these control cells but, as expected,    estimate of cytochrome P450 catalytic capability in vivo,
notaxoidsweredetected.Forconditionsofthe analysis,seethe Materialsand
                                                   showed that all three of the taxoid hydroxylase were properly
Methods.
                                                                targeted  to  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  (as  evidenced
                                                    by exclusive localization to microsomes) but that the 5a-
could not be measured because of the large amount of    hydroxylase afforded the lowest level of expressed speciﬁc
obscuringendogenous materialseluting inthe12.3–12.6min     activity. At the time that the present work was undertaken, we
range, and taxadien-5a-acetoxy-10b-ol (eluting shortly after    did not fully appreciate the low levels of functionally active
geranylgeraniol) could not be detected. None of the taxoid    5a-hydroxylase expressed in yeast or Spodoptera compared
products was  observed  in  untransformed  control  cells     to those of other cytochrome P450 taxoid hydroxylases
identically grown and analyzed. These results suggest that,    (Jennewein et al., 2004a). Although virtually all naturally
while the ﬁrst two pathway steps (GGPPS and TS) were    occurring taxoids are oxygenated at C5, suggesting adequate
reasonably well coupled to each other and to host precursor   ﬂux through this step in planta (Ketchum et  al., 1999),
supply, a ﬂux restriction was encountered at the 5a-hydro-    previous in vivo studies and in vitro studies with the native
xylase because of the limited expressed activity of this   enzyme had indicated that the taxadiene 5a-hydroxylase
cytochrome P450 under control of the constitutive GPD    conducts a relatively slow step of Taxol biosynthesis (Hefner
promoter.                                                            et  al., 1996; Lovy Wheeler et  al., 2001). Taxadiene 5a-
                                                          hydroxylase mediates a very unusual (but not unprecedented
                                                            (Groves, 2005; Groves and Subramanian, 1984)) cytochrome
DISCUSSION
                                                  P450 reaction (Fig. 2) involving an allylic transposition in
In this study, we describe the functional expression of eight    which a hydrogen radical is removed from a methyl carbon
genes of Taxol biosynthesis (for four distinct enzyme types)    (C20), the double bond migrates, and oxygen is delivered to
in a yeast host. For many of these genes (taxadiene synthase    the new allyllic position now two carbons distant from the
and the three transferases), this is the ﬁrst report of hetero-     initial abstraction site (C5). It is possible that a low turnover
logous expression in yeast, and, for the others, the ﬁrst report    number is an inherent feature of this novel oxygenase type
of functional expression of a range of fusions with several    and is compensated for in planta by a relatively high level of
different epitope tags to permit ready protein surveillance.    expression (Jennewein et al., 2004b). It was also not fully
These results encouraged an attempt to reconstruct a ﬁve-step    appreciated at the time that this work was conducted that the
linear pathwayfor taxoid metabolism leading to taxadien-5a-     reliance on endogenous host NADPH:cytochrome P450
acetoxy-10b-ol (Fig. 2) that would, nevertheless, rely on the    reductase for coupling electron ﬂow to the cytochrome could
yeast host for supply of basic isoprenoid precursors (for    have very serious kinetic consequences. Thus, it has recently
function of GGPPS and TS), NADPH and cytochrome P450    been shown that, for the 10b-hydroxylase, co-overexpression
reductase (for the two hydroxylases), and acetyl CoA (for the    of  the homologous Taxus cytochrome P450  reductase
transferase). The ﬁrst two steps of the reconstructed pathway    increases hydroxylase activity six-fold over that supported
(GGPPS and TS) could be successfully coupled in yeast, as    by the endogenous yeast reductase alone (Jennewein et al.,
evidenced by the production of mg/L levels of taxadiene    2005). Thus, it can be suggested that, in addition to driving



222       BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOENGINEERING, VOL. 93, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 5, 2006


[PDF physical page 12]
the 5a-hydroxylase gene with the strongest available pro-    Chau M, Walker K, Long RM, Croteau R. 2004. Regioselectivity of taxoid-
moter, this hydroxylase should be co-expressed with the          O-acetyltransferases: Heterologous expression and characterization of a
homologous reductase, even at the cost of incorporating this       new taxadien-5a-O-acetyltransferase. Arch Biochem Biophys 430:
                                                                      237–246.
additional gene into what is already a substantial multi-gene                                                                  Cragg GM, Schepartz SA, Suffness M, Grever MR. 1993. The Taxol supply
transformation. For this purpose, we have very recently used            crisis. New NCI policies for handling the large-scale production of novel
a PCR-directed integration method to introduce the Taxus          natural product anticancer and anti-HIV agents. J Nat Prod 56:1657–
cytochrome P450 reductase gene into the HIS3 site of S.         1668.
cerevisiae. Preliminary estimates indicate that the combina-    Croom EM, Jr. 1995. Taxus for taxol and taxoids. In: Suffness M, editor.
                                                                                Taxol: Science and applications. Boca Raton, FL: CRC. pp 37–70.
tion of the Taxus reductase with THY5a under GAL1 control                                                                    Duport C, Spagnoli R, Degryse E, Pompon D. 1998. Self-sufﬁcient
will permit at least ten-fold increase in ﬂux through the 5a-          biosynthesis of pregnenolone and progesterone in engineered yeast.
hydroxylation step.                                                  Nat Biotechol 16:186–189.
  Because  of  the  very  limited ﬂux  through  the  5a-     Goldspiel BR. 1997. Clinical overview of the taxanes. Pharmacotherapy
hydroxylation step, and the interference by endogenous        17:1105–1255.
                                                                   Groves JT. 2005. Models and mechanisms of cytochrome P450 action. In:
metabolitesin the present analysis (Fig. 7), it was not possible                                                                                   Ortiz de Montellano PR, editor. Cytochrome P450: Structure, mechan-
to assess the function of the 5a-O-acetyl transferase in vivo.         ism, and biochemistry, 3rd edn. New York, NY: Kluwer Academic/
However, the observation that the in vitro rate measured for        Plenum. pp 1–43.
this recombinant enzyme was higher than for any other step     Groves JT, Subramanian DV. 1984. Hydroxylation by cytochrome P-450 and
of the reconstructed pathway suggests that this reaction         metalloporphyrin models. Evidence for allylic rearrangement. J Am
                                                         Chem Soc 106:2177–2181.
would be productive in vivo in the presence of the taxoid                                                                      Hefner  J, Rubenstein SM, Ketchum REB, Gibson DM, Williams RM,
substrate and sufﬁcient acetyl CoA from the host. Although it         Croteau R. 1996. Cytochrome P450-catalyzed hydroxylation of taxa-
was not possible in this initial attempt to reconstruct the          4(5),11(12)-diene to taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-ol: The ﬁrst oxygena-
entire target pathway in yeast, the successful coupling of the          tion step in Taxol biosynthesis. Chem Biol 3:479–489.
ﬁrst two steps (GGPPS and TS), the demonstrated functional     Hefner  J, Ketchum REB, Croteau R. 1998. Cloning and  functional
                                                                                expression of a cDNA encoding geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase
expression of eight taxoid biosynthetic genes  (for four                                                                      from Taxus canadensis and assessment of the role of this prenyltransfer-
different enzyme types) by in vitro assay, and the diagnosing         ase in cells induced for Taxol production. Arch Biochem Biophys
of means by which ﬂux through the restricted hydroxylation         360:62–74.
step may be improved, do provide a sound foundation for     Hezari M, Lewis NG, Croteau R. 1995. Puriﬁcation and characterization of
further attempts to engineer baccatin biosynthesis in yeast.          taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene synthase from Paciﬁcyew (Taxus brevifolia) that
                                                                                   catalyzes the ﬁrst committed step of Taxol biosynthesis. Arch Biochem
Although production levels of the oleﬁn precursor were not                                                                       Biophys 322:437–444.
quite as high as those observed previously in engineered E.     Hezari M, Ketchum REB, Gibson DM, Croteau R. 1997. Taxol production
coli (Huang et al., 2001), it is notable that the present attempt        and taxadiene synthase activity in Taxus canadensis cell suspension
has yielded substantially higher levels of taxadiene produc-           cultures. Arch Biochem Biophys 337:185–190.
tion in yeast (by about 100-fold) than those recently observed    Huang Q, Roessner CA, Croteau R, Scott AI. 2001. Engineering Escherichia
                                                                                          coli for the synthesis of taxadiene, a key intermediate in the biosynthesis
by engineering the TS gene in Arabidopsis (Besumbes                                                                                  of Taxol. Bioorg Med Chem 9:2237–2242.
et al., 2004), a result that also bodes well for the ultimate      Innis MA, Gelfand DH, Sninsky JJ, White TJ. 1990. PCR protocols: A guide
production of more advanced taxoids in  this microbial          to methods and applications. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. pp 3–12,
host.                                                                 253–258.
                                                                       Jackson BE, Hart-Wells EA, Matsuda SP. 2003. Metabolic engineering to
                                                                          produce sesquiterpenes in yeast. Org Lett 5:1629–1632.
                                                                     Jennewein S, Croteau R. 2001. Taxol: Biosynthesis, molecular genetics and
  We thank Jamie Johnson and Shan Sivakumaran  for technical            biotechnological applications. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 57:13–19.
   assistance.                                                          Jennewein  S,  Rithner CD,  Williams RM,  Croteau  R.  2001.  Taxol
                                                                                     biosynthesis: Taxane 13a-hydroxylase is a cytochrome P450-dependent
                                                                       monooxygenase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:13595–13600.
                                                                     Jennewein  S, Rithner CD, Williams RM, Croteau R. 2003. Taxoid
                                                                           metabolism: Taxoid 14b-hydroxylase is a cytochrome P450-dependent
References                                                        monooxygenase. Arch Biochem Biophys 413:262–270.
                                                                     Jennewein S, Long RM, Williams RM, Croteau R. 2004a. Cytochrome P450
Besumbes O,  Sauret-Gu¨eto  S,  Phillips MA,  Imperial  S,  Rodı´guez-         taxadiene 5a-hydroxylase, a mechanistically unusual monooxygenase
    Concepcio´n M, Boronat A. 2004. Metabolic engineering of isoprenoid          catalyzing the ﬁrst oxygenation step of Taxol biosynthesis. Chem Biol
    biosynthesis in Arabidopsis for the production of taxadiene, the ﬁrst        11:379–387.
   commited precursor of Taxol. Biotechnol Bioeng 88:168–175.            Jennewein S, Wildung MR, Chau M, Walker K, Croteau R. 2004b. Random
Borman S. 1994. Total synthesis of anticancer agent taxol achieved by two         sequencing of an induced Taxus cell cDNA library for identiﬁcation of
     different routes. Chem Eng News 72:32–34.                                  clones involved in Taxol biosynthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
Brown DT. 2003. Preclinical and clinical studies of the taxanes. In: Itokawa        101:9149–9154.
    H, Lee H-K, editors. Taxus: The genus Taxus. London: Taylor & Francis.     Jennewein S, Park H, DeJong JM, Long RM, Bollon AP, Croteau RB. 2005.
   pp 387–435.                                                            Coexpression in yeast of Taxus cytochrome P450 reductase with
Burke C, Croteau R. 2002. Interaction with the small subunit of geranyl        cytochrome P450 oxygenases involved in Taxol biosynthesis. Biotech-
    diphosphate synthase modiﬁes the chain length speciﬁcity of geranyl-         nol Bioeng 89:588–598.
    geranyl diphosphate synthase to produce geranyl diphosphate. J Biol    Ketchum REB, Gibson DM. 1996. Paclitaxel production in cell suspension
   Chem 277:3141–3149.                                                          cultures of Taxus. Plant Cell Tissue Organ Cult 46:9–16.




                                    DEJONG ET AL.: ENGINEERING TAXOL BIOSYNTHESIS IN YEAST        223


[PDF physical page 13]
Ketchum REB, Gibson DM, Croteau R, Shuler ML. 1999. The kinetics of        Balbuena D, Winter J, Achstetter T, Spagnoli R, Pompon D, Dumas B.
    taxoid accumulation in cell suspension cultures of Taxus following         2003. Total biosynthesis of hydrocortisone from a simple carbon source
     elicitation with methyl jasmonate. Biotechnol Bioeng 62:97–105.               in yeast. Nat Biotechol 21:133–134.
Kingston DGI, Jagtop PG, Yuan H, Samala L. 2002. The chemistry of Taxol     Walker K, Croteau R. 2000a. Molecular cloning of a 10-deacetylbaccatin III-
    and related taxoids. Prog Chem Org Nat Prod 84:56–225.                     10-O-acetyl transferase cDNA from Taxus and functional expression in
Koepp AE, Hezari M, Zajicek J, Stofer Vogel B, LaFever RE, Lewis NG,         Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:583–587.
    Croteau R. 1995. Cyclization of geranylgeranyl diphosphate to taxa-     Walker K, Croteau R. 2000b. Taxol biosynthesis: Molecular cloning of a
    4(5),11(12)-diene is the committed step of Taxol biosynthesis in Paciﬁc         benzoyl CoA:taxane-2a-O-benzoyl transferase cDNA from Taxus and
    yew. J Biol Chem 270:8686–8690.                                             functional expression in Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:
LaemmliUK. 1970.Cleavage ofstructural proteinduring the assemblyof the        13591–13596.
    head of bacteriophage T4. Nature 227:680–685.                       Walker K, Croteau R. 2001. Taxol biosynthetic genes. Phytochemistry 58:
Lovy Wheeler A, Long RM, Ketchum REB, Rithner CD, Williams RM,        1–7.
    Croteau R. 2001. Taxol biosynthesis: Differential transformation of     Walker K, Ketchum REB, Hezari M, Gatﬁeld D, Goleniowski M, Barthol A,
    taxadien-5a-ol and its acetate ester by cytochrome P450 hydroxylases         Croteau R. 1999. Partial puriﬁcation and characterization of acetyl
    from Taxus suspension cells. Arch Biochem Biophys 390:265–278.          coenzyme  A:taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-ol-O-acetyl  transferase  that
Michaud LB, Valero V, Hortobagyi G. 2000. Risks and beneﬁts of taxanes in          catalyzes the ﬁrst acylation step of Taxol biosynthesis. Arch Biochem
    breast and ovarian cancer. Drug Saf 23:401–428.                          Biophys 364:273–279.
Miura Y, Kondo K, Saito T, Shimada H, Fraser PD, Misawa N. 1998.     Walker K, Schoendorf A, Croteau R. 2000. Molecular cloning of a taxa-
    Production of the carotenoids lycopene, b-carotene, and astaxanthin in          4(20),11(12)-dien-5a-ol-O-acetyl transferase cDNA from Taxus and
    the food yeast Candida utilis. Appl Environ Microbiol 64:1226–1229.          functional expression in Escherichia coli. Arch Biochem Biophys 374:
Pompon D, Louerat B, Bronnine A, Urban P. 1996. Yeast expression of        371–380.
    animal and plant P450s in optimized redox environments. Methods     Wall ME, Wani MC. 1995. Paclitaxel: From discovery to clinic. Am Chem
   Enzymol 272:51–64.                                               Soc Symp Ser 583:18–33.
Sankawa U, Itokawa H. 2003. Biosynthesis of taxoids. In: Itokawa H, Lee     Wildung MR, Croteau R. 1996. A cDNA clone for taxadiene synthase, the
   K-H, editors. Taxus: The genus Taxus. London: Taylor & Francis.          diterpene cyclase that catalyzes the committed step of Taxol biosynth-
    pp 19–34.                                                                                esis. J Biol Chem 271:9201–9204.
Schoendorf A, Rithner CD, Williams RM, Croteau R. 2001. Molecular     Williams DC, Wildung MR, Jin AQ, Dalal D, Oliver JS, Coates RM, Croteau
    cloning of a cytochrome P450 taxane 10b-hydroxylase cDNA from         R. 2000. Heterologous expression and characterization of a ‘‘pseudo-
    Taxus and functional expression in yeast. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:         mature’’ form of taxadiene synthase involved in paclitaxel (Taxol)
    1501–1506.                                                                     biosynthesis, and evaluation of a potential intermediate and inhibitors of
Shimada H, Kondo K, Fraser PD, Miura Y, Saito T, Misawa N. 1998.          the multistep diterpene cyclization reaction. Arch Biochem Biophys
    Increased carotenoid production by the food yeast Candida  utilis        379:137–146.
    through metabolic engineering of the isoprenoid pathway. Appl Environ    Wuts PGM. 1998. Semisynthesis of Taxol. Curr Opin Drug Disc Dev 1:
    Microbiol 64:2676–2680.                                             329–337.
Skeel RT. 1999. Antineoplastic drugs and biological response modiﬁers.     Xiao Z, Itokawa H, Lee K-H. 2003. Total synthesis of taxoids. In: Itokawa H,
    Classiﬁcation, use, and toxicity of clinically useful agents. In: Skeel RT,        Lee K-H, editors. Taxus: The genus Taxus. London: Taylor & Francis.
     editor. Handbook of chemotherapy, 5th edn. Baltimore: Lippincott,        pp 245–297.
    Williams & Wilkins. pp 63–144.                                Yamano  D,  Ishi  T, Nakagawa M,  Ikenaga  H, Misawa  N.  1994.
Suffness M. 1995. Overview of paclitaxel research: Progress on many fronts.         Metabolic engineering for production of b-carotene and lycopene
  Am Chem Soc Symp Ser 583:1–17.                                              in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 58:1112–
Szczebara FM, Chandelier C, Villeret C, Masurel A, Bourot S, Duport C,         1114.
    Blanchard S, Groisillien A, Testet E, Costaglioli P, Cauet G, Degryse E,





224       BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOENGINEERING, VOL. 93, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 5, 2006