
[PDF physical page 1]
Trends in
Biotechnology

Review
A synthetic biology roadmap for sustainable
production of the plant-originated anti-cancer
drug paclitaxel


Chun-Lin Tan (谭春林)1, Xin Yu (余鑫)1, Hui-Cheng Feng (冯慧程)1, Jonathan Gershenzon 3,
Yan Liu   (刘燕)1,2,*, and Sheng-Hong Li  (黎胜红)1,2,*

Paclitaxel, a clinically potent anticancer drug derived from Taxus species,   Highlights
faces persistent challenges in sustainable supply. Synthetic biology presents     Synthetic biology tools (mpXsn, CRISPR,
substantial opportunities for its de novo production, particularly with recent      in silico modeling) advance pathway
breakthroughs in elucidating its intricate biosynthetic pathways. However, its    elucidation/assembly for sustainable
                                                                                                                                        paclitaxel intermediate production.
heterologous biosynthesis is signiﬁcantly constrained by key bottlenecks,
including pathway complexity, poor P450 expression, and inefﬁcient metabolic     Nonconventional chassis (cyanobacteria,
ﬂux. In this study, we explore how synthetic biology facilitates pathway decoding     Bacillus  subtilis,  ﬁlamentous  fungi)
and reconstruction and propose strategies involving nonclassical chassis such    expand options for heterologous pacli-
                                                                                                                                     taxel intermediate synthesis beyond
as p lant-associated cyanobacteria and ﬁlamentous fungi to enhance P450     Escherichia coli, yeast, and tobacco.
compatibility. We also present a pragmatic framework for the rational application
of state-of-the-art tools, including cell-free systems, synthetic microbial consor-      Artiﬁcial intelligence–driven P450/TXS
tia, hybrid chemoenzymatic synthesis, and machine learning, to sustainably     engineering and  synthetic modules,
                                                                                                     combined with metabolic engineering,
produce paclitaxel and other natural products.                                                       optimize paclitaxel pathways in chassis.


                                                                                                                    Hybrid cell-free/chemoenzymatic syn-
                                                                                                                                     thesis bypasses P450 promiscuity and
Technologies and bottlenecks in the sustainable production of paclitaxel                cytotoxicity for paclitaxel intermediate
                                                                                                                               production.
Paclitaxel (Taxol®), a natural diterpenoid drug derived from the bark of Taxus (yew) species,
features a unique 6/8/6-membered carbocyclic scaffold with extensive oxygenation and complex     Synthetic microbial consortia (cross-
functionalities [1]. Being a clinically prominent broad-spectrum anticancer agent, it is extensively    species division of labor) boost pacli-
used in the treatment of breast cancer, ovarian cancer, and melanoma [2]. By 2000, paclitaxel     taxel intermediate yields and overcome
                                                                                                                                             single-strain limits.
had become the best-selling anticancer therapeutic agent, with a global market value of approx-
imately $1.6 billion [3]. However, its natural abundance is extremely low (0.001–0.050% of dry
weight in Taxus bark), leading to severe depletion of natural yew resources [4]. This scarcity has
spurred signiﬁcant interest in developing sustainable production methods, such as semisynthesis    1
                                                                                                                     State Key Laboratory of Southwestern
from late-stage taxane intermediates and production via plant cell cultures (Figure 1). Box 1 outlines   Chinese Medicine Resources, Innovative
current production strategies and highlights the urgent need for sustainable production platforms    Institute of Chinese Medicine and
to secure the supply of paclitaxel while protecting ecosystems.                                      Pharmacy, Chengdu University of
                                                                                                                                  Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu
                                                                                                          611137, PR China
Synthetic biology (s ee Glossary) offers promising strategies for the production of high-value-    2State Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry
added natural products such as paclitaxel and vinblastine [9]. Remarkable progress has been   and Natural Medicines, Kunming Institute
                                                                                                                               of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
made in sequencing the Taxus genome and elucidating the biosynthetic pathway of baccatin III   Kunming 650201, PR China
(a critical paclitaxel precursor) [10,11]. Recently, Jiang and colleagues identiﬁed missing en-   3Max Planck Institute for Chemical
zymes, including taxane-9α-hydroxylase (T9αH) and taxane oxetanase 1 (TOT1) , thereby en-   Ecology, Jena 07745, Germany
abling the biosynthesis of baccatin III [12]. In addition, Liang and colleagues characterized in
detail the ﬁnal enzymatic tailoring steps (C2′α-hydroxylation and 3′-N-benzoylation) that convert
                                                                                                          *Correspondence:
baccatin  III into paclitaxel [1]. Furthermore, McClune and colleagues pioneered multiplexed   liuyan@cdutcm.edu.cn (Y. Liu) and
perturbation-single nuclei (mpXsn), a technique combining single-nucleus RNA sequencing   shli@cdutcm.edu.cn (S.-H. Li).


                                                                     Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2025.11.013  1939
                                © 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.


[PDF physical page 2]
                                                 Trends in Biotechnology





                                                                                 Glossary

                                                                                                                                              Artificial intelligence (AI): a
                                                                                                                                             multidisciplinary ﬁeld that develops
                                                                                                                      computational systems capable of
                                                                                                                       performing tasks traditionally requiring
                                                                                             human intelligence, such as reasoning,
                                                                                                                                           learning, problem-solving, perception,
                                                                                                     and language understanding. AI
                                                                                                             systems are designed to analyze data,
                                                                                                               adapt to new inputs, and automate
                                                                                                                      decision-making processes.
                                                                                                                         Cell-free protein synthesis (CFPS): a
                                                                                                                       biochemical technique that enables
                                                                                                                                   protein production without relying on
                                                                                                                                                                living cells. Instead, this method uses cell
                                                                                                                                  extracts containing the machinery
                                                                                                                   necessary for protein synthesis
                                                                                                                                                             (e.g., ribosomes, tRNAs, amino acids,
                                                                                                     and other factors required for
                                                                                                                                                    translation). CFPS enables rapid and
                                                                                                 TrendsTrends inin BiotechnologyBiotechnology
                                                                                                                                      ﬂexible protein production, providing a
Figure 1. Schematic depicting strategies for the production of the plant-originated anti-cancer drug paclitaxel.    platform to bypass catalytic promiscuity
Current approaches for producing paclitaxel involve the extraction of key precursors from Taxus plants or Taxus cell    bottlenecks that often plague in vivo
suspension cultures, followed by semisynthetic processes to produce paclitaxel. Alternatively, the heterologous    systems.
expression of paclitaxel biosynthetic enzymes in microbial or plant-derived host systems enables the production of key    Chassis cell: a host organism or cell
paclitaxel precursors or related taxane intermediates.                                                                      type that provides the cellular machinery
                                                                                                     and environment for engineering
with clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) -based gene perturba-     synthetic genetic circuits and
                                                                                                                       heterologous pathways. In paclitaxel
tion, to map gene regulatory networks in Taxus [13]. This approach identiﬁed FoTO1 (facilitator
                                                                                                                                  biosynthesis, common chassis cells
of taxane oxidation), an NTF2-like protein that forms complexes with taxadiene 5α-hydroxylase     include prokaryotes (e.g., E. coli),
(T5αH) and taxadiene synthase (TXS), resulting in a 10–17-fold increase in yields from early    eukaryotes (e.g., S. cerevisiae,
Taxol pathways. Structural modeling suggests that FoTO1 acts as a scaffold to interact with    Y. lipolytica), plant cells
                                                                                                                                                             (e.g., N. benthamiana), and
TXS and T5αH, stabilizing their enzyme-substrate interactions to ensure sequential catalysis
                                                                                                                          photosynthetic organisms
and minimize off-target oxidation, thereby providing insights to guide the design of targeted arti-      (e.g., cyanobacteria).
ﬁcial enzyme scaffolds for heterologous paclitaxel synthesis. Nevertheless, reconstructing the full    Clustered regularly interspaced
paclitaxel pathway in heterologous microbes remains a major challenge. The pathway comprises    short palindromic repeats
                                                                                                          (CRISPR): a naturally occurring
approximately 19 taxane biosynthetic enzymatic reactions, nearly 50% of which are catalyzed by                                                                                                                            defensive adaptive immune system in
cytochrome P450 enzymes whose catalytic mechanisms are incompletely understood [2,11,14].     bacteria and archaea, which uses short,
Although gram-scale production of taxadiene (a key early precursor) has been achieved, down-    repeated DNA sequences and
stream reconstruction of the pathway is constrained by critical bottlenecks: intrinsically low cata-    associated Cas proteins to detect and
                                                                                                                           cleave foreign genetic material, such as
lytic efﬁciency of P450s, poor compatibility with heterogeneous hosts, and extensive byproduct      viral DNA. This system has been
                                                                                                               repurposed as a powerful genome
 Box 1. Diverse production sources of paclitaxel and their limitations for sustainable supply                         editing tool, enabling precise DNA
 Many efforts have been made to explore paclitaxel production, including chemical synthesis, semisynthesis, plant cell     modiﬁcations in a wide range of
 culture, and biosynthesis using host-associated engineered endophytic fungi (e.g., Taxomyces andreanae) [4,5]. However,     organisms for applications in research,
 Heinig and colleagues demonstrated no evidence of de novo paclitaxel biosynthesis in endophytic fungi, including the      medicine, and biotechnology.
 once-proposed fungal species Taxomyces andreanae, with trace paclitaxel in these fungi attributed to residual accumulation     Isopentenol utilization pathway
 from their host Taxus plants [6]. Consistently, Stadler and colleagues further disqualiﬁed engineered endophytic fungi as a      (IUP): a metabolic pathway that enables
 viable option, noting that early misjudgments stemmed from ﬂawed detection methods (e.g., cross-reactive immunoassays)      the conversion of isopentenol, a short-
 and conﬁrming that these endophytes cannot sustain paclitaxel production [7]. Although total chemical synthesis has over-      chain ﬁve-carbon alcohol, into
 come many technical hurdles for paclitaxel production, it remains constrained by the long synthetic routes, complex reaction      isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP), a critical
 steps, low yields, and high production costs, making larger-scale commercialization impractical. The large-scale cultivation of      intermediate in isoprenoid biosynthesis.
 Taxus suspension cells has achieved notable industrial breakthroughs, as exempliﬁed by Phyton Biotech, a global biotech      This pathway is harnessed in synthetic
 ﬁrm and industry leader, which has successfully scaled up Taxus suspension cell cultures to enable the commercial-scale      biology for the production of biofuels,
 production of paclitaxel. At present, semichemical synthesis remains the primary method for paclitaxel production, a method      pharmaceuticals, and other valuable
 that uses key intermediates (e.g., baccatin III, 10-deacetylbaccatin III) that are extracted from Taxus trees or cultivated Taxus      isoprenoid compounds, such as taxane.
  cells as substrates [8]. Nonetheless, this approach still relies on natural yew resources harvested from wild populations, failing    Machine learning (ML): a subﬁeld of
 to fully address the issues of sustainable supply of paclitaxel and high production costs associated with its synthesis.           AI focused on developing algorithms


1940   Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7


[PDF physical page 3]
Trends in Biotechnology





formation of core enzymes. These issues lead to signiﬁcant diversion of metabolic ﬂux, thereby    and statistical models for making
                                                                                                                                     predictions. ML systems learn from
severely limiting the de novo biosynthesis of paclitaxel precursors.
                                                                                                                                data, identify patterns, and make data-
                                                                                                                                driven decisions or predictions using
Recent reviews have summarized progress in elucidating the biosynthetic m echanism of   new inputs.
paclitaxel [15,16] and offered valuable insights into the ﬁeld of paclitaxel biosynthesis. Our work   miRNA-mediated regulatory: a
                                                                                                                                        functional unit consisting of miRNAs and
focuses on addressing challenges hindering the sustainable production of paclitaxel precursors
                                                                                                                                                       their targets (e.g., transcription factors)
and on proposing state-of-the-art synthetic biology strategies to overcome these challenges.     that regulates biological processes by
Speciﬁcally, we systematically analyze key bottlenecks, including the product promiscuity of     targeting gene transcription or
P450s and metabolic ﬂux imbalances, and present solutions categorized as follows: novel     translation. It enables precise regulation
                                                                                                                                     of speciﬁc biological processes
chassis cell systems using algae, nonconventional yeasts, and ﬁlamentous fungi to enhance                                                                                                                                                             (e.g., paclitaxel biosynthesis) by
compatibility with plant-derived P450s; hybrid biosynthetic-chemical approaches that integrate     regulating the transcription or translation
cell-free and chemoenzymatic methods; deployment of regulatory factors (e.g., FoTO1) to mini-     of target genes.
mize byproducts generated by P450 enzymes (e.g., those from T5αH); and advanced technolo-    Product promiscuity of P450s: the
                                                                                                                            capacity of cytochrome P450 enzymes
gies, including machine learning (ML)–driven pathway optimization and the use of synthetic    to oxidize a diverse range of speciﬁc
microbial consortia. Collectively, these strategies provide a road map for the scalable produc-    taxane precursors, resulting in the
tion of paclitaxel precursors and other complex plant-derived natural products.                         generation of multiple products from a
                                                                                                                                        single reaction. For instance, the enzyme
                                                                                            T5αH can catalyze the conversion of
Elucidation of the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway                                                 substrates to produce various products,
The paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway has been characterized biochemically and  partially     including the target compound taxadien-
genetically and is divided into three stages: formation of taxadiene-5α-ol from geranylgeranyl    5α-ol and other oxidation byproducts.
                                                                                                                Synthetic biology: a multidisciplinary
pyrophosphate (GGPP), conversion of taxadiene-5α-ol to baccatin III (Box 2), and attachment
                                                                                                                                  ﬁeld that focuses on the de novo
of phenylisoserine to baccatin III, which forms paclitaxel (Box 3). The ﬁrst committed step involves    construction of microbial cell factories
the formation of the C20 terpene taxadiene, which is catalyzed by a plastidial TXS enzyme that uses    and redesign of enzymes, metabolic
GGPP as a substrate [12,23]. Croteau and colleagues laid important groundwork for clarifying the    networks, and regulatory systems in
                                                                                                                          chassis cells to produce target products
paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway, including the identiﬁcation of taxadiene as the ﬁrst key intermediate
                                                                                                                                                             (e.g., paclitaxel). Here, it speciﬁcally
in the taxane skeleton, and the isolation and functional characterization of TXS, the enzyme     refers to strategies such as
                                                                                                                               reconstruction of the paclitaxel
                                                                                                                                  biosynthetic pathway in E. coli,
 Box 2. Formation of the taxane skeleton of baccatin III: key pathways and reactions                             S. cerevisiae, and other chassis and
 The biosynthesis of paclitaxel begins with GGPP, a key common precursor of plant-derived diterpenoids. GGPP is synthe-      optimizing precursor pathways to
 sized by the enzymatic condensation of one molecule of DMAPP and three molecules of isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP).     address bottlenecks in taxane
 This reaction is catalyzed by GGPPS. In plant cells, these precursors are produced through two endogenous pathways:      biosynthesis.
 the mevalonate (MVA) pathway in the cytoplasm and the methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway in chloroplasts [12].     Synthetic microbial consortia: an
 IPP and DMAPP can be interconverted by the enzyme isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase (IDI). Subsequently, IPP and     engineered communities of multiple
 DMAPP are condensed by GGPPS to form GGPP. TXS then catalyzes the cyclization of GGPP to produce primarily      microbial species designed to
 taxadiene [taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene] (approximately 95%), along with a small amount of isotaxadiene [taxa-4(20),11(12)-diene]      collaborate to perform complex
 (approximately 5%) [17]. Baccatin III is subsequently produced through a series of enzymatic modiﬁcations, which include     metabolic tasks that are beyond the
  hydroxylation, acylation of hydroxyl groups, ketone formation, and oxetane ring formation. The hydroxylation reaction at      capability of a single species. These
 the C5 position of taxadiene is considered the ﬁrst step, which is catalyzed by the enzyme taxadiene-5α-hydroxylase     communities divide the paclitaxel
 CYP725A4 (T5αH). This reaction results in the formation of taxa-4(5),11(12)-dien-5α-ol (taxadiene-5α-ol), the ﬁrst hydroxyl-      biosynthetic pathway into modular steps
 ated intermediate of paclitaxel, along with various taxane-derived mono- and di-oxygenated byproducts, (e.g., 5(12)-      to alleviate metabolic burden in single
 oxa-3(11)-cyclotaxane (OCT) and 5(11)-oxa-3(11)-cyclotaxane (iso-OCT). When isotaxadiene serves as the substrate, it      hosts.
 can be directly hydroxylated by the enzyme T5αH to generate taxadiene-5α-ol. Subsequently, taxadiene-5α-ol can undergo
 two alternative pathways: (i) the C5α hydroxyl group is acetylated by taxadienol-5α-O-acetyltransferase (TAT), yielding taxa-4
  (20),11(12)-dien-5α-yl acetate, which is then hydroxylated by taxane-10β-hydroxylase (T10βH) to form taxa-4(20),11(12)-
  dien-5α,10β-diol-5-acetate; (ii) taxadiene-5α-ol is hydroxylated at the C13 position by taxane-13α-hydroxylase (T13αH) to
 form taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5α,13α-diol, which subsequently undergoes C5α acetylation and 10β-hydroxylation to form
 taxadiene-5α,10β-13α-triol-5-acetate. Subsequently, multiple enzymatic hydroxylation reactions occur at the C1, C2, C7,
 and C9 positions, along with oxidation at the C9 position and the formation of oxetane ring [2,18]. Taxane-2α-O-
 benzoyltransferase (TBT) further catalyzes the conversion of 2-debenzoyltaxane into the predominant intermediate 10-
 deacetylbaccatin  III (10-DAB). Subsequently, the C10 hydroxyl group of 10-DAB is acetylated by the enzyme 10-
 deacetylbaccatin III-10-O-acetyltransferase (DBAT), yielding a subsequent intermediate baccatin III, the core structure of
  paclitaxel [19]. These taxane skeleton-modiﬁcation reactions are catalyzed by a series of cytochrome P450 enzyme-mediated
  hydroxylations and acyltransferase-mediated acetylations, but the precise order of these reactions remains unclear [13,20]
 Notably, the biosynthesis of paclitaxel is not a single linear pathway but includes multiple branching points, leading to the
  synthesis of highly diversiﬁed taxane structures [12].



                                                                                                              Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7  1941


[PDF physical page 4]
                                                 Trends in Biotechnology





 Box 3. Formation of paclitaxel through postmodiﬁcation of baccatin III

 The C13 side chain of paclitaxel is essential for its anticancer activity, and the biosynthesis of this side chain primarily
 involves two steps: enzymatic isomerization and esteriﬁcation [1]. Initially in this pathway, α-phenylalanine undergoes
 isomerization, which is catalyzed by the enzyme phenylalanine aminomutase (PAM), generating the isomer of β-phenylalanine.
 β-phenylalanine then undergoes esteriﬁcation, which is catalyzed by the enzyme β-phenylalanine-CoA ligase (PCL), yielding the
 activated form β-phenylalanine-CoA. Next, the enzyme 3-amino-13-phenylpropanoyltransferase (BAPT) catalyzes the acylation
 of baccatin III at the C13 position with β-phenylalanyl-CoA as the acyl donor, yielding baccatin III conjugated with the
 β-phenylalanyl acyl group (β-phenylalanyl baccatin III). Next, the enzyme taxane-2′α-hydroxylase (T2α′H) catalyzes the
 hydroxylation of the C2′ position of the side chain of β-phenylalanyl baccatin III, producing the intermediate 3′-N-debenzoyltaxol
  [21]. Finally, the enzyme 3′-N-debenzoyl-2′-deoxytaxol N-benzoyltransferase (DBTNBT) catalyzes the N-benzoylation at the C3′
 position of the side chain of 3′-N-debenzoyltaxol, thereby ultimately producing paclitaxel [22].


responsible for this reaction [24]. After the formation of taxadiene, a series of tailoring reactions occur,
which generate a key paclitaxel precursor baccatin III. These modiﬁcations include enzymatic hydrox-
ylation, acylation, and ketonization reactions and the formation of the oxetane ring (Figure 2). Recently,
researchers have identiﬁed several novel enzymes essential for paclitaxel synthesis, including C4β-
C20 epoxidase, taxane-1β-hydroxylase (T1βH), T9αH, and taxane 9α-dioxygenase [18].


The oxetane ring, a four-membered heterocycle with one oxygen and three carbon atoms, is
a unique paclitaxel structural feature and critical for its anticancer activity. Recent research has
enhanced understanding of the oxetane ring formation enzymatic mechanism. In 2023, Zhang
and colleagues discovered a novel C4β-C20 epoxidase, an α-ketoglutarate/Fe (II) –dependent
dioxygenase, catalyzing the formation of the C4β-C20 oxetane ring [18]. However, due to the
difﬁculty in isolating sufﬁcient epoxidation products for NMR-based structural identiﬁcation, the
exact mechanism remains a matter of speculation. In 2024, Zhao and colleagues demonstrated
that CYP725A4 (cytochrome P450 family 725, subfamily A, member ), a previously characterized
taxadiene-5α-hydroxylase, catalyzes multisite oxidation reactions of taxadiene, which potentially
forms the oxetane ring via a two-step epoxidation mechanism [17]. Meanwhile, Jiang and col-
leagues conducted enzyme activity assays on candidate genes using a Nicotiana benthamiana
chassis system and identiﬁed TOT1, a bifunctional P450 enzyme that is involved in oxetane
ring biosynthesis. Moreover, Jiang and colleagues found that knocking down TOT1 expression
in Taxus cells signiﬁcantly reduced the biosynthesis of both baccatin  III and paclitaxel [12].
Yang and colleagues reported a functionally similar P450 enzyme, CYP725A55, capable of
catalyzing oxetane ring formation through cascade oxidation reactions coupled with an acyl
rearrangement [20]. In addition, Li and colleagues discovered a cytochrome P450 enzyme of
TmCYP1 from Taxus mairei, which also catalyzes oxetane ring formation. They explored the
catalytic mechanism of TmCYP1, suggesting an oxidation-rearrangement reaction between the
Δ4,20 double bond and C5-OAc group, with oxetane ring formation possibly occurring via a con-
certed reaction [25]. These ﬁndings collectively advanced our understanding of the mechanism un-
derlying the formation of the oxetane ring as well as the catalytic diversity of plant-derived P450s.

Reconstructing, integrating, and optimizing complex heterologous pathways
Reconstructing and optimizing the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway in heterologous hosts pre-
sents three major interconnected challenges for taxane production. First, precursor supply
(e.g., GGPP) requires precise balancing with downstream rate-limiting enzyme catalytic capacity.
Second, plant-derived P450s exhibit inherently low catalytic efﬁciency in microbial hosts, primarily
due to poor functional expression, cofactor incompatibility, and suboptimal membrane integra-
tion. Third, metabolic ﬂux toward paclitaxel competes with th at of essential host pathways for
NADPH and carbon resources, forcing a fundamental trade-off between taxane yield and host
cellular ﬁtness [26–28]. Insights gained from microbial parthenolide biosynthesis demonstrated
that targeted NADPH supplementation and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) expansion can simulta-
neously enhance P450 functionality [29]. Contemporary strategies—precursor pathway optimization,


1942   Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7


[PDF physical page 5]
Trends in Biotechnology





                                                                                                 TrendsTrends inin BiotechnologyBiotechnology

Figure 2. Schematic of the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway. The yellow-green module depicts one proposed
biosynthetic pathway leading to baccatin III, while the pink module represents an alternative biosynthetic pathway. The gray
module indicates the postmodiﬁcation pathway involving the synthesis of the β-phenylisoserine side chain coupled to baccatin
III. TXS: taxadiene synthase; T5αH: taxadiene-5α-hydroxylase; TAT: taxadiene-5α-ol-o-acetyltransferase; T10βH: taxane-10β-
hydroxylase; T13αH: taxane-13α-hydroxylase; T2αH: taxane-2α-hydroxylase; T9αH: taxane-9α-hydroxylase; T7βH: taxane-
7β-hydroxylase; T1βH: taxane-1β-hydroxylase; TBT: taxane-2α-o-benzoyltransferase; DBAT: 10-deacetylbaccatin III-10-o-
acetyltransferase; TOT: taxane oxetanase; BAPT: baccatin III-3-amino, 13-phenylpropanoyltransferase; T2′αOH: taxane-2′α-
hydroxylase; DBTNBT: 3′-N-debenzoyl-2′-deoxytaxol-N-benzoyltransferase; PAM: phenylalanine aminomutase; PCL:
β-phenylalanine CoA ligase.


enzyme engineering, CRISPR/RNAi-mediated ﬂux control, synthetic microbial consortia, and hybrid
systems—converge to align paclitaxel production with host physiological constraints (Figure 3).

Optimization of precursor supply and overexpression of positive effectors
Steady precursor supply is essential for efﬁcient taxane production, but enhancing precursor
levels alone is insufﬁcient; its effectiveness depends on tuning downstream enzymes to regulate
metabolic ﬂux and avoid ﬂux diversion, byproduct accumulation, or intermediate metabolite tox-
icity. For paclitaxel biosynthesis, isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate
(DMAPP) are the universal precursors for terpenoid biosynthesis, which originate from the



                                                                                                              Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7  1943


[PDF physical page 6]
                                                 Trends in Biotechnology





                                                                                                 TrendsTrends inin BiotechnologyBiotechnology

Figure 3. Schematic of diverse synthetic biology strategies for taxane biosynthesis. Various metabolic engineering
strategies have been used to successfully redirect metabolic ﬂux toward the biosynthesis of taxanes. These strategies include
enhancing the supply of taxane precursors, tunable control of taxane-related metabolic pathways, cell-free biochemical
synthesis, and synthetic microbial consortia. In addition, CRISPR-based and RNAi-based strategies for regulating targeted
gene expression and remodeling metabolic networks play crucial roles in overcoming bottlenecks in the de novo taxane
biosynthetic pathway. The ER network has been shown to extend from the chloroplast, consistent with recent observations
demonstrating ER–choloroplast physical coupling during plant terpenoid synthesis [30]. The chemical and biological coupling
scheme: PdII : Pd (OAc)2, BQ: p-benzoquinone. CRISPR: clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats; ER:
endoplasmic reticulum.



cytoplasmic MVA and the MEP pathways. Optimization of these pathways ha s successfully
boosted taxane yields [5,31]. For example, the introduction of a heterologous MVA pathway or
optimization of the native MEP pathway achieved signiﬁcant increases in taxane titer, but these
improvements relied on concurrent enzyme engineering to mitigate byproduct formation; otherwise,
excess precursors would lead to excessive metabolic waste. In particular, the catalytic promiscuity
of TXS and T5αH acts as another bottleneck in paclitaxel biosynthesis. To resolve this bottleneck,
structure-guided enzyme engineering has emerged as an effective approach (Box 4). This mutation
reduces iso-taxadiene (a major byproduct) by 10–30% and channels ﬂux toward taxadiene.


A further challenge arises from the competition between taxane synthesis and host biomass
formation for central carbon metabolites [40]. The isopentenol utilization pathway (IUP) offers
a solution by enabling the orthogonal generation of IPP/DMAPP from exogenous isoprenol or
prenol (used as substrates), thereby decoupling paclitaxel precursor supply from the host’s native
metabolism [41]. For instance, implementation of the IUP elevated IPP/DMAPP pools by 147-fold
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae compared with those of endogenous pathways [42], while in vitro


1944   Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7


[PDF physical page 7]
Trends in Biotechnology





 Box 4. Engineering rate-limiting enzymes (TXS and T5αH) in paclitaxel biosynthesis

 TXS serves as the ﬁrst dedicated terpene cyclase enzyme in the biosynthesis of paclitaxel, which catalyzes the crucial
  cyclization step that converts GGPP to the primary product taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene [5]. The native TXS enzyme, which
 consists of 862 amino acids, contains an N-terminal chloroplast transit peptide (CTP) of approximately 80 residues that
  directs the enzyme’s localization to plastids in plants [32,33]. Notably, the removal of this CTP yields a pseudo-mature form
  of TXS that displays enhanced catalytic efﬁciency and stability in heterologous hosts, which is evi denced by successful
 expression in heterologous E. coli hosts [5]. Moreover, the promiscuity of key enzymes (e.g., TXS, T5αH) and cofactor
  availability constraints also contribute to reduced catalytic efﬁciency. The structural basis for this improvement was
 elucidated by Köksal and colleagues, whose crystallographic studies of the truncated TXS enzyme revealed a three-domain
  α-helical architecture that facilitates substrate binding and catalysis [33]. Further mechanistic insights were provided by He and
  colleagues [34], who characterized speciﬁc active-site residues of the TXS enzyme that regulate the complete catalytic cycle,
 from substrate ionization and carbocation stabilization to ﬁnal cyclization. TXS also exhibits promiscuity, producing
 approximately 5% isotaxadiene (an undesired nontarget byproduct) along with the major product taxadiene. Site-directed mu-
 tagenesis of speciﬁc residues in TXS (e.g., V584, Q609, Y688, Y762, Q770, and F834) reduces this promiscuity by 10–25%,
  further boosting ﬂux toward the target taxadiene [34]. This research identiﬁed several active-site residues that preferentially result
  in the formation of minor taxane-derived side products. In addition, Edgar and colleagues demonstrated that engineering the TXS
 enzyme through site-directed mutagenesis is an effective method for enhancing product selectivity [35]. They achieved a 2.4-fold
 improvement in yield and selectivity for an alternative cyclization product of taxa-4(20)-11(12)-diene. Collectively, these studies
 have enhanced our understanding of TXS enzyme and its potential applications in the heterologous biosynthesis of paclitaxel.


 For over 30 years, a major bottleneck in reconstructing the early step of paclitaxel biosynthesis in heterologous systems
 has been the functional expression of paclitaxel’s biosynthetic cytochrome P450 enzymes [17]. The enzyme T5αH is
 responsible for the ﬁrst hydroxylation step in paclitaxel biosynthesis, which exhibits high product promiscuity leading to
 the production of various oxidized taxadiene-derived byproducts [19]. However, only taxadiene-5α-ol is recognized as
 the direct precursor for paclitaxel production, while other byproducts redirect metabolic ﬂux away from the desired
  paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway. The high product promiscuity and low catalytic activity of T5αH have signiﬁcantly impeded
 the reconstruction of de novo paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway in microbial heterologous systems [5,14,36]. Since the ﬁrst
 discovery of T5αH from Taxus species in 1996, the enzyme has emerged as a key focal point for P450 enzyme engineer-
  ing. Several strategies have been explored, including strategies such as N-terminal modiﬁcations, optimization of the P450
  electron transport chain, ribosome-mediated regulation, and subcellular compartmentalization. Extensive optimizations of
 key reaction conditions, such as catalytic temperature, oxygen concentration, pH, and cofactor (e.g., NADPH) availability,
 have also been performed [5,14,19,37,38]. For instance, Biggs and colleagues optimized the expression of T5αH and its
 P450 reductase (CPR) partner in E. coli through N-terminal modiﬁcation, which led to a ﬁvefold inc rease in oxygenated
 taxane titer, reaching 570 mg/l ±45 mg/l [37]. Despite these efforts, substantial breakthroughs in understanding the
 detailed catalysis mechanism of T5αH have proven elusive. Yadav and colleagues constructed a homology model of
 T5αH based on the structures of six P450 enzymes and designed 53 different mutants, and only six of thes e mutants
 demonstrated improvements in conversion rates and selectivity for taxadiene-5α-ol production [38]. In 2024, Liu and
 colleagues explored various expression hosts for the heterologous characterization of T5αH and observed the formation
  of overoxidation byproducts across all tested hosts. By adjusting the promoter activity for T5αH expression, they success-
  fully reduced the byproduct levels while boosting the accumulation of taxadiene-5α-ol by threefold [19]. In addition, Song
 and colleagues used a combination of X-ray crystallography, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, quantum mechanics/
 molecular mechanics (QM/MM) calculations, and standalone quantum mechanics (QM) calculations to elucidate the crystal
  structure of the CYP725A4-taxadiene enzyme-substrate complex [39]. This study provided valuable insights into the detailed
  catalytic mechanism of CYP725A4, which lays the groundwork for further T5αH engineering efforts. Future efforts should
 focus on overcoming the challenges of heterologous expression incompatibilities to increase the metabolic ﬂux toward
 taxadiene-5α-ol and mitigate the complexities of product deconvolution caused by multiple taxane oxidation byproducts.


IUP systems achieved threefold higher taxadiene production than conventional cell-based
approaches [41]. Unlike the multistep, cofactor-intensive MEP/MVA routes, the IUP is much
simpler to optimize than these native pathways as it requires only two reactions and a single
cofactor (ATP). Crucially, the metabolic isolation of the IUP prevents the competition for carbon
between the specialized pathway and the host’s central metabolic pathways, which helps
preserve host cellular ﬁtness.

CRISPR- and RNAi-based knockout/knockdown of negative effectors
Competing metabolic pathways divert carbon ﬂux away from paclitaxel biosynthesis, thereby sig-
niﬁcantly reducing taxane yields. To resolve this, CRISPR-mediated gene editing and RNAi tech-
nologies serve as feasible strategies to block or weaken competing pathways and redirect
carbon ﬂux toward target taxanes (Table 1). CRISPR-mediated silencing of the sterol biosynthesis



                                                                                                              Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7  1945


[PDF physical page 8]
                                                 Trends in Biotechnology





         Refs    [43]         [44]                                     [45]          [5]              [31]          [5]              [31]                    [37]             [46]                   [47]                             [48]           [49]         [36]

         Date    2001         2012                                     2022              2010              2022              2010              2022                    2016             2008                   2014                             2020           2023         2015

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              condi-                 chassis                         tools; for                                                                                                                                                                                                                              folding                                                                                             activity);           CRISPR,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             activity);                                                              pathway                                                                                                                              and                                                                                                                         fermentation                                                                                                                                                                                                                     protein                                                                       (e.g.,                                                                                                                                                                           P450                                                                                             synthesis;                     wild-type                MEP     of                                                  manipulation                                        high                                                                                               for                                                        folding        tools   fermentation                                                     native                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              eukaryotic                                     P450                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 density).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    isoprenoid                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (critical                                                                                                                                                            for                          limitations                             Genetic                synthesis;   settings.                                                                                                                                                               for                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             genetic   industrial                                                                                      ER                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (lacks                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    high                                                                                                                                                            (ER                                                                                                               to       and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mature     pH,                                             mature                                                                                                 background;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         system  without  certiﬁed.                                        system  pathway         robust low                                                                                           precursor   industrialin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (e.g.,                        advantages                             growth;  genetic                                                                                                                                         GRAS                        MVA  certiﬁed;       Key          Advantages:           Rapid clear   isoprenoid   scalability                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Limitations:          Prokaryotic   machinery); not          Advantages:                                                Eukaryotic  native GRAS   YeastFab); tions



                                           to                               a                                  T7,                                                                                                                                                                                              and                                                TXS                                                                                                                              and                                                                                                      MVA                                                                                                          by                               ni                                                                                                   CPR,                                      genes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fusion                                of                                  the                                                   the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tHMGR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           factory                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GGPPS                                                                                                                                                                                                system                                                                                                 T.                          a                                                                                                                        of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mutant                                                                                                                                                                                                            the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TbrTXS,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        integration                                                           MEP                                                                                                                                     S.                                                                                                                        T5αH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          modeling,                  T7                                                                                                                            Taxus                                                                                                                               optimizing                                                                                                                                                                                                               cell                                                                                                                                                                       and                                                                                                                                coli                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               guided                                                        22°C                                                                                                                                                                             approach                                                                              and                          GGPPS,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               conditions                                                         using                                                                                                                                                                                                            for                                       in                                                                                                               protein                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          algorithms                              the                                                                E.                                                     pathway                          the                            to                                                                                                                                                                                                        and                                                                                            and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            engineering                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pathway;                                                           IDI                 IDI,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 interactions,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UPC2-1,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   yeast                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rate-limiting                  of                                                                                                                                                                           increasing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               expression,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tHMGR,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      heterologous                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      optimized                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             protein         of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           coli                                                    a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ERG20                       MEP                                                                                                                                                                                                         culture                                                                                               fusion                                                                                            TXS                                  a                                                                                                                                                                              TbrTXS,                            genes                                                           and                                                                                            of                                                       the                                                                                                                                                        modular                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             design                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      combination                                                                                  MVA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                expressing                                                                                                        of                a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GGPPSs                                                                                                                                     E.                                                                                pathway                                                   and                                                         of                                                  of                                                             of                                                                    of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T5αH-GSTGS-CPR                                                                                                                               promoters,                                                            a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                modular                       the                                     of                                                                                                                                                                  P450                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     partner   modiﬁcations                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            protein                                                                                                     regulating                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       consortium                                                                                                                                                                 pathway                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        chromosomal                                                              control                                                                                                                                                      TXS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   codon                 DXP                                                           DXS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    gene                                                                                                         and                         T5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             silico                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      screening                                                                                                                                                         temperature                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 with tags                                                                                                                                                  CPR,                          the                                                                                                                               in                 and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              different                                      and                                                                                      GGPPS                                                                                                                                                                                                   TXS,                                                                                                                                                                           TXS      ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    multivariate                                                                                                                 TXS                                                            mutualistic                   Strategy             Overexpression TXS         Expressing under   promoter,   downstream Trc,  culture           Constructing and   expression  enzymes A   metabolic           Introduction    T5αOH-GSTGS-CPR,   heterologous   optimization           Introduction   multivariate           Introduction  pathway Taxus  models                   Optimizing   reductase   N-terminal                       Coexpression   regulatory and   chinensis           Construction with    computer-aided    overexpression and        Multicopy of  protein     Using  wet-lab A   cerevisiae


                                                                                                                                                                        mg/l
                                                                                                                             mg/l                   45
                               3                                                                                                                                                                                                               mg/l                             mg/l           mg/l                                          ±             mg/l                 mg/l         mg/l                                     mg/l                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mg/l                               ±              mg/l                                                                   g/l              mg/l            Titer   1.3       200                                     93.5   1    7       58       27               570          8.7                   72.8                      129         215    33     production

e
  taxan
 for
   systems                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     taxanes                                                                                                                                                                                               taxanes
                 Product        Taxadiene                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Taxadiene-5α-ol                                                                                                Oxygenated                                                       Taxadiene                                                                                                                                                                                                          Oxygenated     expression

                 coli
      Heterologous 1.   Host          Escherichia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Saccharomyces   cerevisiae



    1                                         2  Table


1946   Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7


[PDF physical page 9]
Trends in Biotechnology




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 page)               [50]              [51]                 [50]                      [51]                           [52]                      [49]           [50]           [52]           [49]             [1]               [53]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       next
               2021              2022                 2021                      2022                           2022                      2023           2021           2022           2023                  2025               2023                       on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (continued

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lipid                                                                                                                                                      MVA                                                                                                                                  synthesis                                                                                                    on         slower                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           strong                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  cerevisiae; lipid                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    precursor                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pathway                        S.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            solely
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 than  toward                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   precursors;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (relies                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    terpenoid                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              synthesis                                                            conditions;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tools tends
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 harsh                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sterol                                                                                                                                                                                                ﬂux                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               pathway                                                                                                                    to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  genetic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FPP/GGPP    prokaryotes.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (supporting                                                                                                                                                      MEP  native for                                                                                                                                                                                                                        than                                                        mature   metabolic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tolerance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            native                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Limitations:                                                                                                    No   pathway);  competes  growth          Advantages:    High   metabolism  supply).           Limitations:     Fewer  native

                                                                                                                                                                                                            from
                                                            the                       of                   pH        of                                 cell    taxanes                                       in                                                       in                          tags                                                                                                                                                          strategies                                                                                                          cells                                                                      expression                                                                                                                                                                                          expression                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              system                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        strategy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               fusion                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           statistical                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              iterative                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              paclitaxel                                                                      using                                                                                                                                                            inducible                                          a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pathway                                                                   neutral                                                                                                                                                                         design                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        statistical                                                          resting                                                                                                                                           assayed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           high-throughput                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              silico                                          fusion                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              optimization                                                                                                               fusion                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              solubilizing                                                                                                                                                    resting                           a                         microscale                                                                                                                                acetylated                                                                                                                                                                                                       late                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        genome-scale                                                                                                                             and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               fermentation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    pseudohyphal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      metabolic                                                                                                                                          biosynthesis                                                                                         the                                                                             pH      oxygenated                                                                          of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       strategy, ﬁve                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   screening                                 CPR,                                                                               CPR;                                          improvement  process                                                                                                                                                     the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nutritional                                      and                                                                   optimal                                                                                                      and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              multicopy of                                                                                                          using                                                                                                                  of                                   the                                                                                                                                                                                                        bioprocessing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              synthesize                                                                                                                      with                                          pHXT7,                                                                                                               pHXT7;                                                                                                                                             precursors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          strategy                                                          a                                                                                                                                                                                                 e.g.,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              screening                                                                                                                                                             III                         and                                                            and                                                                                                                                                                                                                       coupling                                                                                                                                                                                              low-glucose                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               high-throughput                                                                                          in  approach                                      with                                             pH
                 a                                        a                             and                          TXS,                                                                                                                                                                         nitive                                T5αH                                         T5αH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         combinatorial                                                                                                          ‘push–pull’      production              High-throughput    optimization,   fermentation       Promoter of  assays         Optimizing   oxygenated   paclitaxel  advanced     Using  promoter of   production  neutral         Overcoming    stress-induced  growth, deﬁ  approach     microbioreactors            Computational   engineering  modeling          Improvement  process,     Using    microbioreactor    deterministic A  biology                            Reconstruct yeast  baccatin   A   expression and   integration

                                 mg/l
                                                                               mg/l
                                 52.4        ±                                8.4                                                     mg/l                                                g/l               mg/l                    ±                                                                                                   mg/l    μ               mg/l                                   mg/l                                                     mg/l                                     mg/l           mg/l
        78                 361.4        20                      38.1             42                           43.65         3.7      22           26.2                  0.97                   101.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Taxadiene-5α-ol                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Taxadien-5α-yl-acetate                                                                                   Taxadien-5α-acetate                                             Paclitaxel                                  Taxadiene

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Yarrowia   lipolytica





                                                                                                              Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7  1947


[PDF physical page 10]
                                                 Trends in Biotechnology





          Refs    [54]                   [14]                      [14]                   [19]              [18]              [18]                 [12]                 [13]              [55]                  [56]

          Date    2014                   2019                      2019                   2024              2023              2023                 2024                 2025              2021                  2004


                               for                  chassis                                                                                          P450s);  function                                                                       in                                                                                  pathways                                                        gene                       wild-type                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   density   large-scale                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          unstable     of                           dual              (fast                                                                                                        of                                                                                                                                                                                                    folding/co-factor                                                                                                                                                                      plant-derived                                                                                                                                                                                                                cost             culture.                                      for                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   biomass                                              P450                            limitations                                                      (MEP/MVA                                                                                                                                             capability                                                                                                           low high        and                                                        (ideal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          microorganism;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           long-term                                                                                            inherent                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     cycle;                                                                        chassis                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                culture;   in                                                                                                                                                                                                                     than                                                                             system   expression                                                   plant                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             growth                         advantages        Key          Advantages:                             Native    isoprenoids);  matching   transient   veriﬁcation).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Limitations:    Long   suspension   cultivation    productivity

                  gene                        of                                                                                                         with                                                                                                          and                                                   a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               single                                                                                                                                       T10βH,                                                                                                                                                                known                                                                GGPPS             TXS                                                                                                                                                                                    T1βOH,                                                                                                                                                                                                             paclitaxel                                                                                                                                                                                       known                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          system                                        ×                                                               terpenoid                                                    metabolic                                                                                                                               two                                                                                                                                                                                                          C4β-C20                                                                               PCL                                                                                                          TOT                                                                                       host                                                                                                                                       T2’OH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     chloroplast                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               using                                                                                                        strategy,                                                                                                                                                strategy,             the           or                                      and                                                                                            TAT,                                            in                                                           of                                                     of                                                                       of                                              a                     the                                                                                                       early                                                                                                                                                                other         of                                                                                                                                                                                       other                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FoTO1                                                                                                                                                                                              enhancement              of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              factor                                         an                                                                                                                                                                                    T9αOH,                                                                    αH,                                      DXS                                                                                                                                                                                      with                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               overexpression                                                                                                                                nine                                                    the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          compartmentalized                                                                                                                                                                              compartmentalized                                         of                                              T5                          of                                                                                                                                                                                                 DBTNBT,                                                                                                                                                                                       seven                                                                                                                                                         network                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             perturbation                                                                                                                                         TXS                                                                                                                       T13αΗ                                                    treatment                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             protein,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               expression                                                                                                                                with                                                                     with   precursor                                                                                                                               engineering                                                                                                                                                                                engineering                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       expression                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       expression                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 expression                                                                                                                                                                                             genes                                                        shunting                                                                                            TXS,                                                                                                                                                  with                                            expression                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             transport                                                                         and                                                                                                              PAM,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        peptide                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (mpXsn),                                              elicitor                                                                                                     T9OX                                                                                                                                     chloroplastic                                              chloroplastic                    Strategy      Ectopic and  pathway  pathway A   metabolic   coexpression A   metabolic  combined   isoprenoid             Reconstitution    biosynthetic   involving DBAT,        Transient BAPT,        Transient    cyclooxygenase, and genes        Transient  T9αH-1   synthetic          Multiplexed  nuclei  nuclear   (NTF2)-like         Expressing  transit                             Transgene       glucocorticoid-mediated

                                 FW
                                                               FW                   DW                                                  g/g                   FW         DW                   μg/g                                                                                            DW         DW                 μ                                             DW                                                                                                                              ng/g                 μg/g              3.2                                                                                                                                                                   μg/g                                                                                                            ng/g          ±  weight            0.5                                                                                                                                                  ng/g                                                                                                                                                                                     μg/g                  ng/g                 ±                   μg/g             Titer     11-27                   56.6 fresh            1.3          63                 64.29                     154.87            ~50                     10-30              87.8             600





                                                                                                              III                  Product        Taxadiene                                                                                                                                                                    Taxadiene-5α-ol                                                                                                                                                5α,10β-diacetoxytaxadien-13α-ol                                   Paclitaxel                                                                     Baccatin                                                                              Taxadiene                                        Taxadiene
      (continued) 1.   Host        Nicotiana   benthamiana                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Nicotiana  tabacum                                   Arabidopsis  thaliana



    3   Table


1948   Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7


[PDF physical page 11]
Trends in Biotechnology





  [57]                                               [58]                                               [59]

  2017                                               2019                                               2024


        for     ER   potential                     (hard                                                                  lower                                                                   activity);
                                                        as                                                                                                            MVA                                                                                                            stress;  pathway;                                                                                                                           P450                                                      growth  genetic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pathway;                                                                                                                                                                                         pathway;                                                                                                                                                         folding                                                                                                                          coli.                 energy                                        native                              pathway;                few                MEP                            (possessing                                                                        mycelial                                       MVA E.            MEP  partial                                                                                       P450                                                                                                                                             solar                                                                                                    native                                                                                                                                                                                                        environmental                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            without           MVA                                               growth.                                                                                                                                           native than                                                                                     and  native               fungus                               to                                                                       ﬂux                                           (support                     coli;                                                                                                                                                                                   secretion.                                                                                                                                                                              (without                       native                             complex      slow                                                                                                                                               fermentation);                                                   (CO             E.                                                                                            robust                                                                                                                                                                  without                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            source);                                                                  fermentation.                                                                     tools;                                                                                                                                                than                                                                                                                                                                                       background;  protein                                  folding);                                                             liquid                                                                                                                                   system                                                                                                                                                                cost.                                                                              certiﬁed;                                                                                                                                                                                                                           precursor                        ﬁlamentous
                    in                                                      for                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     membranes               P450                                                                                             certiﬁed;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 culture                                                        solid-state           GRAS  control                                      genetic                                                                                                              growth      Advantages:         Eukaryotic  partial for           Limitations:   Not to    manipulation          Advantages:    GRAS clear   capability           Limitations:          Prokaryotic    machinery/ER);   isoprenoid          Advantages:               Photoautotrophic    carbon/energy   thylakoid low           Limitations:    Slow  pathway.

   tHMGR                                                                                  and  supply
  IDI,         fungi                                MEP gene                                                                                                                                              high-density    CO2
                            a                                            TXS of                                    the                                                       in  system                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            heterologous                           of
                                                     of TXS                  ﬁlamentous                                                                                                                                                                                                          culture    in                                                                       GGPPS,                                    and
      TXS          Co-overexpression and                                                                                                                                                    Overexpression  pathway,                                                                                                                               Coexpression GGPPS   cultivation     membrane-mediated


  μg/l
  6.3 ±                                               mg/l                                               mg/l
  61.9                                               17.8                                               4.32

     Taxadiene                                                                                                           Taxadiene                                                                                                                                                                             Taxadiene-5α-ol

       TPF6                                                                                     subtilis                                                     6803
                                                                                   PCC      Alternaria   alternata                                                                                     Bacillus                                                                                                                                                          Synechocystis                                                                                   sp.



 4            5            6



                                                                                                              Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7  1949


[PDF physical page 12]
                                                 Trends in Biotechnology





gene ERG9 (encoding the enzyme squalene synthase) in S. cerevisiae redirects isoprenoid
precursors from sterol synthesis to taxane biosynthesis, thus increasing taxadiene yield by two-
fold [60,61]. In another example, researchers replaced the native ERG9 promoter with a weaker
promoter variant and combined this modiﬁcation with precursor ‘push–pull’ strategies, synergis-
tically increasing taxadiene ﬂux by up to twofold [53]. These results demonstrate that CRISPR-
mediated silencing of competing pathways, coupled with other tools, can boost taxane produc-
tion by reducing carbon diversion. Similarly, CRISPR-guided methylation is an effective approach
to regulate the metabolic ﬂux of the phenylpropanoid pathway in T. chinensis cells. This pathway
supplies phenylalanine derivatives f or paclitaxel biosynthesis while also supporting essential
functions like lignin synthesis [62]. Newton and colleagues knocked down the expression of
phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL), the ﬁrst committed enzyme of the phenylpropanoid pathway
and supplier of phenylalanine derivatives for paclitaxel side-chain synthesis, via CRISPR-guided
DNA methylation. This PAL knockdown resulted in a signiﬁcant 25-fold increase in paclitaxel accu-
mulation [62]. They also used chemical inhibitors to suppress the downstream phenylpropanoid
pathway. When combined with exogenous phenylalanine feeding, this synergistic strategy further
boosted the efﬁciency of paclitaxel biosynthesis.


Beyond CRISPR, miRNA-mediated regulatory strategies also offer a viable approach to
optimize paclitaxel biosynthesis. Recent studies have documented that the endodermis-
speciﬁc miR858b-MYB1L module plays a pivotal role in mediating paclitaxel biosynthesis in
T. mairei. Speciﬁcally, miR858b targets MYB1L, a transcription factor that activates two key pac-
litaxel biosynthetic genes: taxane-2α-O-benzoyltran sferase (TBT) and baccatin III-3-amino,13-
phenylpropanoyltransferase (BAPT) [63]. This miR858b-MYB1L module plays a critical role in
the transcriptional regulation of paclitaxel biosynthesis by speciﬁcally ﬁne-tuning the expression
of TBT and BAPT in the endodermal cells of Taxus roots and stems.

Genetic circuit-based tunable control of metabolic pathway components
Paclitaxel biosynthesis, a 19-step enzymatic cascade, exhibits inherent complexity that demands
precise control to prevent ﬂux imbalances, which could ca use intermediate toxicity or reduced
product yields [61,64–66]. Synthetic genetic circuits provide a powerful solution through
programmable, ligand-responsive regulation. Biosensor-mediated dynamic control enables the
establishment of real-time feedback loops between ﬂuctuations in metabolite concentrations
and adjustments to enzyme expression. This biosensor-mediated regulation relies on metabolite-
responsive biosensors (core components of genetic circuits) to detect input changes (i.e.,
ﬂuctuations in metabolite concentrations) and deliver output signals that modulate enzyme expres-
sion. This approach is critically effective in isoprenoid pathways: for example, FPP-responsive circuits
in S. cerevisiae paradoxically alleviated FPP-induced cytotoxicity while doubling amorphadiene
production, a ﬁnding relevant to paclitaxel biosynthesis as both pathways rely on isoprenoid precur-
sors [67]. In another example, a genetically encoded GGPP biosensor that uses the CrtR from
Corynebacterium glutamicum and a PcrtE_gfpuv fusion reporter has been validated for linking ﬂuo-
rescence signals with intracellular GGPP concentrations [68]. These two validated biosensor cases
demonstrate the feasibility of using biosensors to optimize ﬂux for isoprenoid-derived products,
laying a critical foundation for their use in paclitaxel biosynthesis.


Metabolic network remodeling offers an additional strategy to enhance taxane production by
enabling targeted, precise control over metabolic pat hways relevant to taxane biosynthesis
[69,70] This approach includes four key strategies to enhance taxane production: organelle com-
partmentalization, artiﬁcial protein scaffolds, protein fusion, and transcription factor–mediated
regulation. Organelle compartmentalization strategically optimizes the localization of heterolo-
gous pathway components, enhancing local substrate concentrations and reducing cytotoxicity


1950   Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7


[PDF physical page 13]
Trends in Biotechnology





from intermediate metabolites. For instance, through the localization of TXS, T5αH, and cyto-
chrome P450 reductase (CPR) to chloroplasts in Nicotiana benthamiana, researchers achieved
signiﬁcant increases (up to twofold) in taxadiene production [14]. Similarly, the taxadiene titer
was increased by 54% by using a geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase (GGPPS)–TXS fusion
enzyme in engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae [71]. These results demonstrate that targeted
compartmentalization and protein fusion can effectively alleviate constraints on taxane produc-
tion. In addition, transcription factor regulation also plays a crucial role in optimizing taxane bio-
synthesis. For example, overexpression of TcWRKY33 in T. chinensis leaves led to a signiﬁcant
increase in 10-deacetylbaccatin  III levels [72]. In addition, overexpression of TcMYB29a in
T. chinensis suspension cell led to increased accumulation of paclitaxel and upregulated expres-
sion of key paclitaxel biosynthetic genes [73].


Coupling biosynthesis and chemosynthesis of taxanes
Beyond standalone biosynthesis, coupling bio- and chemo-methods has emerged as an effec-
tive solution for addressing P450-related catalytic promiscuity [19,74]. This approach leverages
the precision of biosynthesis to produce paclitaxel precursors while taking advantage of chemical
robustness to bypass enzymatic steps that are challenging to reconstitute. A key component of
this hybrid strategy is cell-free protein synthesis (CFPS), which uses in vitro reaction platforms
and puriﬁed enzymes or cell extracts to catalyze target metabolic reactions [75]. Unlike in vivo
systems, CFPS avoids intermediate-induced cellular toxicity, eliminates endogenous metabolic
competition, and enables direct optimization of reaction conditions to maximize enzyme activity
[76]. These attributes make CFPS ideal for producing taxane precursors and overcoming limita-
tions associated with P450 enzymes. For instance, Li and colleagues developed an integrated
hybrid system that combines cell-free enzymatic react ions, chemical catalysis, and whole-cell
catalysis for taxane synthesis [74]. This system successfully bypassed the catalytic bottlenecks
of T5αH and taxadiene-5α-ol-O-acetyltransferase (TAT) and synthesized three key paclitaxel
intermediates from mevalonic acid: taxadiene, taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5α-yl acetate (T5α-AC),
and taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5α,10β-diol-5-acetate (T5α-AC-10β-ol). Notably, this integrated
system minimized byproduct formation, attained the highest reported yield of T5α-AC-10β-ol,
and o ptimized the expression of taxane-10β-hydroxylase (T10βH) in S. cerevisiae, thereby
boosting T5α-AC titer by more than 2000-fold relative to conventional fermentation.

Synthetic microbial consortium to enhance taxane production
Synthetic microbial consortia are deﬁned as cocultured communities of two or more wild-type
or genetically engineered microbial species [77]. Through interspecies cooperation [78], these
consortia execute complex metabolic tasks and effectively address single-microbe system limita-
tions in handling the lengthy, multistep paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway. By leveraging microbial
synergies, this consortium-based strategy improves reaction efﬁciency and increases taxane
yield. For example, Zhou and colleagues applied this strategy to taxane production by developing
a dual-species E. coli and S. cerevisiae coculture system [36]. In this system, E. coli synthesizes
taxadiene, which is then passively transported across the cell membranes of both microbes
to S. cerevisiae. In S. cerevisiae, P450 enzymes (e.g., T5αH) catalyze the oxidation of these
precursors into more complex taxane intermediates. This design takes advantage of the unique
strengths of each microbe: E. coli efﬁciently produces taxane precursors, while S. cerevisiae
provides a conducive eukaryotic environment for P450 expression, thereby overcoming the
incompatibility of P450s in prokaryotic systems. First, this consortium approach allows for the
independent optimization of distinct modules of the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway for taxane
production. This separation simpliﬁes engineering efforts and accelerates research progress
toward enabling the biosynthesis of taxane intermediates. Second, this approach maximizes
the utilization of microbial traits tailored for taxane production. Third, this approach effectively



                                                                                                              Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7  1951


[PDF physical page 14]
                                                 Trends in Biotechnology





minimizes feedback inhibition by spatially separating the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway across
different microbes.

Trade-offs of synthetic strategies in paclitaxel biosynthesis
Reconstructing the complex paclitaxel biosynthesis pathway into compatible microbial systems
centers on adapting pathway components to microbial metabolism. Three key challenges are
addressed via targeted engineering: insufﬁcient precursor supply, inefﬁcient P450-mediated
oxygenation, and metabolic ﬂux competition. Each solution carries distinct trade-offs, requiring
deliberate evaluation. The IUP avoids native metabolic competition via exogenous precursors
but is less economically viable for industrial use than engineered MVA/MEP pathways. Similarly,
synthetic microbial consortia resolve P450 incompatibility but face hurdles in population
dynamics and intercellular metabolite transfer. Notably, these strategies are not mutually exclu-
sive but can be synergistically integrated via a phased roadmap. Hybrid bio-chemo approaches
accelerate proof-of-concept in initial pathway reconstruction. The most promising strategy com-
bines key elements: engineered MVA pathways for sustained precursors, optimized P450 sys-
tems for efﬁcient oxygenation, and dynamic regulation to maximize carbon ﬂux to paclitaxel.
This integration tackles current taxane bottlenecks and provides a ﬂexible framework for future
innovations.

Rational selection of the ideal host for de novo biosynthesis of taxanes
Selecting a suitable host for taxane biosynthesis requires matching the host’s intrinsic biological
properties with the unique requirements of the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway. The paclitaxel
pathway imposes three critical demands: nearly half of its biosynthetic steps are catalyzed by
cytochrome P450s, which require eukaryotic-like environments for proper folding and a continuous
NADPH supply for catalytic activity; the multistep reactions necessitate targeted intracellular
compartmentalization to prevent the formation of overoxidation byproducts that divert metabolic
ﬂux; and late-stage intermediates demand a sustained ﬂux of terpenoid precursors to prevent
bottlenecks in downs tream modiﬁcations. Despite signiﬁcant progress in heterologous hosts
such as E. coli, yeast, N. benthamiana, and cyanobacteria, which have enabled the de novo
synthesis of key precursors (e.g., taxadiene, taxadien-5α-ol) (Table 1), the complete recon-
struction of the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway in heterologous chassis remains unachieved.
This underscores the critical importance of rationally selecting hosts for de novo paclitaxel
biosynthesis.

Classic microbial chassis cells: E. coli and yeast
E. coli remains a predominant prokaryotic chassis in metabolic engineering, which is favored for
its rapid growth kinetics, robust scalability, and well-developed genetic toolset. This platform has
successfully generated strains capable of biosynthesizing key paclitaxel precursors, including
taxadiene [43,45], baccatin III (by supplementing 10-deacetylbaccatin III as a substrate) [79],
and other oxygenated taxane intermediates [37]. A paradigmatic work established that computa-
tionally guided dynamic balancing between the endogenous MEP pathway of E. coli and heterol-
ogous taxadiene biosynthetic modules, through modular expression tuning, achieved an overall
~15 000-fold increase in taxadiene yields. This systematic integration of E. coli’s native metabo-
lism with engineered pathways precisely redirected isoprenoid precursor pools toward taxadiene
biosynthesis, laying the foundation for scalable paclitaxel biomanufacturing [5]. Nevertheless,
E. coli lacks membrane-bound organelles and possesses limited posttranslational machinery,
both of which are  critical for late-stage oxidation steps  in paclitaxel biosynthesis [80].
Consequently, while E. coli is effective for the production of upstream precursors (e.g., GGPP,
taxadiene), its inherent limitations in multistep oxidations pose signiﬁcant barriers to the
de novo biosynthesis of paclitaxel as a standalone chassis.


1952   Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7


[PDF physical page 15]
Trends in Biotechnology





By contrast, S. cerevisiae serves as a eukaryotic counterpart featuring native organelle-based
compartmentalization, advanced posttranslational machinery, exceptional fermentation resil-
ience, and GRAS (generally recognized as safe) status. These attributes enable the functional
expression of plant P450s, establishing S. cerevisiae as a versatile industrial chassis for taxane
biosynthesis. S. cerevisiae–based taxane research has progressed along two key directions:
optimizing the production of precursors (e.g., taxadiene) and resolv ing gaps in the pathway for
oxidized taxane intermediates. For taxadiene synthesis, strategies such as suppressing compet-
ing sterol biosynthesis pathways, engineering key enzymes, and pairing enzymes with compati-
ble promoters to optimize gene expression have been validated to boost taxadiene yields [46,48].
Beyond precursor production, S. cerevisiae has also facilitated progress in decoding the late
oxidation steps of paclitaxel. Yang and colleagues revealed that the sequential hydroxylation
order is C5→C10→C13/C9α and identiﬁed CYP725A55 that mediates oxetane ester formation
through cascade oxidation- and concerted acyl rearrangement–driven mechanisms, while a
newly discovered C7-speciﬁc acetyltransferase enabled th e ﬁrst complete biosynthesis of 1β-
dehydroxybaccatin VI, the oxygenated tetracyclic core of paclitaxel, from taxa-4(20),11(12)-
diene-5α-ol in engineered yeast [20]. This work ﬁlled a long-standing knowledge gap in the
late-stage oxidation pathway of paclitaxel.


Beyond conventional S. cerevisiae, Yarrowia lipolytica emerges as a promising nonconventional
chassis. A typical example is the work conducted by Xu and colleagues [53], which demonstrated
the potential of Y. lipolytica for boosting taxadiene production through a ‘push-pull’ metabolic
strategy. Critically, recent studies have validated Y. lipolytica’s prowess in terpenoid biosynthesis,
including peroxisome engineering for compartmentalized squalene pathways [81] and structure-
guided mutagenesis to overcome inhibition of lycopene cyclase [82], which are key adaptations
for synthesizing complex terpenoid backbones.

Nonconventional microbial chassis cells: photosynthetic algae, B. subt ilis, and
Alternaria alternata

Cyanobacteria, as photoautotrophic organisms, serve as promising chassis owing to their
capacity to convert solar energy and CO2 into valuable biochemicals [83]. Their metabolic
ﬂexibility includes the robust native MEP pathway for supplying terpenoid precursors [84,85].
The integration of P450 enzymes into cyanobacterial host systems is facilitated by the photo-
synthetic electron transport chain, which regenerates reducing power (e.g., NADPH) and
enhances P450 catalytic activity. In addition, their thylakoid membranes provide a n optimal
environment for the functional expression of plant-derived eukaryotic P450s, establishing
cyanobacteria as a robust innovative platform for taxane biosynthesis [86]. A recent study
demonstrates the potential of cyanobacterial chassis for taxane production. Zhong and col-
leagues have successfully integrated and optimized a heterologous biosynthetic pathway in
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, achieving notable yields of taxadiene and T5α-ol [59]. This
work establishes cyanobacteria as a sustainable, robust, and promising chassis for paclitaxel
pr ecursor production.


Beyond cyanobacteria chassis, B. subtilis and A. alternata exhibit distinct advantages as alterna-
tive microbial chassis. B. subtilis, a GRAS-certiﬁed organism, has demonstrated potential in the
biosynthesis of natural products, including the production of taxadiene [58]. Although B. subtilis
lags behind E. coli in the development of synthetic biology tools, particularly due to the absence
of stable gene expression systems, its broad metabolic capabilities and recent genetic advance-
ments position it as a viable candidate for further taxane pathway engineering. Meanwhi le, the
ﬁlamentous fungus A. alternata, with its well-established transformation systems, serves as
another promising platform for taxane biosynthesis [57].



                                                                                                              Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7  1953


[PDF physical page 16]
                                                 Trends in Biotechnology





Plant cell chassis
Unlike microbial systems, plant cells naturally support the intricacies of metabolic pathways involving
multiple plant-derived P450s. For instance, researchers have constructed biosynthetic pathways for
taxadiene and taxadiene-5α-ol in various plant chassis, including N. benthamiana [18], Arabidopsis
thaliana [56], Solanum lycopersicum [87], and Artemisia annua [88], leveraging these plant chassis’
well-established genetic transformation systems. In particular, N. benthamiana has emerged as a
prominent model plant system due to its rapid growth, substantial biomass, and capability for tran-
sient gene expression [14]. These characteristics establish N. benthamiana as an ideal host for the
characterization of biosynthetic enzymes and the reconstruction of biosynthetic pathways for plant
natural products [55]. Through the introduction of paclitaxel biosynthetic genes into N. benthamiana,
researchers have elucidated the functions of multiple enzymes involved in paclitaxel biosynthesis
[18]. A notable study by Jiang and colleagues achieved the production of the paclitaxel precursor
baccatin III in N. benthamiana [12]. Through the transient expression of TOT and T9αH, along
with seven other known genes (TXS, T5αH, taxane-13α-hydroxylase gene (T13αH), taxane-2α-
hydroxylase (T2αH), taxane-7β-hydroxylase (T7βH, TAT, and TBT), Jiang and colleagues demon-
strated the capacity of plant chassis to facilitate the reconstruction of complex biosynthetic path-
ways. In addition, Anterola and colleagues expressed the TXS from Taxus brevifolia in the moss
Physcomitrella patens to produce the paclitaxel precursor taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene, and proposed
P. patens as a promising host for biotechnological production of paclitaxel and its precursors [89].


Beyond the whole-plant system, plant suspension cells are promising hosts for the production of
high-value plant-derived metabolites [90]. For taxane production, notable advances have been
made through the use of Taxus species (yews) cell cultures. Taxus suspension cells are a natural
source of paclitaxel and its precursors, and their large-scale cultivation has led to notable break-
throughs in industrial-scale paclitaxel production. Matas and colleagues have successfully estab-
lished stable in vitro transgenic lines of T. baccata through the use of Rhizobium rhizogenes A4
[91]. By overexpressing late-stage genes, such as BAPT and 3′-N-debenzoyl-2′-deoxytaxol-N-
benzoyltransferase gene (DBTNBT), researchers achieved a fourfold increase in paclitaxel titer.
Moreover, companies such as Phyton Biotech have successfully harnessed this approach,
achieving industrial-scale production of paclitaxel through optimized cell culture techniques.
Beyond gene overexpression strategies, transp orter engineering is another critical strategy to
boost paclitaxel yields in Taxus suspension cells [92]. Intracellular accumulation of toxic paclitaxel
intermediates often limits taxane production efﬁciency, and functional transporters can facilitate
the secretion of these intermediates or paclitaxel, thereby reducing cellular toxicity and optimizing
metabolic ﬂux toward the target product of paclitaxel. A recent study of T. mairei identiﬁed the
ATP-binding cassette transporter gene ABCG2 as a potential paclitaxel transporter through the
use of single-cell RNA sequencing and MALDI-IMS analysis [93]. The cell-speciﬁc expression of
ABCG2, which colocalizes with paclitaxel biosynthesis genes in epidermal, endodermal, and
xylem parenchyma cells, may facilitate targeted paclitaxel translocation, thereby serving as a
molecular target for engineering.


Holistic comparison of taxane-producing chassis and trade-off analysis
Selecting an optimal host system for the biosynthesis of high-value complex natural products,
such as paclitaxel, demands a strategic and multidimensional approach (Table 1). Holistically, dif-
ferent chassis exhibit irreplaceable strengths tailored to distinct stages of paclitaxel biosynthesis,
with inherent limitations that constrain their standalone application. As for E. coli, it achieves
gram-scale taxadiene production (up to 1.2 g/l) via MEP pathway engineering but lacks ER struc-
tures required for cytochrome P450 folding; S. cerevisiae supports P450 activity via ER compart-
mentalization but suffers ﬂux competition with the native sterol biosynthesis pathway;
Cyanobacteria use CO as a sustainable carbon source for precursor synthesis but have slow


1954   Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7


[PDF physical page 17]
Trends in Biotechnology





growth rates; Taxus suspension cells retain native paclitaxel pathway completeness but incur
high industrial costs. The aforementioned strengths and limitations create unavoidable trade-
offs. These trade-offs necessitate tailored engineering rather than a one-size-ﬁts-all chassis. To
resolve these trade-offs, an emerging paradigm leverages synthetic microbial consortia, where
distinct modules of the paclitaxel pathway are distributed among hosts naturally suited to speciﬁc
tasks. For instance, a dual-species E. coli-S. cerevisiae coculture system was developed for
highly efﬁcient taxane production [36]. E. coli is particularly efﬁcient in producing the initial taxane
precursor (e.g., taxadiene) owing to its efﬁcient terpenoid metabolic pathways. Yeast excels at
expressing plant-derived P450s, which are crucial for the later stage oxygenation steps of pacli-
taxel biosynthesis. This ‘division of labor’ approach reduces metabolic burden in single hosts and
leverages each chassis’ unique strengths, including prokaryotic metabolic ﬂux, eukaryotic P450
functionality, and compatibility with plant pathways.


Artiﬁcial intelligence–guided optimization of metabolic pathway and chassis cell
The integration of machine learning (ML) into targeted metabolic pathway optimization holds
signiﬁcant potential but remains underexplored in the construction of the paclitaxel biosynthetic
pathway. By integrating ML with yeast-speciﬁc genetic assembly strategies, researchers can rap-
idly resolve core bottlenecks in paclitaxel biosynthesis in yeast, such as unbalanced heterologous
gene expression and metabolic ﬂux diversion (Figure 4). Notably, a platform such as MiYa, which





                                                                                                 TrendsTrends inin BiotechnologyBiotechnology

Figure 4. Schematic illustrating AI-driven advanced strategies for enhancing taxane biosynthesis. (A) Biosensor-
driven high-throughput screening: A genetic biosensor emits ﬂuorescence upon binding to the target taxane intermediate. A
library of random mutants, derived from taxane biosynthetic genes, is generated and sorted using FACS according to
ﬂuorescence intensity (high, moderate, or low). Key genes (e.g., gene a, gene b, gene c) involved in taxane biosynthesis
are subsequently identiﬁed via NGS. (B) Schematic of the EvolvePro enzyme-evolution platform: the iterative workﬂow initi-
ates with low-throughput mutagenesis of target enzymes, where a pretrained PLM generates structural embeddings through
residue-level feature extraction. Domain-speciﬁc representations are obtained by positional averaging across functional
regions, subsequently training a regression model on experimentally validated activity data (K = batch size; f(x) = prediction
score). Through active learning loops, top-performing mutants identiﬁed in each cycle (top n selection) feed back into PLM
parameter updates, establishing a closed-loop optimization system, as denoted by dashed update arrows. (C) ML-assisted
pathway optimization: pathway optimization progresses through three consecutive phases: (i) a design phase using Golden
Gate assembly to modularize PRO-ORF-TER (POT) units; (ii) a testing phase quantifying product titers in phenotyped strain
libraries under controlled fermentation; and (iii) an optimization phase deploying gradient-boosted regression models to
map conﬁguration-titer relationships, where prediction conﬁdence intervals guide combinatorial parameter adjustment.
This computational-experimental integration enables systematic reﬁnement of biosynthetic performance. AI: artiﬁcial
intelligence; FACS: ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting; ML, machine learning; NGS: next-generation sequencing; ORFs:
open-reading frames; PRM: protein language model; PROs: promoters; TERs: terminators.


                                                                                                              Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7  1955


[PDF physical page 18]
                                                 Trends in Biotechnology





combines ML with YeastFab assembly methods, has illustrated how combinatorial gene expres-   Outstanding questions
sion optimization in yeast can boost target taxane production [94]. Similarly, ML-driven strategies   What  are  the  advantages  and
have been used to optimize heterologous gene copy numbers, enabling Y. lipolytica to achieve     limitations of various chassis  cells,
eicosapentaenoic acid biosynthesis with a titer of 27.5 g/l [95]. These advances suggest that     including E. coli, yeast, cyanobacteria,
                                                                                                                            plant  cells,  in the biosynthesis  of
ML strategies could also be adapted to optimize the construction of paclitaxel biosynthetic                                                                                                                               paclitaxel? What chassis cells offer
pathways in yeast and other microbial chassis. ML technologies also hold promise for addressing    the most promising platform for the
critical bottlenecks in paclitaxel biosynthesis: high promiscuity and low catalytic activity of P450    de novo production  of p aclitaxel,
enzymes (e.g., T5αH) that mediate key oxygenation ste ps in paclitaxel biosynthesis. A tool     considering factors such as efﬁciency,
                                                                                                                                                         scalability, and metabolic compatibility?
such as the Bayesian Optimization–guided Evolutionary (BO-EVO) algorithm enables the iterative
exploration of protein ﬁtness landscapes to reﬁne the function of these P450 enzymes [96]. In ad-   How can advanced artiﬁcial intelligence
dition, the EVOLVEpro approach integrates protein language models with a few-shot learning    systems be used to integrate multi-
                                                                                                        omics datasets related to paclitaxel
framework to efﬁciently enhance the functionality o f P450 enzymes, even when experimental
                                                                                                                        biosynthesis and  predict unknown
data are limited [97]. Although these tools have not yet been applied directly to paclitaxel-    pathway branches to resolve pathway
speciﬁc P450s, their success in optimizing the activity of P450s for other natural product path-    ambiguity? How can these  artiﬁcial
ways suggests these tools could be adapted to paclitaxel biosynthesis [98,99].                          intelligence–derived insights be further
                                                                                                                            applied to reﬁne synthetic biology tools
                                                                                                     and guide the rational design of chassis
In the optimization of yeast chassis for taxane production, ML also provides promising solutions      cells for de novo paclitaxel production?
for addressing the inherent limitations of yeast chassis. While yeast is widely used for microbial
taxane synthesis, it faces challenges speciﬁc to paclitaxel biosynthesis, such as the toxic accu-    What approaches can be used  to
                                                                                                                    improve heterologous catalytic efﬁciency
mulation of taxane intermediates and the insufﬁcient supply of terpenoid precursors for paclitaxel    and reduce product  promiscuity  of
biosynthesis. Advanced deep learning–based ML models, including convolutional neural net-      critical biosynthetic enzymes, such as
works (CNNs) and long short-term memory (LSTM), have already shown value in improving    cytochrome P450 enzymes (e.g., T5αH),
yeast cellular functions related to terpenoid biosynthesis. For example, these models have pre-      in microbial- and plant-based chassis
                                                                                                                systems?
dicted optimal gene combinations that improved peroxisome functionality in yeast, resulting in
an 80% increase in the yield of geraniol (a derivative of isoprene) by compartmentalizing    Given the highly branched and complex
mevalonate pathway enzymes [61]. However, a major challenge in applying ML to paclitaxel bio-    nature of the metabolic network for
                                                                                                                                           paclitaxel biosynthesis, what strategies
synthesis is the scarcity of high-quality, standardized datasets, which are critical for training ML
                                                                                                      can be used to systematically identify
models to accurately predict and optimize paclitaxel biosynthetic pathways. To address this    and  optimize   critical  nodes  and
issue, we propose establishing collaborative, open-access data repositories focused on pacli-    pathways  to  improve  the  overall
taxel biosynthesis. The se repositories would allow researchers worldwide to share, access,     biosynthetic  efﬁciency  of  paclitaxel
                                                                                                                      precursors?
and curate comprehensive datasets related to paclitaxel biosynthesis, thereby fostering an envi-
ronment of open collaboration.                                                       How can cell-free protein synthesis
                                                                                                               systems, artiﬁcial metabolic synthesis
Concluding remarks and future perspectives                                                   modules, and chemoenzymatic synthe-
                                                                                                                                                sis methods be integrated to overcome
Paclitaxel and its derivatives, such as docetaxel and cabazitaxel, remain clinically indispensable     existing bottlenecks in paclitaxel bio-
anticancer agents, yet their sustainable production via de novo biosynthesis is hindered by     synthesis and enable the sustainable,
persistent knowledge gaps and technical barriers (see Outstanding questions). Three major inter-     scalable, and economically viable pro-
                                                                                                                         duction of paclitaxel precursors?
connected challenges remain unresolved. First, the intricate and partially unresolved paclitaxel
biosynthetic pathway signiﬁcantly impedes rational metabolic engineering. Paclitaxel biosynthesis
likely functions as a highly branched metabolic network, with an unresolved order of enzymatic
reactions involving hydroxylation, oxidation, and acylation. Second, the incompatibility between
plant-derived pathways and microbial chassis limits heterologous taxanes production. Plant-
derived P450 enzymes often exhibit inadequate catalytic activity in microbial systems, thereby
generating ﬂux-diverting byproducts that disrupt the reconstruction of heterologous paclitaxel
pathways. Third, the intrinsic cytotoxicity of taxane intermediates often exceeds host tolerance,
thereby limiting intracellular accumulation and creating an inherent paradox: paclitaxel’s antican-
cer activity also inhibits the growth of its production hosts.


To address these challenges, future research should prioritize three core goals: (i) optimizing the
functional expression of heterologous enzymes (particularly P450s), (ii) increasing the intracellular


1956   Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7


[PDF physical page 19]
Trends in Biotechnology





availability of key taxane precursors, and (iii) addressing existing metabolic bottlenecks in pacli-
taxel biosynthesis. From a forward-looking perspective, two strategies will be pivotal to advanc-
ing paclitaxel biosynthesis: the use of synthetic microbial consortia and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)–
guided enzyme engineering. Synthetic microbial consortia (e.g., E. coli-S. cerevisiae cocultures)
leverage metabolic division of labor to resolve single-chassis limitations, thereby making them
the most practical midterm platform for scalable taxane production. In parallel, AI-based tools
(e.g., EVOLVEpro) can be harnessed to optimize rate-limiting enzymes (e.g., T5αH) to reduce
P450-mediated product promiscuity, thereby directly boosting ﬂux toward target precursors
and laying the groundwork for de novo paclitaxel synthesis.


Beyond these core strategies, transporter engineering and passive secretion also warrant further
exploration for paclitaxel export. Speciﬁcally, although the ABCG2 transporter from T. mairei is
proposed to mediate paclitaxel efﬂux, existing evidence supporting its function remains scarce
and its in vitro transport activity remains unvalidated. Alternatively, paclitaxel’s lipophilicity sup-
ports passive secretion, as evidenced by the efﬁciency of biphasic reactors (e.g., those with a
vegetable oil overlay) used to recover taxanes; thus, future work should prioritize clarifying
which of these two routes predominates for paclitaxel export. Equally critical is chassis optimiza-
tion: CRISPR-mediated genome editing will facilitate tuning of coenzyme/cofactor supply,
thereby further enhancing precursor pools and enzyme activity. For intractable metabolic bottle-
necks, synergistic chemoenzymatic approaches serve as a bridge between biological ﬂexibility
and chemical synthesis robustness. Finally, a deeper understanding of transcriptional and post-
transcriptional regulatory mechanisms governing paclitaxel biosynthesis will be essential for
achieving consistent, high-titer, industrial-scale paclitaxel yields.


Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to all colleagues whose work is cited or could not be cited in this article. They also extend their
apologies to the authors whose important work is not mentioned here due to word and citation constraints. The authors also
thank BioRender for providing visualization support in the creation of ﬁgures. This work was supported by the National Key
Research and Development Program of China (2023YFA0914501), the National Natural Science Foundatio n of China

(32400068), the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province (2024NSFSC1833), the China Postdoctoral Science
Foundation (GZC20230332, 2024M750284, 2025T180738), and the Sichuan Province Innovative Talent Funding Project

for Postdoctoral Fellows (BX202318).


Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.


References
  1. Liang, F. et al. (2025) Elucidation of the ﬁnal steps in Taxol      9. Zhang, J. et al. (2022) A microbial supply chain for production of
     biosynthesis and its biotechnological production. Nat. Synth. 4,         the anti-cancer drug vinblastine. Nature 609, 341–347
    1212–1222                                                   10. Zhang, Y. et al. (2021) The genomes of Taxus sp ecies unveil
  2. Min, L. et al. (2023) Strategies and lessons learned from total         novel candidates in the biosynthesis of taxoids. Mol. Plant 14,
     synthesis of taxol. Chem. Rev. 123, 4934–4971                    1773–1775
  3. Soﬁas, A.M. et al. (2017) The battle of “na no” paclitaxel. Adv.    11. Xiong, X. et al. (2021) The Taxus genome provides insights into
    Drug Deliv. Rev. 122, 20–30                                                paclitaxel biosynthesis. Nat. Plants 7, 1026–1036
  4. Wani, M.C. et al. (2014) Nature as a remarka ble chemist: a    12. Jiang, B. et al. (2024) Characterization and heterologous recon-
    personal story of the discovery and development of taxol.          stitution of Taxus biosynthetic enzymes leading to baccatin III.
    Anti-Cancer Drugs 25, 482–487                                   Science 383, 622–629
  5. Ajikumar, P.K. et al. (2010) Isoprenoid pathway optimization for    13. McClune, C.J. et al. (2025) Discovery of FoTO1 and Taxol genes
     taxol precursor overproduction in Escherichia coli. Science 330,        enables biosynthesis of baccatin III. Nature 643, 582–592
    70–74                                                         14.  Li, J. et al. (2019) Chloroplastic metabolic e ngineering coupled
  6. Heinig, U. et al. (2013) Getting to the bottom of Taxol biosynthesis         with isoprenoid pool enhancement for committed t axanes bio-
    by fungi. Fungal Divers. 60, 161–170                                   synthesis in Nicotiana benthamiana. Nat. Commun. 10, 4850
  7. Stadler, M. et al. (2024) Taxol is NOT prod uced sustainably by    15. Yin, J.Y. et al. (2024) Comprehensive strategies for paclitaxel
    endophytic fungi! –A case study for the damage tha t scientiﬁc         production: insights from plant cell culture, endophytic microor-
    papermills can cause for the scientiﬁc co mmunities. Fungal        ganisms, and synthetic biology. Hortic. Res. 12, uhae346
     Biol. Rev. 49, 100367                                          16. Zerbe, P. et al. (2024) Plants against cancer: towards green
  8. Schneider, F. et al. (2020) Total synthesis of the complex taxane        Taxol production through pathway discovery and metabolic
    diterpene canataxpropellane. Science 367, 676–681                     engineering. aBIOTECH 5, 394–402



                                                                                                              Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7  1957


[PDF physical page 20]
                                                 Trends in Biotechnology





17. Zhao, Y. et al. (2024) Oxetane ring formation in Taxol biosynthe-    44. Boghigian, B.A. et  al. (2012) A. Analysis of heterologous
     sis is catalyzed by a bifunctional cytoc hrome P450 enzyme.        taxadiene production in K- and B-derived Escheric hia coli.
     J. Am. Chem. Soc. 146, 801–810                                     Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 93, 1651–1661
18. Zhang, Y. et al. (2023) Synthetic biology identi ﬁes the minimal    45. Wang, J.-Y. et  al. (2022) Facile biosynthesis o f taxadiene
    gene set required for paclitaxel biosynthesis in a plant chassis.       by a newly constructed Escherichia coli strain fu sing enzymes
    Mol. Plant 16, 1951–1961                                             taxadiene synthase and geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase.
19. Liu, J. et al. (2024) Reconstitution of early paclitaxel biosynthetic        Process Biochem. 122, 129–136
    network. Nat. Commun. 15, 1419                               46. Engels, B. et al. (2008) Metabolic engineering o f taxadiene
20. Yang, C. et al. (2024) Biosynthesis of the h ighly oxygenated         biosynthesis in yeast as a ﬁrst step towards taxol (paclitaxel)
     tetracyclic core skeleton of Taxol. Nat. Commun. 15, 2339              production. Metab. Eng. 10, 201–206
21. Sanchez-Muñoz, R. et al. (2020) A novel hydroxylation step in the    47. Ding, M.-Z. et al. (2014) Biosynthesis of taxadiene in Saccharomyces
    taxane biosynthetic pathway: a new approach to paclitaxel pro-          cerevisiae: selection of geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase
    duction by synthetic biology. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 8, 410          directed by a computer-aided docking strategy. PLoS ONE 9,
22. Walker, K. et al. (2002) The ﬁnal acylation step in taxol biosynthesis:       e109348
    cloning of the taxoid C13-s ide-chain N-benzoyltransferase from    48. Nowrouzi, B. et al. (2020) Enhanced prod uction of taxadiene in
    Taxus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99, 9166–9171                 Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microb. Cell Factories 19, 200–212
23. Cheng, J. et al. (2021) Chromosome-level genome of Himalayan    49. Malcı, K. et al. (2023) Improved production of taxol(®) precursors
   yew provides insights into the origin and evoluti on of the pacli-           in S. cerevisiae using combinatorial in silico design and metabolic
     taxel biosynthetic pathway. Mol. Plant 14, 1199–1209                   engineering. Microb. Cell Factories 22, 243–265
24. Wildung, M.R. et al. (1996) A cDNA clone for taxadiene synthase,    50. Walls, L.E. et al. (2021) Optimizing the biosynt hesis of oxygen-
    the diterpene cyclase that catalyzes the committed step of taxol        ated and acetylated Taxol precursors  in Saccharomyces
    biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 9201–9204                             cerevisiae using advanced bioprocessing strategies. Biotechnol.
25. Li, C. et al. (2024) A cytochrome P450 enzyme catalyses oxetane        Bioeng. 118, 279–293
     ring formation in paclitaxel biosynthesis. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.    51. Nowrouzi, B. et al. (2022) Exploring opti mal taxol® CYP725A4
    63, e202407070                                                                  activity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microb. Cell Factories 21,
26. Luo, X. et al. (2019) Complete biosynthesis of cannabinoids and       197–221
     their unnatural analogues in yeast. Nature 567, 123–126           52. Walls, L. et al. (2022) Enhancing Sa ccharomyces cerevisiae
27. De La Peña, R. et al. (2021) Rerouting plant terpene biosynthesis        taxane biosynthesis and overcoming nutritional str ess-induced
    enables momilactone pathway elucidation. Nat. Chem. Biol. 17,        pseudohyphal growth. Microorganisms 10, 163
   205–212                                                     53. Xu, M. et al. (2023) Improving solubility and c opy number of
28. Tan, C. et al. (2022) Harnessing interac tional sensory genes for         taxadiene synthase to enhance the titer of taxadiene in Yarrowia
     rationally reprogramming chaotic metabolism. Researc h 2022,           lipolytica. Synth. Syst. Biotechnol. 8, 331–338
   0017                                                         54. Hasan, M.M. et al. (2014) Metabolic engineering of Nicotiana
29. Shi, Y. et al. (2022) Production of plant sesquiterp ene lactone        benthamiana for the increased production of taxad iene. Plant
    parthenolide in the yeast cell factory. ACS Sy nth. Biol. 11,          Cell Rep. 33, 895–904
    2473–2483                                                     55. Fu, J. et al. (2021) Importation of taxadiene synthase into chloro-
30. Huercano, C. et al. (2025) ER–plastid contact sites as molecular          plast improves taxadiene production in tobacco. Planta 253, 107
    crossroads for plastid lipid biosynthesis. BMC Biol. 23, 139        56. Besumbes, Ó. et al. (2004) Metabolic engineering of isoprenoid
31. Wu, Q.Y. et al. (2022) Construction of an Escheric hia coli cell         biosynthesis in Arabidopsis for the produ ction of taxadiene, the
     factory to synthesize taxadien-5α-ol, the key prec ursor of anti-          ﬁrst committed precursor of Taxol. Biotechnol. Bioe ng. 88,
    cancer drug paclitaxel. Bioresour. Bioprocess. 9, 82                168–175
32. Freud, Y. et al. (2017) Catalytic control in the facile proton transfer    57. Bian, G. et al. (2017) Production of taxadiene by engineering of
     in taxadiene synthase. ACS Catal. 7, 7653–7657                     mevalonate pathway in Escherichia coli and endophytic fungus
33. Köksal, M. et al. (2011) Taxadiene synthase structure and evolu-          Alternaria alternata TPF6. Biotechnol. J. 12, 1600697
     tion of modular architecture in terpene biosynthesis. Nature 469,    58. Abdallah,  I.I. et al. (2019) Metabolic engineering of Bacillus
   116–120                                                                        subtilis toward taxadiene biosynthesis as the ﬁrst committed
34. He, S. et al. (2024) Insights into taxadiene synthase catalysis         step for taxol production. Front. Microbiol. 10, 218
    and promiscuity facilitated by mutability landscape and molecular    59. Zhong, J. et al. (2024) Engineering cyanobacteria as a new plat-
    dynamics. Planta 259, 87                                         form for producing taxol precursors directly from carbon dioxide.
35. Edgar, S. et al. (2017) Engineering of taxadiene synthase for im-         Biotechnol. Biofuels Bioprod. 17, 99
    proved selectivity and yield of a key taxol biosynthetic intermediate.    60.  Li, J. et al. (2024) Engineering yeast for high-level production of
   ACS Synth. Biol. 6, 201–205                                         β-farnesene from sole methanol. Metab. Eng. 85, 194–200
36. Zhou, K. et al. (2015) Distributing a metabolic pathway among a    61. Baker, J.J. et al. (2024) ML-enhanced p eroxisome capacity
    microbial consortium enhances production of natural products.        enables compartmentalization of multienzyme pathway. Nat.
    Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 377–383                                 Chem. Biol. 21, 727–735
37. Biggs, B.W. et al. (2016) Overcoming heterologous protein inter-    62. Brzycki Newton, C. et al. (2023) Targeted control of supporting path-
    dependency to optimize P450-mediated taxol precursor synthesis       ways in paclitaxel biosynthesis with CRISPR-guided methylation.
     in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113, 3209–3214          Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 11, 1272811–1272826
38. Yadav, V.G. et al. (2014) Unraveling the multispeciﬁcity and cata-    63. Yu, C. et al. (2025) Role of an endodermis-speciﬁc miR858b-
      lytic promiscuity of taxadiene monooxygenase. J. Mol. Catal. B      MYB1L module in the regulation of Taxo l biosynthesis in Taxus
    Enzym. 110, 154–164                                                       mairei. Plant J. 122, e70135
39. Song, X. et al. (2024) Unraveling the catalytic mechanism of    64. Ream, M. et al. (2024) Engineered autonomous dynamic regula-
    taxadieene-5α-hydroxylase from crystallography and computa-          tion of metabolic ﬂux. Nat. Rev. Bioeng. 2, 233–243
     tional analyses. ACS Catal. 14, 3912–3925                       65. Xu, X. et al. (2024) Genetic circuits for metabolic ﬂux optimization.
40.  Li, G. et al. (2024) Yeast metabolism adaptation f or efﬁcient        Trends Microbiol. 32, 791–806
    terpenoids synthesis via isopentenol utilization. Na t. Commun.    66. Lv, Y. et al. (2019) Coupling feedback geneti c circuits with
    15, 9844                                                       growth phenotype for dynamic population control and intelligent
41. Ward, V.C.A. et al. (2019) Cell free biosynthesis of isoprenoids         bioproduction. Metab. Eng. 54, 109–116
    from isopentenol. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 116, 3269–3281            67. Dahl, R.H.  et  al. (2013) Engineering dyn amic pathway
42. Ma, Y. et al. (2023) Engineering a universal and efﬁcient platform         regulation using stress-response promoters. Nat. Biotechnol.
     for terpenoid synthesis in yeast. Proc. Natl. Ac ad. Sci. U. S. A.        31, 1039–104 6
    120, e2207680120                                            68. Henke, N.A. et al. (2020) Corynebacterium g lutamicum CrtR
43. Huang, Q. et al. (2001) Engineering Escherichia coli for the syn-       and its orthologs in actinobacteria: conserved function and
    thesis of taxadiene, a key intermediate in the biosynthesis of         application as genetically encoded biosensor for d etection of
     taxol. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 9, 2237–2242                               geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 5482


1958   Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7


[PDF physical page 21]
Trends in Biotechnology





69. Bathe, U. et al. (2019) Cytochrome P450 enzyme s: a driving    85. Einhaus, A. et al. (2022) Engineering a powerful green cell factory
     force of plant diterpene diversity. Phytochemistry 161, 149–162           for robust photoautotrophic diterpenoid production. Metab. Eng.
70. Lanier, E.R. et al. (2023) Plant terpene spec ialized metabolism:        73, 82–90
    complex networks or simple linear pathways? Plan t J. 114,    86. Wlodarczyk, A. et al. (2016) Metabolic engineering of light-driven
    1178–1201                                                   cytochrome P450 dependent pathways into Synec hocystis sp.
71. Zhang, C. et al. (2023) Elimination of enzymes catalysis compart-      PCC 6803. Metab. Eng. 33, 1–11
    mentalization enhancing taxadiene production in Sa ccharomy-    87. Liu, L. et al. (2015) Regulation of carotenoid m etabolism in
    ces cerevisiae. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 11, 1141272                tomato. Mol. Plant 8, 28–39
72. Chen, Y. et al. (2021) Salicylic acid-responsive factor TcWRKY33    88.  Li, M. et  al. (2015) Engineering isoprenoid biosy nthesis in
     positively regulates Taxol biosynthesis in Taxus chinensis in direct         Artemisia annua L. for the production of taxa diene: a key inter-
    and indirect ways. Front. Plant Sci. 12, 697476                       mediate of Taxol. Biomed. Res. Int. 2015, 504932
73. Cao, X. et al. (2022) TcMYB29a, an ABA-responsive R2R3-MYB    89. Anterola, A. et al. (2009) Production of taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene by
     transcriptional factor, upregulates taxol biosynt hesis in Taxus         transgenic Physcomitrella patens. Transgenic Res. 18, 655–660
     chinensis. Front. Plant Sci. 13, 804593                          90. Wu, T. et al. (2021) Plant cell cultures as heterologous bio-
74.  Li, J. et  al. (2024) Biochemical synthesis of  t axanes from          factories for secondary metabolite production. P lant Commun.
    mevalonate. Synth. Syst. Biotechnol. 9, 694–700                         2, 100235
75. Liu, W.-Q. et al. (2024) Cell-free biosynthesis and engineering of    91. Perez-Matas, E. et al. (2024) Overexpression o f BAPT and
    ribosomally synthesized lanthipeptides. Nat. Commun. 15, 4336      DBTNBT genes in Taxus baccata in vitro cultu res to enhance
76. Valliere, M.A. et al. (2019) A cell-free platform for the prenylation         the biotechnological production of paclitaxel. Plant Biotechnol.
     of natural products and application to cannabi noid production.          J. 22, 233–247
    Nat. Commun. 10, 565                                          92. Xie, X. et al. (2025) From Taxus to pacl itaxel: opportunities and
77. Jiang, Y. et al. (2023) Construction of stable microbial consortia for        challenges for urban agriculture to promote h uman health.
     effective biochemical synthesis. Trends Biotechnol. 41, 1430–1441         Plant Physiol. Biochem. 220, 109502
78. Liu, Y. et al. (2024) Rational construction of synthetic consortia:    93. Yu, C. et al. (2023) Integrated mass spectro metry imaging and
    key considerations and model-based methods for gui ding the          single-cell transcriptome atlas strategies provide no vel insights
    development of a novel biosynthesis pla tform. Biotechnol. Adv.          into taxoid biosynthesis and transport in Taxus m airei stems.
    72, 108348                                                             Plant J. 115, 1243–1260
79. Loncaric, C. et  al. (2006) Proﬁling a taxol pathway 10β-    94. Zhou, Y. et  al. (2018) MiYA, an efﬁci ent machine-learning
     acetyltransferase: assessment of the speciﬁcity and the produc-       workﬂow in conjunction with the YeastFab assembl y strategy
     tion of baccatin III by in vivo acetylation in E. coli. Chem. Biol. 13,          for  combinatorial  optimization  of heterologous met abolic
    309–317                                                   pathways  in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Metab. E ng. 47,
80. Mutanda, I. et al. (2021) Recent advances in metabolic engineer-       294–302
     ing, protein engineering, and transcriptome-guided in sights to-    95. Du, F. et al. (2024) Optimizing multic opy chromosomal integra-
    ward synthetic production of taxol. Front. Bioeng. Bi otechnol.          tion for stable high-performing strains. Nat. Chem. Biol. 20,
     9, 632269                                                 1670–1679
81. Ma, Y. et al. (2024) Engineering peroxiso mal biosynthetic path-    96. Hu, R. et al. (2023) Protein engineering via Bayesian optimization-
    ways for maximization of triterpene production in Yarrowia        guided evolutionary algorithm and robotic exp eriments. Brief.
      lipolytica. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 121, e2314798121             Bioinform. 24, 1–9
82. Ma, Y. et al. (2022) Removal of lycopene substr ate inhibition    97. Jiang, K. et  al. (2025) Rapid in silico d irected evolution
    enables high carotenoid productivity in Yarrowia lipolytica. Nat.        by a protein language model with EVOLVEpro. Sc ience 387,
   Commun. 13, 572                                            eadr6006
83. Tan, C. et al. (2022) Direct carbon capture for the production of    98. Jang, W.D. et al. (2022) Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence to en-
    high-performance biodegradable plastics by cyanobacterial cell       zyme and pathway design for metabolic engineering. Curr. Opin.
     factories. Green Chem. 24, 4470–4483                                 Biotechnol. 73, 101–107
84. Tan, C. et al. (2022) Carbon-negative synthetic biology: challenges    99. Wang, Q. et al. (2024) Cytochrome P450 e nzyme design by
    and emerging trends of cyanobacterial technolog y. Trends         constraining the catalytic pocket in a diffusion model. Research
     Biotechnol. 40, 1488–1502                                                7, 0413





                                                                                                              Trends in Biotechnology, July 2026, Vol. 44, No. 7  1959