www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                step being the cyclization of geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP) to taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene—a reaction catalyzed
                           by taxadiene synthase (TXS)2. Through a series of enzymatic transformations, 10-deacetylbaccatin III (DBT) is
                             hydroxylated by the enzyme 10-deacetylbaccatin III-10-O-acetyltransferase (DBAT), resulting in the formation
                                of the diterpene intermediate baccatin III3. Baccatin III is then conjugated with a β-phenylalanyl-CoA side
                             chain by C-13 phenylpropanoyl-CoA transferase (BAPT), producing 3-N-debenzoyl-2-deoxypaclitaxel. Finally,
                              the enzyme 3-N-debenzoyl-2-deoxypaclitaxel N-benzoyltransferase (DBTNBT) catalyzes the attachment of a
                             benzoyl group from benzoyl-CoA, yielding paclitaxel (PTX) as the final product4,5. Classified as a member of
                                taxanes, PTX is a tetracyclic diterpenoid that was initially characterized as one of the most potent antineoplastic
                              agents with proven anti-cancer effects. Nowadays, PTX is largely applied as a chemotherapy medication against
                              various types of advanced tumors, including ovarian, breast, metastatic pancreatic, Kaposi’s sarcoma and non-
                                 small-cell lung tumors6–9. Initially, PTX was extracted from the bark of the Pacific yew tree, Taxus brevifolia, and
                         showed a high cytotoxicity against mouse tumor cells10. Subsequently, the chemical structure of PTX molecule
                          was determined by X-ray analysis, and it was verified as an efficient large broad-spectrum natural anticancer
                                     drug9,11,12. PTX was therefore approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration firstly for the treatment of
                           advanced ovarian cancer and later for other cancer types13.
                             Twenty years after its discovery, the sustainable production of PTX is still a multi-factorial challenge. In
                                  particular, the low yield of PTX from its natural sources, together with its structural complexity, are considered
                              the most important factors that limit its sustainable production9,14–16. Alternative biotechnological approaches
                            based on the use of Taxus sp.cell suspension cultures have been established and effectively used for PTX
                              production, yet enhancing its yield remains a significant on-going challenge17–19..
                                   Intensive studies have been conducted over last decade to improve the production of PTX in Taxus sp. cell
                             suspension cultures. This research was mainly based on testing a set of variants such as Taxus sp. cell line varieties,
                                culture conditions, media composition, use of elicitors and other bioreactor systems20–23. Several of them
                              suggested promising outcomes for the use of elicitors and certain plant hormones24–26. In particular, jasmonic
                               acid (JA) and its methyl-derivative (MeJA) have been shown to play roles in enhancing the biosynthesis of PTX
                               in Taxus sp. cell suspension cultures24,26. Jasmonic acid is known as a plant oxylipin-derivative hormone that
                                regulates several key physiological processes in plants including development, stress responses and immunity
                                 systems27–31. The first step of JA biosynthesis starts by the di-oxygenation of linolenic acid (C18:3) under the
                               action of 13-lipoxygenase (13-LOX).
                                In general, plant lipoxygenases (LOXs) have well characterized iron or manganese-dependent dioxygenases
                                    activities that transfer molecular oxygen (O2) to polyunsaturated fatty acids notably, linoleic acid (LA, C18:2ω6),
                                 linolenic acid (ALA, C18:3ω3), forming therefore the corresponding hydroperoxides,  i.e. hydroperoxy
                              octadecadienoic acid (HPOD), hydroperoxy octadecatrienoic acid (HPOT), and hydroperoxy eicosatetraenoic
                               acid (HPOET), respectively32,33. LOXs are normally classified according to their regiospecificity, the position of
                           carbon atom in the fatty acid where the oxygen molecule is incorporated, into 9-LOXs and 13-LOXs34–36. Most
                               plant LOXs identified to date are 13-LOXs that produce 13-hydroperoxide fatty acids, which are concurrently
                             metabolized by at least four key enzymes, forming together the 13-LOX oxylipin biosynthetic pathways37–39.
                            These include divinyl ether synthase (DES)40, hydroperoxide lyase (HPL)41, allene oxide synthase (AOS)42,
                                also known as the JA-biosynthesis pathway, and peroxygenase (PXG), the latest identified branch in 13-LOX
                              pathway43. Together, these enzymes work cooperatively, and sometimes competitively, to transform 13-HPOT
                                into a bouquet of highly active molecules with proven impacts on seed germination and plant growth, pathogen
                                  resistance, response to abiotic stresses in many economically important plants34,44. The role of the 13-LOX
                           pathway in activating the biosynthesis of a range of plant secondary metabolites was recently reported, whereby
                           exogenous treatment of Taxus sp. cell suspensions with 13-HPOT significantly enhanced the biosynthesis and
                                secretion of PTX45 by inducing the expression of caleosins/peroxygenases, plus the accumulation of cellular lipid
                               droplets in Taxus media cell cultures.
                                In this context, although the biological importance of 13-LOX- derivative oxylipins in the stimulation of PTX
                               biosynthesis has been demonstrated, no 13-LOX enzyme has been characterized to date in any species of Taxus
                                   sp. The main objective of the current study was to identify and characterize 13-lipoxygenase from Taxus media
                                  callus and describe the functional connection of 13-LOX activity with the biosynthesis of PTX. For that, a gene
                       TmLOX13, encoding a typical 13-lipoxygenase has been cloned, heterologously expressed and the enzymatic
                                   activity of the recombinant protein has been characterized. Furthermore, the biological involvement of TmLOX13
                               in the biosynthesis of PTX has been evaluated using TmLOX13-silenced cells of T. media. The results obtained
                          from the complementation of TmLOX13-silenced cells suggested a particular role of the 13-LOX-PXG pathway
                               in the regulation of PTX biosynthesis.

                       Materials and methods
                        Chemicals and plant materials
                             Culture media components and agarose were procured from Pronadisa (Torrejon de Ardoz, Spain), while high-
                             grade liquid chromatography solvents and buffer components were provided by Merck (Darmstadt, Germany).
                             X-Gal, isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG), RNase A, molecular markers for DNA,  restriction
                          enzymes and dNTPs were obtained from Fermentas (Vilnius, Lithuania). Antibiotics, soybean LOX, amino acids
                         and fatty acids were sourced from Sigma–Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Jasmonic acid (purity > 98%) was procured
                            Larodan, Inc., Sweden. The study was performed on cell suspension cultures regeneration from Taxus media calli
                               previously established from stems as described before45,46. Cell suspensions were initially cultured using a cell
                           growth medium composed of Gamborg’s B5 medium supplemented with 3% sucrose, 0.01% myo-inositol, B5
                               vitamins, 4 mg L− 1 of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), 1 mg L− 1 of kinetin, and 0.1 mg L− 1 of gibberellic
                               acid (GA3). The flasks were capped with Magenta B-Caps and incubated in the dark at 25 °C and 100 rpm in a
                             shaker incubator for 24 days.

Scientific Reports |    (2025) 15:42330                               | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-26256-x                                  2