
[PDF physical page 1]
   Overcoming heterologous protein interdependency to
   optimize P450-mediated Taxol precursor synthesis in
    Escherichia coli

       Bradley Walters Biggsa,b,1, Chin Giaw Lima,1, Kristen Sagliania, Smriti Shankara, Gregory Stephanopoulosc,
       Marjan De Meya,c,d,2, and Parayil Kumaran Ajikumara,2

        aManus Biosynthesis, Cambridge, MA 02138; bMasters in Biotechnology Program, Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern
           University, Evanston, IL 60208; cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; and dLaboratory
           for Industrial Biotechnology and Biocatalysis, Ghent University, Coupure Links 653, B-9000, Belgium

          Edited by Frances H. Arnold, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, and approved February 5, 2016 (received for review August 10, 2015)

        Recent advances in metabolic engineering have demonstrated the    engineering, and  its successful synthesis would likely provide a
         potential to exploit biological chemistry for the synthesis of complex   template for the construction of other complex natural products.
         molecules. Much of the progress to date has leveraged increasingly    To assemble such biosynthetic routes, however, it is needful to
          precise genetic tools to control the transcription and translation of   not only elucidate the native enzymatic pathway but to value the
       enzymes for superior biosynthetic pathway performance. However,   underlying chemical logic (11). Nature employs a particular strat-
         applying these approaches and principles to the synthesis of more   egy to achieve its vast chemodiversity, beginning with the poly-
                                                                         merization and cyclization of basic metabolic building blocks to        complex natural products will require a new set of tools for enabling
                                                                 form a broad range of scaffold molecules (11). After scaffold         various classes of metabolic chemistries (i.e., cyclization, oxygenation,
                                                                                 creation, tailoring enzymes decorate with various functional moi-
          glycosylation, and halogenation) in vivo. Of these diverse chemistries,
                                                                                           eties, effectively multiplying total potential diversity (12). A level
        oxygenation  is one of the most challenging and pivotal for the
                                                                            of hierarchy exists among functionalizations, with oxygenation
         synthesis of complex natural products. Here, using Taxol as a model                                                                           claiming a preeminent role (13). Mediated primarily by the cyto-
         system, we use nature’s favored oxygenase, the cytochrome P450, to                                                              chrome P450 superfamily of enzymes (14), oxygenation can act
        perform high-level oxygenation chemistry in Escherichia coli. An un-   not only as an independent decoration, but often serves as the
        expected coupling of P450 expression and the expression of upstream    basis for subsequent modification (15). This paradigm of scaffold
       pathway enzymes was discovered and identified as a key obstacle for    creation, oxygenation, and further decoration holds especially true
         functional oxidative chemistry. By optimizing P450 expression, reduc-    for Taxol and the greater isoprenoid family of molecules to which
         tase partner interactions, and N-terminal modifications, we achieved     it belongs (16). Built from the five carbon isomers isopentenyl
         the highest reported titer of oxygenated taxanes (∼570 ± 45 mg/L) in   pyrophosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMAPP)
           E. coli. Altogether, this study establishes E. coli as a tractable host for    (Fig. 1) (17), a remarkable 97% of isoprenoid scaffolds are oxy-
        P450 chemistry, highlights the potential magnitude of protein inter-   genated (18), and the Yew specifically employs up to eight
        dependency in the context of synthetic biology and metabolic engi-   separate P450-mediated oxygenations to create Taxol (19). It is
         neering, and points to a promising future for the microbial synthesis   the P450’s unique capacity to  selectively oxygenate inactive
         of complex chemical entities.                                     carbons that provides biosynthesis with its competitive advantage212.56.47.88.                                                                    over traditional chemical approaches (20, 21). Accordingly, P450
address       Taxoloxygenated| P450 taxanes| metabolic engineering | natural products |                   Significance
IP
                                                                             Metabolic                                                                                       engineering                                                                                                                                             is an economically                                                                                                                                  feasible                                                                                                         and                                                                                                                                       sustainable                       engineering                                    represents                                          a                                                     particularly                                                             auspicious
                                                                                      alternative                                                                                                 for the production                                                                                                           of natural                                                                                                                           products,                                                                                                                             pharmaceuti-               vehicle for                            exploiting                                    the power                                                  of                                                        biological                                                                          catalysis,from M etabolic
2026      offering readily scalable “one-pot” transformations of simple and       cals, nutraceuticals, flavors, and fragrances. Of the model systems
        renewable feedstocks into value-added materials (1). Through the     used to demonstrate and develop this approach, the anticancer
28,                                                                      agent Taxol stands out for its structural complexity and thera-         targeted manipulation of genetic material, heterologous enzymatic
July     pathways can be transferred to fermentable microbes, fashioning     peutic value. A major challenge for the biosynthesis of Taxol and
on     them into miniature chemical factories (2). A growing number of    many other natural products is the involvement of cytochrome
                                                                        P450-mediated oxygenation. P450 enzymes are intransigent to        examples demonstrate the efficacy of this approach and, for a
                                                                                  functional heterologous expression, especially in Escherichia coli,
        range of complex molecular families, including alkaloids (3), fla-
                                                                             leading many laboratories to abandon this organism when en-
        vonoids (4), and isoprenoids (5), giving hope for a future in which
                                                                              gineering P450-containing pathways. Here, through a series of212.56.47.88       industrial biotechnology improves both our synthetic approach and                                                                                 optimizations, we demonstrate E. coli as a viable host for P450-
by      access to a vast array of even new-to-nature chemical entities (6).                                                                      mediated oxidative chemistry, advancing Taxol’s biosynthesis
         For this future to be realized, however, additional tools and
                                                                      through a fivefold increase in oxygenated terpene titers.
         strategies need to be established. Although much attention has
        been given to developing “parts” that control molecular processes
                                                                                         Author contributions: B.W.B., C.G.L., G.S., M.D.M., and P.K.A. designed research; B.W.B.,
          like transcription and translation (7–9), little has been focused     C.G.L., K.S., S.S., and M.D.M. performed research; B.W.B., K.S., S.S., and P.K.A. analyzed
       on developing different classes of metabolic chemistries (i.e.,     data; and B.W.B., M.D.M., and P.K.A. wrote the paper.
        polymerization, cyclization, oxygenation, and glycosylation) as     Conflict of interest statement: C.G.L., S.S., G.S., M.D.M., and P.K.A. have financial interests
         potential parts. Systematizing the optimization of different meta-     in Manus Biosynthesis, Inc.https://www.pnas.org
          bolic chemistries would bring us closer to an “off the shelf” catalyst     This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
from     approach in metabolic engineering, which would greatly benefit the     1B.W.B. and C.G.L. contributed equally to this work.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BIOLOGICAL         synthesis of complex molecules such as the blockbuster anticancer    2To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: marjan.demey@ugent.be or pkaji@        agent Taxol. Long captivating chemists and biochemists alike (10),     manusbio.com.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SCIENCES
         Taxol’s densely functionalized, labyrinthine structure (Fig. 1) pro-     This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          APPLIED
         vides an excellent model system to probe the capacity of metabolic    1073/pnas.1515826113/-/DCSupplemental.Downloaded


          www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1515826113                                           PNAS   | March 22, 2016   |  vol. 113   |  no. 12   |  3209–3214


[PDF physical page 2]
                                                                                                                                  Fig. 1.  Taxol biosynthesis schematic. The schematic
                                                                                                                      depicts an abbreviated overview of the Taxol path-
                                                                                                     way, beginning with this work’s carbon source glyc-
                                                                                                                                   erol. From glycerol, the basic metabolic building blocks
                                                                                                            of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAP) and pyruvate
                                                                                                              (PYR) are made. These building blocks are then carried
                                                                                                    through the methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) path-
                                                                                      way to create the ubiquitous isoprenoid precursors IPP
                                                                                            and DMAPP. IPP and DMAPP then are polymerized
                                                                                            and cyclized by GGPPS and TxS to form the 20-carbon
                                                                                                 backbone taxa-4 (5),11 (12)-diene (taxadiene). The
                                                                                                          blue star indicates the focus of this study, which is the
                                                                                                                  putative next pathway the fifth carbon hydroxylation
                                                                                                                  as performed by the cytochrome P450 CYP725A4 and
                                                                                                                                                            its reductase partner. Further decoration leads to the
                                                                                                     advanced intermediate Baccatin  III, which combined
                                                                                                           with group transfer produces the final Taxol compound.


          optimization is seen as a key challenge for successful biosynthesis   chromosomally integrated T7 MEP T7 TG strain was carried forward
          of Taxol and similar, complex natural products (22).               as the background for downstream P450 module testing.
            Taxol’s first P450 was identified nearly two decades ago. After   A second hypothesized cause for the poor productivity was
          discovering the synthase responsible for the diterpene backbone    that the addition of the P450 module disrupted the pathway’s
          taxadiene, Croteau and coworkers reported the C-5 hydroxylation    previously engineered balance. To address this possibility, sev-
        and concomitant allylic rearrangement performed by CYP725A4    eral strains with a range of P450 module expression strength
          as Taxol’s first functionalization (Fig. 1) (23). With both terpene   were created, using our previously described chimeric P450-CPR
          synthase and P450 enzymes in hand, the Croteau and Jennewein    construction (26). Each construction’s qualitative, relative expres-
         groups even initiated the construction of heterologous biosynthetic    sion strength was evaluated by using GFP (SI Appendix, Fig. S2),
         pathways in Escherichia coli (24) and yeast (25), meeting relative   with values assigned by normalizing to a single chromosomal in-
           success. A significant advance came when a multivariate modular    tegration under a Trc promoter. Each strain’s relative expression
          metabolic engineering (MMME) approach was applied to optimize   value can be found parenthetical in Fig. 2, strains 1–10. Strain
          taxadiene production in E. coli (26). By grouping enzymes according    productivity was next evaluated by using small-scale (2-mL) fer-
          to their metabolic branch points (i.e., chemical logic), an expression   mentations. Interestingly, this assay shows that each strain with a
          landscape was quickly explored to identify a balanced pathway   T7 promoter (Fig. 2, strains 2, 5, and 6) underperforms its copy-
           construction, resulting in a 15,000-fold improvement in diterpene   matched Trc counterpart (Fig. 2, strains 1, 3, and 4), a weaker,
             titer. Upon the addition of CYP725A4 to this strain, however, op-   “leaky” promoter unshared by the upstream pathway modules.
           timality was lost and titers fell considerably. One hypothesis was that   Second, beyond a relative expression value of nine, the pathway
          E. coli was simply not an amenable host for P450 chemistry, leading    nearly shuts off, including the upstream taxadiene module (Fig. 2,
          to the design of a yeast coculture in a subsequent study (27). Here,    strains 4–6). By simply moving from a five-copy (Fig. 2, strain 3) to212.56.47.88.         however, we demonstrate E. coli’s suitability through the optimi-   10-copy plasmid system (Fig. 2, strain 4) with the same weak
          zation of the P450 pathway module, identifying a set of conditions   promoter, an order of magnitude decrease in overall terpene titers
           that deliver P450-inclusive pathway functionality and achieve a     is observed. Ultimately, a five-copy plasmid under a Trc promoteraddress
           fivefold increase in oxygenated diterpene titer (∼570 mg/L) over    (Fig. 2, strain 3) is identified as the optimal construction.IP
          previous work. In the process, we observed a problematic coupling
from      between P450 expression and upstream pathway protein expression.   Exploration of Reductase Partner Interactions. A second major
        The tools and strategies in this work should prove beneficial to   consideration for P450 systems is the inclusion of their reductase
               E. coli-based P450 chemistries, including subsequent engineering   partner cytochrome P450 reductase (CPR). Class II microsomal2026       other
28,       of the Taxol pathway, which likely includes several other P450s.        P450s, such as CYP725A4, require a CPR to donate two NADPH-
                                                                           derived electrons during their catalytic cycle (29), with this in-
July       Results                                                              teraction typically occurring at the endoplasmic reticulum (30).
on       Balancing P450 Module Expression. In previous work (26), the ad-   The location of this interaction presents an obstacle because
          dition of a P450 module into a diterpene-overproducing E. coli    bacteria notably lack such compartmentalization. Accordingly, it
           strain was found to measurably reduce titers, including the upstream   has been hypothesized that a physical fusion of these enzymes is
          taxadiene molecule. One hypothesized cause was the introduction   necessary to mediate efficient P450/CPR interactions in E. coli
          of a second plasmid to the system. Plasmid-borne, metabolically    (31). Such a construction mimics the highly effective P450 BM3, a212.56.47.88        burdensome pathways are known to be subject to rapid inactivation    natural chimera whose high turnover and native bacterial expres-
by        (28), and the use of a dual-plasmid system carrying an especially    sion have made  it a popular construction to replicate (18, 21).
         burdensome enzyme (P450) may have exacerbated this problem.   Examples of chimeras include our previous work, wherein CYP725A4
          Therefore, to avoid a dual-plasmid system moving forward, the   was physically linked to its native Taxus cuspidata CPR (26). Although
         upstream pathway was chromosomally localized into the E. coli    functional, this approach does present some disadvantages. First,
           chassis strain. Chromosomal integration was done as two separate    Taxol’s pathway likely includes several P450s, and physically linking
         modules, designed as operons, and parsed according to metabolic   each will require significant effort. Moreover, a chimera construction
         branch points. The first module “MEP” was comprised of the four    prevents the natural in planta phenomenon of CPR sharing (30),https://www.pnas.org        previously identified rate-limiting enzymes of the IPP-producing    potentially precludes optimal protein–protein interaction through
           methylerythritol phosphate pathway (dxs, idi, ispDF). The second    physical constraint, and eliminates the flexibility to modulate P450/
from        “cyclase” module was comprised of taxadiene synthase (TxS) and  CPR ratios. Therefore, motivation existed to examine the efficacy of
          geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase (GGPPS). A brief explora-   unlinked systems.
           tion of expression strength was carried out, and single-copy integration     The first approach was to simply create an operon construction
         under the tightly repressed T7 promoter was identified as optimal   of the P450 and CPR. In this format, four plasmids systems with
           for each upstream module (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). Accordingly, this    increasing expression strength were tested in small-scale fermentationDownloaded


           3210   |  www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1515826113                                                                                              Biggs et al.


[PDF physical page 3]
            Fig. 2.  P450 module optimization screen. The con-                    CYP-L-CPR         CYP-O-CPR       CPR      N-terminal ModiﬁcaƟons
            trol references the taxadiene producing chromoso-          40
                                                                        Oxygenated Taxanes
          mally integrated strain that contains no P450 or CPR.
                                                                                                35         Taxadiene         The first graph depicts the physically linked chimera
            strains in order of increasing expression strength:          30
           single-copy chromosomal integration with Trc (1) and                                                                             (9)
         T7 (2), Trc on a five-copy (3) and 10-copy plasmid (4),          25
        and T7 on a five- (5) and 10-copy plasmid (6). Above                                (1)                                                                                                                                                                                                        (mg/L)  20                              (9)
         each strain are given qualitative, relative expression
          values for the construct collected by GFP experiments         Titer  15
        and normalized to (1)  (SI Appendix, Fig. S2). The
         second graph depicts the operon construction          10                       (2)
         mimicking the expression strength of strains 3–6
                                                                                                 5                                                                 (118)
           (strains 7–10). The third graph depicts the strains                                              (21) (118) (217)             (21)       (217)
         with varying CPR expression, with the P450 held
                                                                                                 0
         constant at Trc with a five-copy plasmid. Strain 11       Strains    Control          1      2      3      4      5      6            7      8      9     10            7     11     12            7     13     14     15     16     17     18
         corresponds to the CPR expressed from a single      Expression Strength                                                                                                 CYP   8RP   8RP   8RP  MA  MA   2B1   2B1
        chromosomal integration with a T7 promoter.                                                                                                                      CPR   8RP  MA   2B1  MA   2B1  MA   2B1
          Strain 12 corresponds to the CPR expression with the P450 on the five copy plasmid, but with its own separate T7 promoter. The fourth graph depicts the
           strains with various N-terminal modifications to the P450 and CPR, ordered in increasing hydrophilicity.


          (Fig. 2, strains 7–10). As seen with the physically linked system, be-   methionine and alanine (MA), because carrying an alanine at the
        yond a relative expression of nine (Fig. 2, strains 8–10) the pathway   second amino acid position has consistently shown benefit for P450
         nearly shuts off and little isoprenoid is produced. Additionally, as    expression (36). The second was a hydrophilic leader sequence that
         with the chimera system, the five-copy plasmid Trc system (Fig. 2,   had been demonstrated useful for the E. coli expression of an Ara-
          strain 7) is found to be an optimal expression level. Interestingly, the    bidopsis P450 (2B1) (37).
          overall performance of the operon system not only matched but       Interestingly, however, although the MA and 2B1 modifications
        exceeded the chimera construction, demonstrating that physically   produced increased P450 enzyme in the soluble protein fraction of
          linking these enzymes is unnecessary and perhaps suboptimal.        a protein gel compared with 8RP (SI Appendix, Figs. S5 and S6),
           Notably, the operon construction simultaneously modified two   the systems with these modifications show less turnover of tax-
        parameters with reference to the chimera, both physically unlinking   adiene to its oxygenated downstream products compared with the
         the enzymes and lowering the relative expression of the CPR (32).  8RP modification. This effect is far more pronounced for P450
       By lowering CPR expression,  it was possible that the reductase   than for CPR modifications (Fig. 2, strains 7 and 13–18). One
         partner may have become catalytically limiting as seen in another    hypothesis is that the increased solubility disrupts the P450’s in-
       P450 system (5). To test this hypothesis, two additional construc-    teraction with the lipid membrane and inhibits its ability to accept
         tions were made with varying CPR expression, holding the P450   taxadiene as a substrate. The hydrophobic taxadiene molecule is
         expression constant with the five-copy plasmid Trc system. Neither    likely concentrated in the E. coli membrane, and P450s are known
         the lower expression of a single copy integrated into the chromo-    to involve the flexible and notably lipophilic F-G loop in substrate
       some with a T7 promoter nor the higher expression of a separate   acceptance (38). Therefore, if the increasingly hydrophilic modifi-
       T7 promoter incorporated into the P450-bearing plasmid shows    cations were strong enough, they may prevent the P450 from212.56.47.88.      benefit (Fig. 2, strains 7, 11, and 12). The increased CPR expression    properly interacting with its substrate. This consideration would not
         of strain 12 had a more dramatic negative impact, possibly due to    present a problem for the 8RP modification, however, because it
         increased burden, resource competition, or inefficient NADPH   has been shown to be membrane associated (39, 40). In addition,address
           utilization. Targeted proteomic analysis, discussed further below,   with respect to the CPR modifications, alternative electrostatic
IP
        shows the ratio of P450 to CPR in strain 7 to be ∼12. This result    protein–protein interactions (30) may help overcome the increased
from      follows a trend observed for natural plant systems, wherein multiple    hydrophilicity of the CPR to allow for continued P450 interaction
        P450s have been known to share a single CPR and are found in   and electron donation. Lastly, although, the strains containing the
2026      plant membranes at a ∼15:1 P450 to CPR ratio (30). In addition, it   more hydrophilic P450s catalyze less oxygenation, they do produce
        demonstrates another potential shortcoming for the fixed 1:1 ratio   more total terpenes, potentially due to a relief of overall system28,
         of the chimera.                                                             stress or decrease in membrane crowding.
July
on      Exploration of N-Terminal Modifications. Another challenging ele-    Targeted omics To Explore the Pathway Balancing in Modular Engineering.
       ment for plant P450 utilization in E. coli is their lipophilic N ter-   Our previous observation that increased P450 expression disrupted
        minus (33). In planta, these hydrophobic tails direct P450 and CPR   production even of upstream metabolites motivated further ex-
       membrane localization, potentiating the aforementioned electron   amination as to how this interaction was mediated. Accordingly,
          transfer interactions. However, because E. coli lack such internal   targeted transcriptomics and proteomics were conducted by using212.56.47.88        membranes, these N termini can become a hindrance. Their lip-   a representative subset of strains to examine the expression of
by       ophilicity decreases solubility, which can lead to increased formation    specific pathway genes. For each strain, a time course sampling of
         of inclusion bodies and loss of functional protein. To circumvent    8, 24, 48, and 96 h was completed. From this sampling, 24 h was
         these effects, N-terminal regions are often truncated and replaced    identified as exponential phase and represented the best differ-
         with more hydrophilic peptide sequences. One particularly favored    entiation among strains (SI Appendix, Fig. S7).
        sequence to exchange for a native P450 N terminus has been an       First, growth and productivity data show that the high expression
         eight-residue peptide originally derived from bovine (8RP) (34),    strength, poor producing chimera strains (4–6) have lower growth
        which has seen several successful applications (26, 31, 35).           during the intermediate time points, but nearly match the betterhttps://www.pnas.org        Hypothesizing the benefit of N-terminal modification to pre-   producing strains’ final OD600 values (SI Appendix, Figs. S7 and
from     dominantlyincorporatedbetwoan effectincreasinglyof greaterhydrophilicsolubilitymodificationsand expression,to thewe    S8).relievingThis thefindingheterologouspotentially pathway’sindicated anmetabolicinactivatingburden,mutationbut        P450 and CPR in addition to the 8RP (SI Appendix, Figs. S3 and S4).   when these plasmids were harvested and sequenced after the fer-                             BIOLOGICAL         All three modifications were incorporated into the previously   mentation, no mutations were found. Next, targeted quantitative                                  SCIENCES
         truncated, codon optimized versions of these enzymes (26). The  RT-PCR (RT-qPCR) was carried out for several pathway genes.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          APPLIED
            first modification was simply the addition of the two amino acids   Using at least one representative gene from each pathway module,Downloaded


           Biggs et al.                                                                          PNAS   | March 22, 2016   |  vol. 113   |  no. 12   |  3211


[PDF physical page 4]
           transcript-level  analysis shows that increasing P450 expression    significantly higher than our previous work, in which a dual plas-
         seems to have little to no effect on the upstream pathway (Fig. 3A).   mid strain was reported to produce ∼116 mg/L of two oxygenated
         In fact, two of the poor producing strains (Fig. 3B, strains 4 and 5)    products. Even more, through our optimization, we observed the
           actually show higher taxadiene synthase mRNA levels compared   accumulation of two additional, previously uncharacterized, oxy-
          with a high producer (Fig. 3B, strain 3). Targeted proteomics reveal   genated taxane species (SI Appendix, Figs. S18–S25).
         a contrasting trend. On the protein level, for the poor producing
            strains, the upstream “cyclase” pathway decreases in the presence   Discussion
          of high P450 expression (Fig. 3B, strains 4–6). In fact, even the    Biology’s role in chemical synthesis will increase in coming years.
          further upstream MEP pathway enzymes are down-regulated on   Natural systems possess immense chemical diversity, and harness-
          the protein level in the poor producing strains (SI Appendix, Fig.    ing their catalytic power looks to provide long-term environmental
           S9). It appears that upstream down-regulation is strongest at the   and socioeconomic benefits. However, metabolic engineers and
           earlier time points (SI Appendix, Figs. S9–S12), indicating the need    synthetic biologists will need to establish new tools and strategies to
           for balanced protein expression from the beginning of the fer-   take full advantage of this potential, especially in terms of de-
          mentation. This behavior is confirmed in the control, which is a   veloping systematic methods for using different classes of metabolic
          high taxadiene producer without a P450, and shows most of its    chemistries. The densely functionalized anticancer agent Taxol
          synthase expression early in the fermentation (SI Appendix, Figs.   provides an excellent model system to approach such development,
          S9–S12). This observation explains why, although protein levels    particularly because of its multiple selective oxygenations.
          recover somewhat at later time points in the poor producing strains,     In nature, selective oxygenation is predominantly mediated by
           their titers remain low, because downstream enzymes would still   the cytochrome P450 superfamily of enzymes (14). Here, we
         have  little substrate on which to act. Taken together, this data   engineered P450-mediated catalysis in E. coli for the third step in
           clearly indicates an interdependency of pathway expression and   Taxol biosynthesis. By tuning different elements of the CYP725A4
          protein level regulation. In addition, the suppressed MEP and cy-   module, E. coli is demonstrated to be a suitable host for plant
           clase protein levels explain the decrease in even upstream titers.   P450-mediated chemistry. This finding contrasts with a growing
         These data shed light on the need to simultaneously balance het-   expectation that yeast or other eukaryotic hosts are necessary for
          erologous enzyme expression for metabolic engineering and syn-    plant P450 chemistry. Through modular pathway engineering, we
           thetic biology applications. Lastly, transcriptomic and proteomic    identified that the relatively low expression of a five-copy plasmid
         experiments were conducted for the unlinked P450/CPR strains (SI   with a weak promoter was key for P450 and CPR functionality.
          Appendix, Figs. S13–S15), but no obvious trends are observed.       This result may shed significant light on the perceived failure of
                                                                           previous E. coli P450 systems, because it is common to use higher
           Bioreactor Scale Fermentation of Oxygenated Taxane-Producing Strain.   copy plasmids and stronger promoters. Through altering reductase
         After identifying strain 7 as the optimum construction for oxy-   partner interactions, we found that chimera linkages are not
         genated taxane production by using the microaerobic 2-mL fer-   necessary for bacterial expression of plant P450s and may even
         mentation assays, this strain was carried to scale-up fermentation    negatively impact overall function. In addition, we observed that
           in a 2-L benchtop fermenter. A brief temperature screen was   lower CPR to P450 ratios are favorable. Through modulating the
         conducted at 22, 25, and 30 °C, identifying 25 °C to provide faster  N termini of the P450 and CPR, we found that greater hydro-
         growth without detriment to P450 catalytic activity (SI Appendix,    philicity relieved overall system stress, but that membrane asso-
           Fig. S16). Acetate accumulation was minimized by maintaining    ciation benefited high turnover. This membrane association may
           glycerol concentration near 0 g/L. An initial bolus of 10 g/L was    either be needed for substrate acceptance or to localize the P450
         provided for the batch phase. Following batch phase, a modified    to the area of highest hydrophobic substrate concentration. Taken
          exponential feeding program was initiated with timed boluses of    together, a strain was identified that rendered high-level oxygen-212.56.47.88.
          0.6 g/L supplemented glycerol and 0.3 g/L yeast extract. Fer-   ated taxane production. Ultimately, this work advances Taxol
         mentations were grown at 30 °C until an OD600 of 5, at which time   metabolic engineering, which has seen stagnation in titer increasesaddress       the temperature was reduced to 25 °C and the culture was in-   over the past half-decade.
IP       duced. A 20% (vol/vol) dodecane overlay was introduced 4 h after      In addition to  strain  construction, diagnostic targeted omics
from       induction.obtained (Fig.Under4). Duplicatethese conditions,bioreactora titerrun dataof 570can±be45foundmg/LinwasSI    studiestein level.revealedIn fact,thatansuboptimalunprecedentedstrainsinterdependencywere regulated ofonheterolo-the pro-
2026       Appendix, Fig. S17. This total oxygenated taxane production is   gous proteins was observed. High expression of a single pathway
28,
July
on
212.56.47.88
by



                                                                                                                                  Fig. 3.  Targeted transcriptomic and proteomic data.
                                                                                             Upper indicates the targeted transcriptomics results
                                                                                                                    for the 24-h time point. Genes depicted include the
                                                                                                                                                   first gene in each module’s operon. DOXP synthase
                                                                                                                                   (dxs) accounts for the MEP module, TxS for the synthasehttps://www.pnas.org                                                                                                   module, and taxadiene 5-α hydroxylase (T5aOH) for the
from                                                                                                 P450results.module.The insolubleLowerfractionindicatesis depictedthe targetedon top,proteomicswhereas
                                                                                                             the soluble fraction  is on the bottom. For both tran-
                                                                                                                            scriptomic and proteomic figures, Left indicates strains
                                                                                                             with relative productivity, whereas Right indicates strains
                                                                                                             with poor productivity of terpene molecules.Downloaded


           3212   |  www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1515826113                                                                                              Biggs et al.


[PDF physical page 5]
       module (P450) broadly affected upstream pathway enzyme expres-   p10T7-TG-KmFRT for taxadiene expression; pMB1CmFRT-Trc-(8RP)P450-l-
          sion, undermining overall system performance. The exact cause of    (MA)CPR, pMB1CmFRT-T7-(8RP)P450-l-(MA)CPR and pMB1CmFRT-T7-(8RP)
           this behavior  is unknown, however, because  it manifests on the   CPR for oxygenated taxadiene expression] using primers to build in site-
         protein and not transcript level, it may be a result of the P450     specific homologies toward lacY or malT loci. Positive transformants were
       enzyme monopolizing rare tRNA, chaperones, or dominating ri-    cured from the antibiotic resistance cassette by using FLP recombinase (in-
       bosome residence time. This understanding would concert with   duced from pCP20). Successful chromosomal integration was confirmed
                                                                          by colony PCR and subsequent sequencing. All primers used are listed in
         recent studies that found a limit to the “free ribosome pool,” (41–43)
                                                                                                             SI Appendix, Table S2.
          especially considering the growth retardation of our poor perform-
         ing strains. This observation likely has relevance outside of the Taxol
                                                                                           Small-Scale “Hungate” Fermentation. For small-scale fermentation assays, the
        pathway and ought to be considered for other synthetic biology                                                                             oxygenated taxane producing E. coli strains were first streaked on LB agar
       and metabolic engineering applications. As the field assembles in-    plates containing corresponding antibiotic and incubated overnight at 37 °C.
         creasingly complex systems, it will be paramount to effectively    Individual colonies were then picked and inoculated into 3 mL of LB media
        decouple protein interdependency, and this study highlights the    with appropriate antibiotic and incubated overnight (250 rpm, 30 °C) to
         potential magnitude of these interactions.                           achieve an approximate OD600 of 3. These LB precultures were then used to
        Work remains to fully elucidate the Taxol pathway, which in-    inoculate 2-mL microaerobic fermentations, completed in Chemglass Hun-
         creasingly appears more complex than originally thought. Crucial    gate tubes. Hungate 2-mL culture tubes and septas were purchased from
         to the success of this and other complex natural product bio-    ChemGlass. Screw caps for Hungate tubes were purchased from Kimble
         synthesis projects will be improved tools to identify, screen, and    Chase. PrecisionGlide 26G × 3/8 [0.45 mm × 10 mm] needles were purchased
        engineer the enzymes of plant-specialized metabolisms, especially   from BD. Media components and concentrations can be found in SI Ap-
        the N-terminally anchored cytochrome P450s. Systematic ap-    pendix, Tables S4 and S5. Briefly, basal R-media was prepared by mixing the
        proaches will greatly expedite progress and will especially ben-   components of SI Appendix, Table S4 with 1.5 mL of Antifoam B and
           efit from an improved understanding of the key elements for    adjusting the pH to 7.6 by using 6 M NaOH. Basal media components were
          catalytic function of each class of enzyme. This work lays a foun-    then autoclaved at 121 °C for 30 min. The “poststerilization” media was
        dation for faster and more efficient expression of P450 enzymes    then prepared as outlined in SI Appendix, Table S5, including the addition of
         in vivo in E. coli, with the hope that in the near future we will see    0.1 mM IPTG and corresponding antibiotic diluted 1000× from stock con-
                                                                                           centration. Total fermentation volume was comprised of 1.950 mL of com-
         wide-scale application of biosynthesis of complex and valuable
                                                                                         plete R-media, 50 μL of LB preculture, and 200 μL of dodecane (10% overlay).
         natural products.                                                                              Each vial was sealed with a rubber septa and screwcap, vortexed, and a
                                                                                              single PrecisionsGlide Needle was inserted into the septa to allow for gas-
        Materials and Methods                                                                              eous exchange. Initial production screening fermentations were run at 22 °C,
          For details, see SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods.                     250 rpm for 4 d. After the fermentations were completed, OD600 values were
                                                                          measured and the culture was centrifuged to collect the dodecane overlay.
         MEP, TG, and P450 Module Construction. Construction of the MEP and TG    This overlay was subsequently diluted into hexane for analytical procedures
        module has been described (26). For the P450 module, various configurations    described below. All experiments were performed in triplicate.
           for the P450 and CPR were made. First, the physically linked “chimera” with
         a GSTGS linker  (l) and the operon 5′-GGATCCAAGGAGATATACC-3′  (o)    Total RNA Quantification. RT-PCR was performed by using the QuantiTect
           structure were constructed. Second, the different N-terminal modifications,    Multiplex RT-PCR kit using 50 ng of RNA per well, in accordance to the
          included the following: MA (incorporation of two residue peptide MA to the    modified Quantitect Multiplex RT-PCR listed above. All RNA was isolated
          42-aa N-terminally truncated P450 and to the 74-aa N-terminally truncated    freshly before analysis to ensure that RNA did not degrade during storage.
          CPR), 8RP (incorporation of eight-residue peptide MALLLAVF to the 24-aa    Threshold data were exported to analyze with the reference gene (hcaT),
          N-terminally truncated P450 and to the 74-aa N-terminally truncated CPR),    which was present in each well. The minimum information for publication of212.56.47.88.      and 2B1 (incorporation of 16-residue peptide MAKKTSSKGKLPPGPS to the    quantitative real-time PCR experiments (qPCR MIQE) guidelines were fol-
          59-aa N-terminally truncated P450 and to the 89-aa N-terminally truncated   lowed for all assay conditions and assay characteristics. MIQE checklist can
          CPR). A pictorial summary of these modifications can be found in SI Appendix,   be found with SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods.address        Figs. S3 and S4. Plasmids p5Trc, p5T7, p10Trc, and p10T7 (26) were used to      Targeted profiling of select proteins was performed by using an Agilent
IP       clone the different configurations of P450 and CRP by two rounds of cloning   6460 Triple Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer equipped with a jet-stream
from       usingprimersNdeI/SalIused forsitesthis forworkP450canandbe foundBamHI/SalIin SI Appendix,sites for CPR,Tablerespectively.S2.        All    electrosprayperformed byionizationusing positivesource. ion-sprayDynamic multiplemode. Thereactionsource-dependentexperiments wereMS
2026      Chromosomal Integration. Site-directed chromosomal integration was ac-    parameterssheath gas suchflow asweregas temperature,set at 325 °C,gas12flow,L/min,sheath350 °C,gas andtemperature,11 L/min,andre-
28,      complished by homologous recombination mediated by λ-Red recombinase    spectively. Nebulizer pressure was set at 45 psi. Capillary and nozzle voltages
         (induced from pKD46). Linear DNA for homologous recombination was   were set to 4,500 V and 1,100 V, respectively. Peptide selection was per-
July      generated by amplifying the pathway module with the FRT-flanked an-   formed by using Skyline 2.6 software, and collision energy, fragmentation
on        tibiotic resistance cassette from the appropriate template [pMB1CmFRT-    voltage, and parent and product ion were determined and optimized for
212.56.47.88      TrcGFP and pMB1CmFRT-T7GFP for MMME expression level investigation;    each specific protein.
by
https://www.pnas.org
from                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BIOLOGICAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SCIENCES

            Fig. 4.  Bioreactor performance of strain 7. Left depicts the growth and productivity curves, represented in OD600 and oxygenated taxanes (mg/L) values.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          APPLIED
          Right depicts glycerol and acetate concentrations throughout the duration of the fermentation.Downloaded


           Biggs et al.                                                                          PNAS   | March 22, 2016   |  vol. 113   |  no. 12   |  3213


[PDF physical page 6]
           Scale-Up Fermentation. Benchtop scale-up fermentations were carried out in    can be found in SI Appendix, Table S9. Feed yeast extract concentration
            2-L Sartorius-Stedim B-DCU  II process units. A modified exponential time-      is 400 g/L.
          dependent feeding program was used for fed-batch phase. This feeding
          program and other process parameters were controlled by using Sartorius S88   GC-MS Analysis. GC-MS analysis was conducted by using an Agilent Technologies
          MFCS-win software package.                                          7890A GC System with a 240 Ion Trap GC/MS, 7693 Autosampler, DB-5 column
             Using strain 7, fermentations were prepared as follows: a cell bank stock is     (Agilent), a splitless single taper glass wool ultrainert inlet liner, and 11-mm
               first removed from −80 °C and streaked onto an LB agar plate containing    Restek premium nonstick center guiding septa. Injections were made in pulsed
          50 μg/L spectinomycin and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Single colonies are     splitless mode, with an inlet temperature of 250 °C and pressure of 7.652 psi. The
          then picked and inoculated into 10 mL of LB broth containing 50 μg/L   GC method proceeds as follows, 50 °C with a hold time of 1 min, followed by a
           spectinomycin in a 50-mL Falcon tube and grown at 30 °C, 250 rpm until    10 °C/min ramp to 200 °C (15 min), and a 5 °C/min ramp to 270 °C (14 min), for a
           reaching ∼3 OD600. Next, 3 mL of this LB broth preculture is used to inoculate     total run time of 30 min. The postrun temperature is increased to 320 °C for
          100 mL of R-media complete in a 500-mL round bottom shake flask. Media   5 min between each sample. MS is collected between 30–350 m/z and from 17
           compositions can be found in SI Appendix, Tables S4 and S5. The R-media    to 30 min for each sample. Carrier gas is helium with a flowrate of 1 mL/min.
           preculture is then grown to ∼3 OD600, and 50 mL of this R-media preculture      Samples were prepared by taking clear centrifuged overlay and diluting 100–
                 is used to inoculate the benchtop bioreactor.                            200× into n-Hexanes and vortexing vigorously. Before each set of samples
              Basal bioreactor R-media components can be found in SI Appendix,   were run, washes of methanol and hexane were carried out twice. Per every
          Table S6. For bioreactor preparation, these components are first dissolved     six samples, and additional hexane wash was carried out. Serial dilutions of
           into 500 mL of deionized (DI) H2O, the volume is filled to 925 mL, and    taxadiene were used to quantify approximate titer, adding 50-μL samples of
          then added into the bioreactor. Next, the bioreactor and basal R-media    taxadiene standards into GC vial inserts. Analysis was completed by using the
           are autoclaved together. Following autoclaving, “poststerilization” com-    Agilent MS Workstation software package. Oxygenated titer was counted by
          ponents and 20% (vol/vol) dodecane overlay are added. A table of post-   summing the integrated values for the four major oxygenated taxane
             sterilization components can found in SI Appendix, Tables S7 and S8.    species (m/z 288), whose retention times correspond 20.838 min, 21.114
          During fermentation, pH is maintained at 7.00 (±0.05) via a controller    min, 21.536 min, and 21.800 min. Figures depicting oxygenated taxane
          with 17% phosphoric acid and 3 M NaOH used as acid and base feeds,   GC-MS can found in the SI Appendix, Figs. S14–S21).
            respectively. Initial conditions for agitation and aeration were 400 rpm
         and 0.75  liters per minute (lpm), respectively. Dissolved oxygen was   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Prof. Keith E. J. Tyo, Dr. Christine N. S. Santos,
          maintained at ∼15%. Each bolus fed consisted of 0.6 g of supplemented   and Dr. Ryan Philippe for their careful readings of this manuscript and Kang
            glycerol and 0.3 g of yeast extract. Supplemented glycerol feed composition   Zhou for his assistance in protein gel work.



                 1. Woolston BM, Edgar S, Stephanopoulos G (2013) Metabolic engineering: Past and     24. Huang Q, Roessner CA, Croteau R, Scott AI (2001) Engineering Escherichia coli for the
                  future. Annu Rev Chem Biomol Eng 4:259–288.                                               synthesis of taxadiene, a key intermediate in the biosynthesis of taxol. Bioorg Med
                 2. Jullesson D, David F, Pfleger B, Nielsen J (2015) Impact of synthetic biology and      Chem 9(9):2237–2242.
                metabolic engineering on industrial production of fine chemicals. Biotechnol Adv     25. Engels B, Dahm P, Jennewein S (2008) Metabolic engineering of taxadiene biosynthesis
                 33(7):1395–1402.                                                                                 in yeast as a first step towards Taxol (Paclitaxel) production. Metab Eng 10(3–4):201–206.
                 3. Thodey K, Galanie S, Smolke CD (2014) A microbial biomanufacturing platform for     26. Ajikumar PK, et  al. (2010) Isoprenoid pathway optimization for Taxol precursor
                 natural and semisynthetic opioids. Nat Chem Biol 10(10):837–844.                         overproduction in Escherichia coli. Science 330(6000):70–74.
                 4. Santos CNS, Koffas M, Stephanopoulos G (2011) Optimization of a heterologous     27. Zhou K, Qiao K, Edgar S, Stephanopoulos G (2015) Distributing a metabolic pathway
              pathway for the production of flavonoids from glucose. Metab Eng 13(4):392–400.       among a microbial consortium enhances production of natural products. Nat
                 5. Paddon CJ, et al. (2013) High-level semi-synthetic production of the potent antima-        Biotechnol 33(4):377–383.
                     larial artemisinin. Nature 496(7446):528–532.                                             28. Tyo KEJ, Ajikumar PK, Stephanopoulos G (2009) Stabilized gene duplication enables
                 6. Paddon CJ, Keasling JD (2014) Semi-synthetic artemisinin: A model for the use of        long-term selection-free heterologous pathway expression. Nat Biotechnol 27(8):
                  synthetic biology in pharmaceutical development. Nat Rev Microbiol 12(5):355–367.         760–765.
                 7. Shiue E, Prather KLJ (2012) Synthetic biology devices as tools for metabolic engi-     29. Munro AW, Girvan HM, Mason AE, Dunford AJ, McLean KJ (2013) What makes a P450
                                                                                                                        tick? Trends Biochem Sci 38(3):140–150.212.56.47.88.             neering. Biochem Eng J 65:82–89.
                 8. Jones JA, et al. (2015) ePathOptimize: A combinatorial approach for transcriptional     30. Jensen K, Møller BL (2010) Plant NADPH-cytochrome P450 oxidoreductases. Phytochemistry
                balancing of metabolic pathways. Sci Rep 5:11301.                                             71(2-3):132–141.
                                                                                                            31. Leonard                                                                                                                                      E,                                                                                                                   Koffas MAG                                                                                                                                     (2007) Engineering                                                                                                                                                  of artificial                                                                                                                                                                 plant                                                                                                                                                      cytochrome                                                                                                                                                             P450                                                                                                                                                                                     en-address            9. Jones JA, Toparlak ÖD, Koffas MA (2015) Metabolic pathway balancing and its role in                                                                                           zymes for                                                                                                                             synthesis                                                                                                                           of isoflavones                                                                                                                          by Escherichia                                                                                                                                                                                                         coli. Appl                                                                                                                                                             Environ                                                                                                                                                                          Microbiol                                                                                                                                                                                                    73(22):
                the                    production                               of biofuels                                    and chemicals.                                                        Curr                                                      Opin                                                                  Biotechnol                                                                               33:52–59.IP
              10.               Guerra-Bubb                                            J, Croteau                                             R, Williams                                RM (2012)                                                     The                                                                       early                                                                        stages of                                                                                    taxol biosynthesis:        7246–7251.
                                                                                                            32. Lim HN, Lee Y, Hussein R (2011) Fundamental relationship between operon organization
             An interim report on the synthesis and identification of early pathway metabolites.from                                                                                       and gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108(26):10626–10631.
               Nat Prod Rep 29(6):683–696.
                                                                                                            33. Kitaoka N, Wu Y, Xu M, Peters RJ (2015) Optimization of recombinant expression
              11. Anarat-Cappillino G, Sattely ES (2014) The chemical logic of plant natural product
                                                                                                      enables discovery of novel cytochrome P450 activity in rice diterpenoid biosynthesis.2026              biosynthesis. Curr Opin Plant Biol 19:51–58.
28,          12. Walsh CT, Fischbach MA (2010) Natural products version 2.0: Connecting genes to     34. BarnesAppl MicrobiolHJ, ArlottoBiotechnolMP, Waterman99(18):7549–7558.MR (1991) Expression and enzymatic activity of
                 molecules. J Am Chem Soc 132(8):2469–2493.
July          13. Mizutani M (2012) Impacts of diversification of cytochrome P450 on plant metabolism.       AcadrecombinantSci USA cytochrome88(13):5597–5601.P450 17 alpha-hydroxylase in Escherichia coli. Proc Natl
on               Biol Pharm Bull 35(6):824–832.                                                             35. Chang MCY, Eachus RA, Trieu W, Ro D-K, Keasling JD (2007) Engineering Escherichia
              14. Podust LM, Sherman DH (2012) Diversity of P450 enzymes in the biosynthesis of
                                                                                                                                  coli for production of functionalized terpenoids using plant P450s. Nat Chem Biol
                 natural products. Nat Prod Rep 29(10):1251–1266.
                                                                                                              3(5):274–277.
              15. Pateraki I, Heskes AM, Hamberger B (2015) Cytochromes P450 for terpene function-
                                                                                                            36. Zelasko S, Palaria A, Das A (2013) Optimizations to achieve high-level expression of
                   alisation and metabolic engineering. Adv Biochem Eng Biotechnol 148:107–139.           cytochrome P450 proteins using Escherichia coli expression systems. Protein Expr Purif
              16. Boutanaev AM, et al. (2015) Investigation of terpene diversification across multiple         92(1):77–87.212.56.47.88            sequenced plant genomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112(1):E81–E88.                       37. Morrone D, Chen X, Coates RM, Peters RJ (2010) Characterization of the kaurene
by          17. Bohlmann J, Keeling CI (2008) Terpenoid biomaterials. Plant J 54(4):656–669.               oxidase CYP701A3, a multifunctional cytochrome P450 from gibberellin biosynthesis.
              18. Renault H, Bassard J-E, Hamberger B, Werck-Reichhart D (2014) Cytochrome P450-       Biochem J 431(3):337–344.
               mediated metabolic engineering: Current progress and future challenges. Curr Opin     38. Cojocaru V, Winn PJ, Wade RC (2007) The ins and outs of cytochrome P450s. Biochim
                  Plant Biol 19:27–34.                                                                   Biophys Acta 1770(3):390–401.
              19. Kaspera R, Croteau R (2006) Cytochrome P450 oxygenases of Taxol biosynthesis.     39. Tang Z, Salamanca-Pinzón SG, Wu Z-L, Xiao Y, Guengerich FP (2010) Human cytochrome
               Phytochem Rev 5(2-3):433–444.                                                      P450 4F11: Heterologous expression in bacteria, purification, and characterization of
              20. Bernhardt R, Urlacher VB (2014) Cytochromes P450 as promising catalysts for bio-          catalytic function. Arch Biochem Biophys 494(1):86–93.
                  technological application: Chances and limitations. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 98(14):     40. Shukla A, Huang W, Depaz IM, Gillam EM (2009) Membrane integration of recombinant
                 6185–6203.                                                            human P450 forms. Xenobiotica 39(7):495–507.https://www.pnas.org          21. Jung ST, Lauchli R, Arnold FH (2011) Cytochrome P450: Taming a wild type enzyme.     41. Ceroni F, Algar R, Stan G-B, Ellis T (2015) Quantifying cellular capacity identifies gene
                                                                                                          expression                                                                                                                     designs with                                                                                                                      reduced                                                                                                                                 burden.                                                                                                                                Nat                                                                                                                             Methods                                                                                                                                                                   12(5):415–418.from          22. CurrChangOpinMCY,BiotechnolKeasling22(6):809–817.JD (2006) Production of isoprenoid pharmaceuticals by en-     42.                                                                                                                    Scott M, Gunderson                                                                                                    CW,                                                                                                                       Mateescu                                                                                                                       EM, Zhang                                                                                                                                                                                        Z,                                                                                                            Hwa T (2010)                                                                                                                                                                Interdependence of cell
                gineered microbes. Nat Chem Biol 2(12):674–681.                                     growth and gene expression: Origins and consequences. Science 330(6007):1099–1102.
              23. Hefner J, et al. (1996) Cytochrome P450-catalyzed hydroxylation of taxa-4(5),11(12)-     43. Carrera J, Rodrigo G, Singh V, Kirov B, Jaramillo A (2011) Empirical model and in vivo
                diene to taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5alpha-ol: The first oxygenation step in taxol bio-         characterization of the bacterial response to synthetic gene expression show that
                   synthesis. Chem Biol 3(6):479–489.                                                   ribosome allocation limits growth rate. Biotechnol J 6(7):773–783.Downloaded


           3214   |  www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1515826113                                                                                              Biggs et al.