
[PDF physical page 1]
S c i e n c e A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h A r t i c l e

P L A N T S C I E N C E S                                                                                                                  Copyright © 2026 The
                                                                                                                                                    Authors, some rights
                                                                                                                                                          reserved; exclusiveA minimal transcription factor network is sufficient to                                                                                                                                                           licensee American
                                                                                                                                                      Association for thedrive paclitaxel biosynthesis                                                                                                                           Advancement of
Qiaona Pan1,2†, Marisol Ochoa-­Villarreal2†‡, Susan Howat2†, Rabia Amir2,3, Zejun Yan2,                         Science. No claim to                                                                                                                                                                    original U.S.
Christopher E. French4, Gary J. Loake2§, Beimi Cui1,2*                                                            Government Works.
                                                                                                                                                        Distributed under a
The supply of the anticancer drug paclitaxel is limited by its low natural abundance and complex chemical struc-      Creative Commons
ture. We previously reported the development of a cultured Taxus cambial meristematic cell (CMC) system, where       Attribution License 4.0
methyl jasmonate enhances paclitaxel production. In this report, we describe a comprehensive analysis to identify      (CC BY).
potential master regulators of paclitaxel biosynthesis. We report that the combined expression of two myeloblas-
tosis transcription factors can cooperatively activate a subset of paclitaxel biosynthetic genes in stable transgenic
CMCs, resulting in a 121-­fold increase in paclitaxel and a 364-­fold increase in its valuable precursor baccatin III. Our
findings provide a powerful approach to enhancing production of this vital compound and can also be applied to
other valuable products.


INTRODUCTION                                                     in heterologous hosts (11, 12, 15–18). By integrating genomics and
Paclitaxel (marketed as Taxol) is a diterpenoid natural product that is   synthetic biology to optimize gene expression, multiple groups have
a blockbuster anticancer drug. Since its initial Food and Drug Ad-   successfully produced the key intermediate baccatin III in Nicotiana
ministration (FDA) approval for ovarian cancer in 1992, its applica-   benthamiana, at yields ranging from ~50 ng/g to 10 to 30 μg/g in
tion has expanded to include the treatment of breast, pancreatic and   reconstituted pathways (5, 15, 16, 18). A recent study showed that a
non–small cell lung cancer (1, 2). Paclitaxel’s potent activity is derived   minimal gene set expressed in N. benthamiana was able to produce
from its complex molecular architecture, which is assembled through   baccatin III at levels approaching those observed in Taxus needles
an elaborate biosynthetic pathway comprising over 19 enzymatic   (18). Although these heterologous systems provide a promising plat-
steps starting from geranylgeranyl diphosphate (3–5). Current com-   form for sustainable production, the resulting titers of paclitaxel and
mercial supplies of paclitaxel rely on a costly and resource-­intensive   baccatin III remain low for industrial application (19).
semisynthesis process, which starts with intermediates, such as bac-    We previously reported the development of a cultured Taxus CMC
catin III, that are extracted from Taxus trees, and on bioreactor-­based   (cambial meristematic cell) system derived from vascular stem cells
plant cell culture processes (3, 6). Consequently, the global demand   (20) and the ability of Methyl Jasmonate (MeJA) elicitation to signifi-
for this World Health Organization–essential medicine consistently   cantly increase paclitaxel production in this system. Our aim was to
outstrips its supply, underscoring the urgent need for a more sustain-   further improve the production of paclitaxel in this system by identi-
able and scalable production platform.                                 fying potential master regulators of paclitaxel biosynthesis. Here, we
   Engineered cell culture has emerged as a promising strategy for   report the identification and validation of two myeloblastosis (MYB)
producing paclitaxel in a more environmentally friendly manner   transcription factors (TFs) that can significantly increase paclitaxel
(7–9). Notable progress has been made at producing early paclitaxel   production in CMCs. Stable transgenic Taxus CMCs expressing these
precursors in microbial systems, such as Escherichia coli and yeast   two MYBs were able to significantly enhance paclitaxel, reaching
(10, 11), but their efficacy is limited because of challenges in express-   98 μg/g fresh weight (FW), about 121 times greater compared to con-
ing essential cytochrome P450 enzymes (12). In contrast, plant plat-    trol cells, and the key intermediate baccatin III, reaching 877 μg/g
forms provide a superior environment for expressing cytochrome  FW, about 364 times the level seen in the control. We present a TF
P450–dependent pathways, owing to their native complement of   engineering approach that not only elucidates the hierarchical control
redox partners and subcellular compartments (13, 14). Recent re-   of this complex biosynthetic pathway but also achieves promising ti-
search has successfully identified the key missing enzymes in pacli-    ters for industrial translation.
taxel biosynthesis, such as T2′OGD (2′α hydroxylation), T3′NBT
(3′-­N benzoylation) (4), taxane oxetanase 1 (15), and facilitator of tax-
ane oxidation 1 (FoTO1) (5). This has enabled the successful reconsti-  RESULTS
tution of the biosynthetic pathway to baccatin III and even paclitaxel   Identification of TFs that are up-­regulated after
                                              MeJA elicitation
1School of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou,   The transcriptional cascade triggered in Taxus cuspidata (Tc) CMCs
Jiangsu 225009, China. 2Institute of Molecular Plant Sciences, School of Biological    after MeJA elicitation was observed, during which paclitaxel produc-
Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK. 3Atta-­ur-­Rahman School   tion was significantly induced (20, 21). To identify TFs for bioengi-
of Applied Biosciences (ASAB), National University of Sciences & Technology (NUST),   neering Taxus cell, we treated CMCs with MeJA, and this elicitationIslamabad 44000, Pakistan. 4Centre for Engineering Biology, School of Biological
Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK.                    induced paclitaxel and baccatin III (fig. S1A), consistent with previ-
*Corresponding author. Email: beimi.​cui@​gmail.​com                        ous findings (20, 21). Transcriptome analysis showed that MeJA trig-
†These authors contributed equally to this work.                            gered an early (0.5 hours) mostly inductive wave in gene expression‡Present address: Phyton Biotech GmbH Alter Postweg 1, 22926 Ahrensburg,
Germany.                                                             in CMCs, followed by a second later wave (12 hours) of genes that
§Deceased.                                                          are up-­and down-­regulated, 40 and 60%, respectively (Fig. 1A).

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eaee6211 (2026)  5 June 2026                                                                                 1 of 11


[PDF physical page 2]
S c i e n c e A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h A r t i c l e





Fig. 1. Transcriptomic changes in CMC cells after MeJA treatment reveal potential TFs. (A) Heatmap of Taxus CMCs upon 100 μM MeJA treatment at 0.5, 2, and
12 hours (h). Values represent z-­score–normalized log2 fold changes (log2FCs) of significant DEGs. Rows correspond to genes, and columns correspond to time points.
Color scale ranges from blue (down-­regulated) to red (up-­regulated). (B) Dot plots showing the top 10 enriched GO categories for Biological Process (BP), Molecular Func-
tion (MF), and Cellular Component (CC) terms among DEGs at 2 hours after MeJA treatment compared to 0 hours. Circle size indicates the number of DEGs per term, and
color intensity reflects statistical significance [−log10 false discovery rate (FDR)]. The dashed line indicates –log10 FDR = 1.3 (FDR = 0.05). (C) Volcano plot showing differ-
ential gene expression in CMCs after 2 hours of MeJA treatment (|log2FC| ≥ 1, FDR < 0.05; red, up-­regulated; blue, down-­regulated; white, NS, not significant; gray, NA, not
available). Key paclitaxel-­responsive enzyme coding genes are labeled. Differential expression was determined using DESeq2 (n = 3). (D) Heatmap showing expression
profiles of identified TFs across MeJA treatment time points (0.5, 2, and 12 hours).


Transcriptomic profiling identified 867 up-­regulated and 749 down-­  This strong enrichment demonstrates that MeJA treatment activates
regulated genes following elicitation with MeJA (fig. S1, B and C).   the core molecular network responsible for paclitaxel biosynthesis.
We performed a gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis on dif-   Consistent with these data, the volcano plot shows that the treatment at
ferentially expressed genes (DEGs), and the results showed a signifi-   2 hours led to a massive and highly significant up-­regulation of genes in
cant enrichment of DEGs in the paclitaxel biosynthetic process and   the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway (Fig. 1C). As highlighted in Fig. 1C,
genes encoding various taxane-­related enzyme activities, such as 10-­  key genes encoding early-­ and late-­stage enzymes (fig. S1E) such
deacetylbaccatin III 10-­O-­acetyltransferase (Fig. 1B and fig. S1D).   as taxadiene synthase (TASY), taxadiene-­13α-­hydrolase (T13αH),

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eaee6211 (2026)  5 June 2026                                                                                 2 of 11


[PDF physical page 3]
S c i e n c e A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h A r t i c l e

taxane-­10β-­hydrolase (T10βH), and taxane-­2α-­ol-­O-­benzoyl transfer-   regulators, with their activity being promoter dependent. Signifi-
ase (DBBT) are among the most highly and significantly up-­regulated   cantly, 8 of the top 10 strongest positive interactions were mediated
genes. This provides compelling evidence that MeJA treatment directly   by MYB proteins, with the majority targeting promoters integral to
activates the expression of the core enzyme-­coding genes required for   the later steps of the paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway. However, the
paclitaxel production.                                        most potent interaction identified was between TcMYB3 and TASY,
  From the 1646 DEGs, we identified 79 TFs spanning 19 different   which catalyzes the first committed step of the biosynthetic path-
gene families (fig. S2A). The APETALA2 (AP2) family was the larg-   way. While no single TF could up-­regulate expression of all tested
est, followed by MYB, basic helix-­loop-­helix (bHLH), C3H zinc fin-   gene promoters required for paclitaxel biosynthesis, TcMYB3 re-
ger, and NAM, ATAF1,2, and CUC2 (NAC) families. Our analysis   markably activated all tested promoters except for T5αH and BAPT,
showed that MeJA treatment up-­regulated 50 of these TFs, with a   the latter of which is thought to encode a rate-­limiting step in pacli-
high proportion belonging to the MYB, C3H, NAC, and WRKY fam-   taxel biosynthesis (5, 6). Crucially, TcMYB4 demonstrated the abil-
ilies. Conversely, 29 TFs were down-­regulated, prominently featuring    ity to up-­regulate BAPT. These findings suggest that the combined
members of the AP2, basic leucine zipper, and CCAAT TF families   action of TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 might be sufficient to drive com-
(fig. S2A). To identify potential positive regulators of paclitaxel bio-   prehensive expression across key paclitaxel biosynthetic promoters.
synthesis, we focused on TFs that were rapidly and significantly up-­
regulated at 0.5 hours post–MeJA treatment. This selection yielded   Electrophoretic mobility shift assay confirmed the binding
19 candidate TFs, comprising six AP2, four MYB, five NAC, two   of TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 to paclitaxel biosynthetic genes
bHLH, and two WRKY proteins (Fig. 1D). These TFs exhibited tem-  To corroborate the direct binding of TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 to the
poral separation in gene expression, suggesting potentially distinct   paclitaxel biosynthetic gene promoters, as implied by the TEA, we
roles in transcriptional regulation (Fig. 1D and fig. S2B). For instance,   generated recombinant proteins for these TFs and performed electro-
TcAP2-­5 and TcMYB3 were highly induced at 0.5 hours, whereas   phoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs). This analysis unequivocally
TcMYB4, TcNAC1, TcWRKY1, and TcWRKY2 showed the highest   established that TcMYB3 strongly binds to the promoter sequences of
log2 fold change (log2FC) values by 12 hours (Fig. 1D and fig. S2B).    all 10 key paclitaxel biosynthetic genes (fig. S4). Furthermore, we suc-
This temporal pattern suggests that TcMYB3 may be associated with   cessfully identified specific binding sites for TcMYB3 within these
the initial, inductive transcriptional wave of paclitaxel gene expres-   target promoter sequences (fig. S4). The specificity of these interac-
sion, while TcMYB4 and WRKY TFs might be involved in a subse-   tions was confirmed by EMSA competitor assays (Fig. 2B). Similarly,
quent transcriptional wave, perhaps fine-­tuning or sustaining the  TcMYB4 demonstrated robust binding to the promoter sequences of
response. Their MeJA-­induced up-­regulation was further validated by   TASY, DBAT, DBBT, DBTNBT, BAPT, and, significantly, T5αH, a cy-
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-­PCR; fig. S2C).    tochrome P450 enzyme that catalyzes a critical early step in the path-
                                                      way (16, 17). Specific binding sites for TcMYB4 within these target
Screening MeJA induced TFs for their ability to regulate key    promoter sequences were also identified, and specificity of these in-
paclitaxel biosynthetic genes                                      teractions was confirmed by EMSA competitor assays (fig. S5). The
To investigate whether these TFs can regulate paclitaxel biosynthesis,   precise locations of TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 binding sites within these
we firstly performed in silico analysis using the plant cis-­acting regula-   promoters are comprehensively shown in fig. S6A. Detailed analysis
tory DNA elements tool (22) to screen the promoter regions of 10 key   of the associated DNA binding sequences revealed the consistent pres-
paclitaxel biosynthetic genes, TASY, taxadiene-­5α-­hydrolase (T5αH),   ence of an AC element containing the consensus sequence A(A/C)C
T13αH, taxadiene-­5α-­ol-­O-­acetyl transferase (TDAT), T10βH, DBBT,    (fig. S6B). Collectively, our data demonstrated that TcMYB3 exhibited
10-­deacetylbaccatin III-­10-­O-­acetyltransferase (DBAT), phenylalanine   broad promoter occupancy across the 10 core biosynthetic genes yet
amminomutase (23), Baccatin III:3-­amino, 13-­phenylpropanoyl   notably failed to bind BAPT and T5αH in our TEA assay (Fig. 2B).
transferase (BAPT), and N-­benzoyltransferase (DBTNBT) (fig. S1E).   However, EMSA results revealed that TcMYB4 specifically bound to
This analysis identified one or more putative cognate DNA binding  BAPT and T5αH, effectively complementing TcMYB3’s regulatory
sites for each selected TF within the sequence of all available pacli-   scope. These findings establish the TcMYB3-­TcMYB4 module as a
taxel gene promoters, and these motifs were generally overrepresent-   central positive regulatory unit that coordinately orchestrated the pa-
ed (fig. S3, A and B). To experimentally determine whether these    clitaxel biosynthetic pathway.
TFs could interact with paclitaxel gene promoters, we used a high-­
throughput Arabidopsis transient expression assay (TEA) using a   In vivo confirmation that TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 can activate
dual luciferase reporter system (fig. S3C). Each of the 19 candidate   paclitaxel biosynthetic genes
TFs was individually tested for its ability to regulate expression from  To confirm whether TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 can drive the expression
the 10 paclitaxel gene promoters. This comprehensive screen identi-   of paclitaxel-­related genes in Taxus cells, we constructed a dual-­
fied 36 significant interactions, with at least three TFs interacting with   luciferase reporter vector that consolidated the reporter gene and the
more than one promoter, demonstrating both activation and repression   internal control into a single plasmid using Mobius Assembly (24)
(Fig. 2A). Notably, TcAP2-­2, TcMYB1, TcNAC1, TcNAC2, bHLH2,    (fig. S7, A to C). We evaluated the protoplast transfection in Taxus
and TcWRKY1 showed highly specific interactions, targeting only  CMCs, determining that 16 μg of DNA achieved the highest transient
BAPT, phenylalanine aminomutase (PAM), BAPT, T5αH, BAPT and   expression and that the ubiquitin10 promoter (Ubiq10p) showed
PAM promoters, respectively. TcAP2-­1, TcAP2-­3, TcNAC4, and Tc-   stronger activity compared to 35S and MAS promoters (fig. S7, D and
NAC5 failed to regulate any of the 10 promoters tested (Fig. 2A). In   E). This TEA in T. cuspidata CMCs demonstrated that TcMYB3 could
contrast, nine TFs interacted with multiple promoters, highlighting   activate all 10 key paclitaxel biosynthetic gene promoters (Fig. 3A), as
their broader regulatory potential. We observed that TcMYB2, bHLH1,   suggested by the EMSA (Fig. 2B). However, TcMYB3 failed to activate
and TcNAC3 exhibited dual roles as both positive and negative   the promoters of BAPT and T5αH in the heterologous Arabidopsis

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eaee6211 (2026)  5 June 2026                                                                                 3 of 11


[PDF physical page 4]
S c i e n c e A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h A r t i c l e





Fig. 2. Functional screening of TF candidates by TEA and EMSA. (A) Arabidopsis transient expression assay (TEA) screen testing for interaction between the 19 candi-
date TFs and the 10 paclitaxel biosynthetic promoters. Error bars represent standard error; n ≥ 4; significance was determined compared to the negative control (NC) in
each promoter using a one-­way ANOVA following Tukey’s test, *P < 0.05. (B) Competitive electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) for showing the specificity of TcMYB3
to the binding site (BS) in the promoters of 10 paclitaxel biosynthesis genes. Glutathione S-­transferase (GST) was used as NC. The oligonucleotide probe for each BS is in-
dicated above the respective EMSA panels, and their sequences are detailed in table S4.





Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eaee6211 (2026)  5 June 2026                                                                                 4 of 11


[PDF physical page 5]
S c i e n c e A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h A r t i c l e





Fig. 3. Combinatorial function of TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 in activating paclitaxel biosynthetic enzyme promoters. (A) CMC protoplast TEA showing the activation of
10 paclitaxel gene promoters by TcMYB3 driven by Ubqi10 promoter and TcMYB4 driven by CaMV 35S promoter. (B) Schematic representation of the TcMYB3 promoter
showing the location of the five MYB-­BS sites in its promoter. (C) Competitive EMSA assay for showing the specificity of TcMYB3 to the BS-­3 in its own promoters. Se-
quences are detailed in table S4. (D) CMC protoplast TEA showing the autoactivation of TcMYB3 using the complete TcMYB3 promoter (715 bp). (E) Schematic representa-
tion of the TcMYB4 promoter showing the location of the MYB-­BS site. (F) Competitive EMSA assay for showing the specificity of TcMYB4 to the BS-­2 in its own promoters.
Sequences are detailed in table S4. (G) CMC protoplast TEA showing the autoactivation of TcMYB3. (H) Combinatorial transactivation of the T5αH, T13αH, BAPT and DBT-
NBT promoters by TcTMYB3 and TcMYB4. The interactions shown are stated in NLuc/FLuc ratios, normalized against the NC for each promoter. n > 3; significance was
determined compared to the NC for each transactivator using a Student’s t test, *P < 0.05 in [(D) and (G)]. Values are means ± SD, n = 3, and different letters indicate sig-
nificant differences at P < 0.05.

TEA assay (Fig. 2A), highlighting limitations of the heterologous sys-   specifically bound to the −482 binding site sequence AACACC
tem, possibly due to the absence of essential cofactors or interacting   (Fig. 3, B and C, and fig. S8, A and B). TEA in T. baccata CMCs assay
partners native to Taxus. Unexpectedly, TcMYB4 also significantly   confirmed the autoregulation of TcMYB3 using its full-­length pro-
enhanced the activity of all these promoters (Fig. 3A), a result that   moter (Fig. 3D). Autoregulation of the −625-­bp TcMYB4 promoter
diverged from the binding observed in EMSA and TEA in Arabidopsis   was also observed within −625 bp of its promoter but not with the
(Fig. 2A and fig. S5). Notably, TcMYB4 bound the TASY and T5αH   −278-­bp deletion derivative (Fig. 3E and fig. S8C), and EMSA re-
promoters in EMSA but did not activate them in Arabidopsis (Fig. 2A   sults demonstrated that TcMYB4 could bind its promoter within
and fig. S5), indicating that its DNA binding ability alone is insuffi-  −371 bp (Fig. 3, E and F, and fig. S8D). TEA in T. baccata CMCs
cient for transcriptional activation in the heterologous Arabidopsis   assay confirmed the autoregulation of TcMYB4 using its full-­length
cells. Together, these results demonstrate that the full transcriptional   promoter (Fig. 3G). Furthermore, we found that TcMYB4 transacti-
potential of the TcMYB3/4​ module is tightly linked to native cellular   vated the TcMYB3 promoter fragments but not vice versa (fig. S9),
machinery, underscoring the importance of studying these regulators   suggesting a hierarchical regulatory relationship.
within their endogenous context.                                To further evaluate the cooperative function of these MYBs in ac-
   This intriguing discrepancy prompted us to investigate potential   tivating paclitaxel biosynthetic enzyme promoters, we tested combi-
autoregulation and transactivation between TcMYB3 and TcMYB4.   nations of both MYBs in the protoplasts of T. baccata CMCs. The
TcMYB3 up-­regulated expression from its own −398–base pair (bp)   coexpression of TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 significantly increased the
promoter and a −525-­bp deletion derivative based on the TEA in   activation of paclitaxel-­related promoters with increased activity be-
Taxus baccata (Tb) CMCs but not from a −258 bp promoter dele-   ing observed for at least four key paclitaxel-­related promoters, T5αH,
tion (Fig. 3B and fig. S8, A and B). The −525-­to −258-­bp TcMYB-­3  T13αH, BAPT, and DBTNBT (Fig. 3H). These data demonstrate that
promoter sequence contains three putative MYB binding sites at   cotransfection of TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 can increase the activation
−518, −482, and −298 (Fig. 3B). EMSAs confirmed that TcMYB3   of T5αH, T13αH, BAPT, and DBTNBT.

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eaee6211 (2026)  5 June 2026                                                                                 5 of 11


[PDF physical page 6]
S c i e n c e A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h A r t i c l e

Production of stable transgenic Taxus CMCs with                the increase in paclitaxel and baccatin III yields following MeJA elici-
identified MYB TFs                                                  tation in TcMYB3/4-­overexpressing lines suggests a combinatorial
To determine whether coexpression of TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 in   regulatory effect (fig. S11B), likely driven by the recruitment of en-
T. baccata CMCs was sufficient to drive paclitaxel biosynthesis, we   dogenous MYB3/4 or by additional unidentified MeJA-­responsive
engineered stable transgenic Taxus CMC lines. We constructed ex-   activators. Collectively, the combined expression of TcMYB3 and
pression vectors for TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 driven by β-­estradiol and  TcMYB4 is able to promote the accumulation of paclitaxel and related
dexamethasone (Dex)–inducible promoters, respectively (fig. S10A).   taxanes in Taxus CMCs, and our data further point to a broader
Confirmation of TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 expression upon induction   MeJA-­responsive transcriptional network that likely functions up-
with β-­estradiol and Dex, respectively, was obtained (Fig. 4A and   stream of, in parallel with, or downstream of the TcMYB3/4​ module
fig. S10, B to D). Critically, induced expression of either TcMYB3 or   to drive taxanes biosynthesis.
TcMYB4 individually activated the expression of paclitaxel biosyn-
thetic enzymes (Fig. 4B and fig. S11A), consistent with our protoplast
data (Fig. 3A). Moreover, coexpression of TcMYB3 and TcMYB4  DISCUSSION
further significantly enhanced the expression of these enzymes com-   Commercial supplies of paclitaxel depend on a costly and environ-
pared to individual expression, definitively demonstrating the com-   mentally unfriendly semisynthesis process that requires the extraction
binatorial function of TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 (Fig. 4B). Further,   of key intermediates such as baccatin III from Taxus species. MeJA is a
coexpression of both TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 in T. baccata CMCs   well-­known elicitor of plant natural products and is used commercially
resulted in a notable accumulation of the commercially relevant pre-   to increase paclitaxel production in plant cell culture (20, 25). The
cursor, baccatin III (Fig. 4C) and paclitaxel, FW (98 μg/g), (Fig. 4D),   identification of putative regulators involved in the up-­regulation of
resulting in a 121-­fold increase in paclitaxel production and a   paclitaxel production after MeJA elicitation could be exploited in bio-
364-­fold increase in baccatin III production, FW (877 μg/g). Further,   engineering efforts to increase paclitaxel yields in plant cell culture.





Fig. 4. Molecular engineering Taxus CMCs cells expressing TcMYB3-­TcMYB4 module enhance production of paclitaxel, and its key intermediates baccatin III
production. (A) Immunoblot of TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 expression in transgenic CMCs lines using hemagglutinin (HA) and MYC antibody, respectively. β-­Actin was used as
a loading control. The samples were collected after Dex and β-­estradiol treatment. WT, wild-­type; T1, transgenic line 1; T2, transgenic line 2. (B) Transcriptional expression
levels of key genes involved in the biosynthetic pathway of paclitaxel in indicated line following a 12-­hour treatment with the indicated chemicals. (C and D) Baccatin III
(C) and paclitaxel (D) yields in micrograms per gram of fresh cells following a 7-­day treatment with the indicated chemicals. Data are means ± SD; n = 3 biological repli-
cates. *P < 0.05.

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eaee6211 (2026)  5 June 2026                                                                                 6 of 11


[PDF physical page 7]
S c i e n c e A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h A r t i c l e

   This study successfully elucidates the transcriptional regulatory   N. benthamiana, enabling baccatin III levels to reach 154.84 ng/g,
mechanism by which MeJA boosts paclitaxel biosynthesis in Taxus   close to the amount produced in Taxus needles (225.32 ng/g) (18).
CMCs. We identified a TcMYB3-­TcMYB4 module that functions as   Moreover, a 17-­gene biosynthesis of baccatin III in Nicotiana was
an important regulatory switch, concurrently activating 10 essential   constructed and resulted in baccatin III production at levels compa-
promoters across the paclitaxel pathway (Fig. 2 and fig. S1E). Stable   rable to its natural abundance in Taxus needles (5). Although the pa-
transgenic Taxus CMCs expressing this module exhibited signifi-    clitaxel biosynthetic pathway has been successfully elucidated and
cantly enhanced paclitaxel production (FW, 98 μg/g) (Fig. 4D) to a   engineered in heterologous hosts, translational application is limited
level equivalent to MeJA elicitation (FW, 102 μg/g) (20), demon-   by an inability to impose native regulatory control over metabolic flux
strating a critical transition from observing complex cellular re-   and the characteristically inefficient functional expression of cyto-
sponses to designing precise transcriptional control systems. Our   chrome P450 enzymes (12, 17, 28, 29). This limitation is further ex-
previous work established that Taxus CMCs exhibit exceptional   emplified by our finding that TcMYB3, despite activating all key
metabolic robustness during scale-­up, with paclitaxel titers increas-   promoters in its native context, failed to activate the promoters of
ing from 102 mg/kg in shake flasks to 268 mg/kg in 20 liters of airlift  BAPT and T5αH in the heterologous Arabidopsis TAE assay (Fig. 2A),
bioreactors upon elicitation for 45 days (20). While contemporary   underscoring the constraints of non-­native systems, likely due to the
industrial company, Phyton Biotech, achieve yields of about 1 to 2 g/   absence of essential Taxus-­specific cofactors or interacting partners.​
kg, these proprietary systems often rely on highly optimized, large-­  In contrast, the native Taxus cell culture remains a promising alterna-
scale bioreactor operations​and well-­defined elicitation that are finely    tive, offering a more sustainable production method, and metabolic
tuned for their specific cell lines. Various Taxus species, such as Taxus   engineering in host cells offers a scalable and environmentally con-
brevifolia, T. baccata, Taxus cuspidate, Taxus chinensis, and Taxus   scious alternative (19). For example, culture optimization in combi-
media (a cross of T. baccata and T. cuspidata), have been explored for   nation with elicitation can promote production of paclitaxel, giving
paclitaxel and related taxanes production (25). Industrial produc-   a content of 43.43 mg/liter (30), and overexpression of BAPT and
tion has most used high-­yielding lines derived from T. chinensis or  DBTNBT genes in T. baccata cells leads to production of taxane at
T. media. In contrast, the present study uses T. baccata to generate   53.83 mg/liter (31). Here, we identified the TF network integral to
TcMYB-­overexpressing CMCs. It is critical to recognize that produc-   paclitaxel biosynthesis, and bioengineering Taxus CMCs cells ex-
tivity varies substantially not only between species but also among   pressing this selected TFs could enhance production of paclitaxel,
individual cell lines, due to distinct selection histories and process   reaching 98 μg/g FW, about 121 times higher than the levels seen in
optimization. Production from industry typically represent final, op-   control cells (Fig. 4D), and the key intermediate baccatin III, 877 μg/g
timized titers achieved in large-­scale bioreactors over full production  FW, about 364 times higher compared to the control (Fig. 4C), and
cycles (often from 3 to 5 weeks), while the yields reported in our study  much higher than previously reported values for heterologous hosts
for transgenic CMCs are from small-­scale, nonoptimized shake-­flask   and other cell culture (32).
cultures at a single 7-­day time point (Fig. 4D). Therefore, the produc-    TF engineering represents a highly promising strategy for en-
tion levels in our nonoptimized, research-­stage CMC line are not di-   hancing metabolite production, as demonstrated by its successful ap-
rectly comparable to those of an industrial cell factory. The key finding   plication in directing the flux of fungal polyketide biosynthesis for
is the significant fold increase over controls achieved through genetic   lovastatin production and in reconstructing complete anthocyanin
engineering, which establishes a foundation for future process opti-   pathways to create anthocyanin-­enriched tomato fruit (33–35). Prior
mization. The translational value of our discovery lies in providing a  work in paclitaxel biosynthesis engineering has often relied on over-
genetic tool (TcMYB3/4) that can be applied to enhance yields in any   expressing single TF, such as MYB, bHLH, or NAC factors, including
chosen, high-­performing production line, irrespective of its specific   those recently identified, such as T. chinensis MYB29a, Taxus media
taxonomic origin or optimization background.                 TmMYB3, or TmMYB39-­TmbHLH13 (32, 36, 37). While these efforts
   In contrast, the CMC platform provides a highly sustainable and   have yielded important insights into paclitaxel regulatory points,
nearly inexhaustible biomass source. The characterization of the   they have consistently struggled to achieve the sustained, multien-
R2R3-­MYB TFs in this study provides a critical molecular toolkit  zyme coordination necessary for high-­level metabolite production.
to bridge the current yield gap. By inducible overexpressing these   This limitation stems from relying on piecemeal approaches that fail
positive regulators, we can genetically stabilize a high-­productivity   to orchestrate the simultaneous activation of the entire biosynthet-
phenotype, securing the long-­term viability of this platform while    ic pathway in heterologous hosts (13). However, our work demon-
maintaining the biological longevity of the cell lines. Furthermore,   strates the successful de novo identification and construction of a
while we used a β-­estradiol–inducible system for this proof of con-   biosynthesis-­optimized TF network. We initiated an unbiased screen
cept, transitioning to Dex or ethanol-­inducible systems would be   of candidate TFs, and this systems-­level approach allowed us to move
more appropriate for clinical-­grade industrial applications to avoid   beyond targeted, gene-­by-­gene investigations and instead identify a
potential regulatory complexities associated with estrogen receptor–   minimal subset of TFs capable of collectively enhancing the entire
positive medical contexts (26).                                     pathway. The in vivo validation of this TF network in host cells, re-
   Metabolic engineering in heterologous hosts has successfully   sulting in a substantial and measurable enhancement of paclitaxel
demonstrated the de novo biosynthesis of paclitaxel and its key in-   biosynthesis (Figs. 2 and 3), underscores the practical utility and
termediate, baccatin III, the industrial precursor to paclitaxel bio-   transformative potential of our findings. The key conceptual break-
synthesis (12). Significantly, the key enzymes required for baccatin   through of our study is moving beyond the characterization of known
III and paclitaxel biosynthesis, including several “missing” genes  TFs to the successful de novo identification and construction of a
have been identified, allowing reconstitution of the de novo bacca-   biosynthesis-­optimized TF network within the host cell. This dem-
tin III biosynthesis pathway (5, 15, 27). For example, the minimal   onstration of concerted regulatory action offers a more potent and
gene set required for paclitaxel biosynthesis was constructed in   coordinated strategy than traditional methods that target individual

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eaee6211 (2026)  5 June 2026                                                                                 7 of 11


[PDF physical page 8]
S c i e n c e A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h A r t i c l e

enzymes, representing a paradigm shift toward systems-­level control   conducted separately for Biological Process (BP), Molecular Function
of plant metabolism.                                          (MF), and Cellular Component (CC) using Fisher’s exact test with
   Although our work could substantially enhance the production of   Benjamini-­Hochberg FDR correction. The top 10 significant GO
paclitaxel and its commercial intermediate baccatin III, several stra-   terms were plotted as dot plots.
tegic avenues promise to further amplify the production platform
based on our work. While the coexpression of TcMYB3​and TcMYB4​  Genomic DNA extraction
is sufficient to strongly induce the biosynthesis of paclitaxel and re-   Approximately 100 mg of frozen tissue was ground in liquid nitrogen,
lated taxanes in Taxus CMCs, we do not propose that this module   suspended in extraction buffer, and incubated at 65°C for 30 min. An
represents the sole or master regulator of the MeJA-­induced pacli-   equal volume of chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (24:1, v/v) was added,
taxel biosynthesis. Instead, our data indicate the existence of a broad-   mixed, and centrifuged at 10,000g for 10 min at 4°C. The aqueous
er, combinatorial transcriptional network. The synergistic increase in   phase was reextracted, and DNA was precipitated with 1.5 volumes of
paclitaxel and baccatin III accumulation following MeJA elicitation   isopropanol at 20°C for 1 hour. DNA was pelleted (17,000g for 30 min
in TcMYB3/4-­overexpressing​lines (fig. S11B) suggests that addition-    at 4°C), washed with 70% ethanol, air dried, and resuspended in 50 μl
al, unidentified MeJA-­responsive TFs, which may function upstream   of Tris-­EDTA (TE) buffer at 65°C for 5 min.
of, in parallel with, or downstream of the TcMYB3/4​ module, coop-
erate to achieve full pathway activation. Among the candidate co-  Rapid amplification of cDNA ends
regulators, the functional homolog of the jasmonate signaling master   Rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) was used to obtain full-­
regulator, bHLH TF AtMYC2​ (38), represents a particularly com-   length sequences of genes with incomplete coding regions. Five-­prime
pelling target for future mechanistic investigation. Building on our  RACE was performed for TcAP2-­3, TcNAC3, and TcbHLH2, and
work, several targeted strategies emerge to boost paclitaxel. First, a   three-­prime RACE was performed for TcMYB4. Amplified cDNA
deeper molecular understanding of the TcMYB3-­TcMYB4 network,   fragments were cloned and sequenced using the 5′/3′ RACE Kit, Sec-
including the identification of their protein interactors and the eluci-  ond Generation (Roche), following the manufacturer’s instructions.
dation of how their binding specificities are integrated during MeJA   Primer sequences are listed in table S1.
elicitation, may reveal endogenous coregulators to recruit or suppress
for further bioengineering. Second, identifying the endogenous  Gene expression analysis
repressors that attenuate the MeJA response presents a target for   T. cuspidata CMCs were collected in the indicated time in the figure
CRISPR-­Cas9–mediated knockout to amplify pathway induction.   legend, and total RNA was extracted using a modified cetyltrimethyl-
Additional study could focus on knockout of competing side path-  ammonium bromide (CTAB) method (42). Total RNA was deoxyri-
ways, such as the phenylpropanoid pathway, which would channel   bonuclease treated and reverse transcribed using oligo(dT) primers
metabolic flux more exclusively toward paclitaxel (39, 40). Last, cou-   and the First-­Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Invitrogen). Quantitative
pling this genetic blueprint with optimized culture conditions will be   RT-­PCR was performed with gene-­specific primers (table S2) and
essential for scalable bioprocessing. Ultimately, this work establishes   others from (43) on a LightCycler 480 (Roche). Reactions were run in
rational TF network engineering as a foundational strategy, heralding    triplicate across three biological replicates. Relative expression was
a previously unexplored era for the sustainable production of com-   normalized to Taxus actin, and significance determined using one-­
plex plant natural products.                                 way analysis of variance (ANOVA) following Tukey’s test (P < 0.05).
   In summary, our study demonstrates the potential applications
of transcriptional network engineering for improving the produc-  Plasmid construction for transient expression in
tion of valuable plant secondary metabolites. We anticipate that a   Arabidopsis thaliana
similar systematic identification and characterization of other TF   The Renilla luciferase sequence from pRL-­TK (Promega) was insert-
networks will pave the way for generating robust, high-­yield pro-   ed into p2GW7.0 to generate an internal control plasmid. TF coding
duction systems for a wide range of natural products.                sequences were amplified from cDNA, and promoter fragments were
                                                                  amplified from genomic DNA using Phusion High-­Fidelity DNA
                                                              Polymerase (New England Biolabs). TFs were cloned into p2GW7.0
MATERIALS AND METHODS                                         to produce effector constructs, and promoters were cloned upstream
Transcriptomic profiling                                            of the firefly luciferase gene in pGWlucB to produce reporter con-
Differential expression analysis was performed using DESeq2 on the    structs. Primer sequences are provided in table S3.
dataset with biological replicates (41). Genes with an adjusted P value
(Padj) < 0.05 and |log2FC| > 1 were considered differentially expressed   A. thaliana protoplast transient assay
in MeJA-­treated samples. For each ontology, enrichment was comput-   Ten Taxus promoters and 19 TFs were cloned using the Gateway sys-
ed against the background of all annotated contigs, and significance   tem (table S3). Protoplast transfection followed an optimized protocol
was assessed using Fisher’s exact test, followed by Benjamini-­Hochberg   (44). A mixture of 250 μl of protoplasts (5 × 105 cells/ml) and 14 μl
false discovery rate (FDR) correction. Venn diagrams were gener-  DNA (1 μg/μl; effector:reporter:control = 4:5:5) was incubated with
ated using the VennDiagram package to display overlap of DEGs   polyethylene glycol (PEG)–Ca2+ solution [40% PEG 4000, 0.4 M man-
across time points. DEG counts per time point were visualized by bar    nitol, and 0.1 M Ca(NO3)2 (pH 8 to 9)] for 5 min at room temperature.
plots. Heatmaps of the union of DEGs were generated using Complex-   Cells were washed, incubated in modified W5 for 20 hours at 25°C
Heatmap, with z-­score–scaled log2FCs, clustering by Euclidean dis-   under light, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C. Dual-­
tance. Time-­course clustering of DEGs was performed using k-­means   luciferase assays were conducted using the Promega system. Each ex-
(k = 6). Cluster trends were visualized with smoothed line plots of   periment was repeated three times. Positive interactions were defined
z-­score expression trajectories. Overrepresentation analysis was   by significant induction relative to the empty-­vector control (P < 0.05).

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eaee6211 (2026)  5 June 2026                                                                                 8 of 11


[PDF physical page 9]
S c i e n c e A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h A r t i c l e

Expression and purification of recombinant TcMYB3           Ca(NO3)2] for 1 min, followed by dilution with MGG and incubation
and TcMYB4                                                        in darkness for 1 hour. Cells were washed and resuspended in 500 μl
The coding sequences of TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 were cloned into the   of MGG for overnight incubation before luciferase analysis.
glutathione S-­transferase (GST)–tagged vector pDEST24 using the
primers in table S3 and expressed in E. coli BL21 (DE3). Protein   Dual-­luciferase assay
expression was induced at optical density at 600 nm (OD600) = 0.6   Luciferase activity was quantified using the Nano-­Glo Dual-­Luciferase
to 0.7 with 0.1 mM isopropyl-­β-­d-­thiogalactopyranoside at 28°C for   Reporter Assay System (Promega). Eighty microliters of passive lysis
3 hours. Cells were lysed in buffer [25 mM tris-­HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM   buffer were added to each sample, followed by 80 μl of ONE-­Glo EX
NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-­100, lysozyme (1 mg/ml), 1 mM dithiothreitol   reagent for firefly luciferase and 80 μl of NanoDLR Stop & Glo reagent
(DTT), and protease inhibitor], and GST-­fusion proteins were puri-   for NanoLuc measurement. Luminescence was measured on a BMG
fied using Glutathione Sepharose 4B (GE Healthcare); the GST was   Labtech microplate reader (gain, 3600; integration, 1 s). Results were
used as a control.                                                  expressed as NLuc/FLuc ratios normalized to controls. Experiments
                                                             were repeated twice with three replicates per treatment. Statistical sig-
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay                                nificance was determined using Student’s t test (P < 0.05).
EMSA was performed using 20-­bp double-­stranded oligonucleotides
containing cis-­elements from paclitaxel gene promoters (table S4).   Stable transformation of Taxus CMCs and Western blotting
Probes were end-­labeled with [γ-­32P]ATP (adenosine triphosphate   Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain AGL1 was cultured in yeast extract
labeled with phosphorus-­32 on the terminal phosphate) using T4   peptone (YEP) medium with rifampicin (25 mg/liter) and kanamycin
polynucleotide kinase (Fermentas, UK). Binding reactions contained   (50 mg/liter) at 28°C for 2 to 3 days. One milliliter of aliquot was trans-
0.5 μg of recombinant protein in buffer [20 mM Hepes (pH 7.9), 50 mM   ferred to 20 ml of YEP containing antibiotics and 200 μM acetosyrin-
KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 5% glycerol, poly(deoxyinosinic-­  gone and grown to OD600 = 0.8. Cells were pelleted (3270g for 5 min)
deoxycytidylic acid) (0.1 μg/μl), and bovine serum albumin (BSA;   and resuspended in infiltration buffer [10 mM MES (pH 5.6), 10 mM
50 μg/μl)]. After incubation (20 min at 4°C; 20 min at room tempera-   MgCl2, and 250 μM acetosyringone]. After 1 to 4 hours of incubation
ture), reactions were loaded on 6% nondenaturing polyacrylamide    at 22°C, 0.02% Silwet-­77 was added, and 50 ml of bacterial suspension
gels in 1× tris-­borate EDTA and run at 120 V for 80 min. Gels were   was mixed with 50 ml of T. cuspidata CMCs. Cultures were incubated
dried and exposed overnight at −80°C to x-­ray film.                      at 25°C in darkness (110 rpm for 30 min), washed twice with H2O,
                                                         and cocultured in TB medium for 3 days. Cells were washed repeat-
Thermal Asymmetric Interlaced-­PCR                             edly and plated on TB agar containing 400 μM timentin for 7 days,
Promoters of TcMYB3 and TcMYB4 were amplified by thermal   followed by stepwise selection on TB agar with decreasing timentin
asymmetric interlaced PCR as described by Thanh et al. (45). Brief-   (300 to 100 μM) and increasing hygromycin (10 to 25 μg/liter) to iso-
ly, 50 ng of T. cuspidata CMC genomic DNA was amplified in three    late stable transformants. TcMYB3 or TcMYB4 proteins were detected
consecutive reactions using nested gene-­specific primers (RSP1,   using anti-­Myc (1:2000; Amsbio) or anti-­hemagglutinin (HA; 1:2000;
RSP2, and RSP3) and arbitrary degenerate primers (table S5). Prod-  Abcam) primary antibodies and IRDye 800CW–conjugated goat anti-­
ucts were cloned into pGEM-­T Easy (Promega) and sequenced. The  mouse or goat anti-­rabbit secondary antibodies (1:5000; Cell Signal-
identified promoter sequences were reamplified and cloned into the   ing Technology).
Mobius Assembly universal acceptor vector.
                                                             Extraction and quantification of taxanes
Mobius assembly cloning                                  The CMC cells were treated with concentration of 50 μM β-­estradiol,
Mobius Assembly (24) was used to generate constructs for transient   50 μM Dex, or 100 μM MeJA for indicated times in the figure. Approxi-
expression in Taxus CMC protoplasts and for stable transformation.   mately 50 mg of frozen cells were extracted with 1 ml methanol:
Promoters were fused to nanoluc luciferase (NLuc), while TcMYB3   dichloromethane (1:1, v/v) by sonication for 2 hours. The supernatant
or TcMYB4 were driven by the PLexA promoter and Ppop6 promoter,   was evaporated under vacuum, and the residue was reextracted twice
respectively. Three level 1 transcriptional units were assembled into   with dichloromethane:H2O (2:1, v/v). The combined organic fractions
level 2 vectors containing the transactivator (TcMYB3 or TcMYB4),   were dried and dissolved in methanol for high-­performance liquid
promoter-­NLuc fusion, and firefly luciferase (FLuc) reporter (fig. S7).   chromatography (HPLC)–mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.
The construct used for stable transformation is shown in fig. S10A.         Paclitaxel and baccatin III were quantified using a 6560 Ion Mobil-
                                                                                 ity Quadrupole Time-­of-­Flight MS coupled to an Infinity II 1290
Taxus CMC protoplast isolation and transfection           UPLC (Agilent) equipped with an ACE C18-­PFP column (100 ×
One milliliter of packed T. cuspidata CMCs was digested in 10 ml   2.1 mm, 1.8 μm). A water (A)–methanol (B) gradient containing 0.1%
enzyme solution [1% cellulase Onozuka R-­10, 0.25% pectolyase Y-­23,   formic acid was used (10 to 100% B over 7 min, held for 4 min, 0.3 ml/
0.05% BSA, and 0.01% MES in maceration-­glucose-­glycine (MGG)   min, 30°C). Data were acquired in positive ion mode (mass/charge
buffer] for 3 hours in darkness. The digest was filtered through a 40-­μm    ratio, 400 to 1000; 1 frame/s). [M + Na]+ ions monitored: baccatin III,
nylon mesh, and protoplasts were pelleted (100 g for 3 min) and   609.2306; paclitaxel, 876.3202. Standard curves were prepared from
washed twice with chilled MGG. Cells were resuspended in 1 ml of   reference compounds (Cambridge Bioscience).
MGG on ice for 1 hour and adjusted to 5 × 105 cells/ml in MMM
solution (0.5 M mannitol, 15 mM MgCl2, and 0.1% MES). Cell viability   Statistical analysis
was assessed with Evans blue and fluorescein diacetate. Transfection   Data were presented as means ± SD. One-­way ANOVA followed by
was performed with 8 μg of DNA, 250 μl of protoplast suspension,   Tukey’s test or t test were used for the statistical analysis unless other
and 250 μl of PEG solution [40% PEG 4000, 0.4 M mannitol, and 0.1 M   stated. P < 0.05 was considered as significant.

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eaee6211 (2026)  5 June 2026                                                                                 9 of 11


[PDF physical page 10]
S c i e n c e A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h A r t i c l e

Supplementary Materials                                                             26.  R. Jeselsohn, R. Yelensky, G. Buchwalter, G. Frampton, F. Meric-­Bernstam,
This PDF file includes:                                                                                  A. M. Gonzalez-­Angulo, J. Ferrer-­Lozano, J. A. Perez-­Fidalgo, M. Cristofanilli, H. Gomez,
Figs. S1 to S11                                                                        Emergence of constitutively active estrogen receptor-­α mutations in pretreated
Tables S1 to S5                                                                         advanced estrogen receptor–positive breast cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 20, 1757–1767
                                                                                                           (2014).
                                                                                                     27.  C. Yang, Y. Wang, Z. Su, L. Xiong, P. Wang, W. Lei, X. Yan, D. Ma, G. Zhao, Z. Zhou,
REFERENCES                                                                                 Biosynthesis of the highly oxygenated tetracyclic core skeleton of Taxol. Nat. Commun.
  1.  P. B. Schiff, S. B. Horwitz, Taxol stabilizes microtubules in mouse fibroblast cells. Proc. Natl.          15, 2339 (2024).
     Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 77, 1561–1565 (1980).                                                         28.  S. Nandi, R. Sharma, S. Mandal, P. K. Sharma, P. K. Ajikumar, A. Anoop, Computational
  2.  B. A. Weaver, How Taxol/paclitaxel kills cancer cells. Mol. Biol. Cell 25, 2677–2681 (2014).             investigation of cytochrome P450-­catalyzed oxetane formation in Taxol biosynthesis.
  3.  S. Howat, B. Park, I. S. Oh, Y.-­W. Jin, E.-­K. Lee, G. J. Loake, Paclitaxel: Biosynthesis,                    Biochemistry 64, 3474–3484 (2025).
     production and future prospects. N. Biotechnol. 31, 242–245 (2014).                            29.  Y. Zhao, F. Liang, Y. Xie, Y.-­T. Duan, A. Andeadelli, I. Pateraki, A. M. Makris, T. G. Pomorski,
  4.  F. Liang, Y. Xie, C. Zhang, Y. Zhao, M. S. Motawia, S. C. Kampranis, Elucidation of the final             D. Staerk, S. C. Kampranis, Oxetane ring formation in Taxol biosynthesis is catalyzed by a
     steps in Taxol biosynthesis and its biotechnological production. Nat. Synth. 4, 1212–1222           bifunctional cytochrome P450 enzyme. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 146, 801–810 (2023).
      (2025).                                                                                        30.  S. Bentebibel, E. Moyano, J. Palazón, R. M. Cusidó, M. Bonfill, R. Eibl, M. T. Pinol, Effects of
  5.  C. J. McClune, J. C.-­T. Liu, C. Wick, R. De La Peña, B. M. Lange, P. M. Fordyce, E. S. Sattely,             immobilization by entrapment in alginate and scale-­up on paclitaxel and baccatin III
     Discovery of FoTO1 and Taxol genes enables biosynthesis of baccatin III. Nature 643,              production in cell suspension cultures of Taxus baccata. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 89, 647–655
     582–592 (2025).                                                                                     (2005).
  6.  C. McElroy, S. Jennewein, “Taxol biosynthesis and production: From forests to fermenters”     31.  E. Perez-­Matas, D. Hidalgo-­Martinez, E. Moyano, J. Palazon, M. Bonfill,
      in Biotechnology of natural products (Springer International Publishing Cham, 2018),              Overexpression of BAPT and DBTNBT genes in Taxus baccata in vitro cultures to
     pp. 145–185.                                                                   enhance the biotechnological production of paclitaxel. Plant Biotechnol. J. 22,
  7.  A. Cravens, J. Payne, C. D. Smolke, Synthetic biology strategies for microbial biosynthesis         233–247 (2024).
     of plant natural products. Nat. Commun. 10, 2142 (2019).                                      32.   J.-­Y. Yin, M. Lai, X.-­Y. Yu, D.-­D. Su, X.-­Y. Xiong, Y.-­L. Li, Comprehensive strategies for
  8. M. Ochoa-­Villarreal, S. Howat, S. Hong, M. O. Jang, Y.-­W. Jin, E.-­K. Lee, G. J. Loake, Plant cell           paclitaxel production: Insights from plant cell culture, endophytic microorganisms, and
      culture strategies for the production of natural products. BMB Rep. 49, 149–158 (2016).             synthetic biology. Hortic. Res 12, uhae346 (2025).
  9.  V. Courdavault, S. E. O’Connor, M. K. Jensen, N. Papon, Metabolic engineering for plant         33.  H. Zheng, X. Fu, J. Shao, Y. Tang, M. Yu, L. Li, L. Huang, K. Tang, Transcriptional regulatory
     natural products biosynthesis: New procedures, concrete achievements and remaining          network of high-­value active ingredients in medicinal plants. Trends Plant Sci. 28,
       limits. Nat. Prod. Rep. 38, 2145–2153 (2021).                                             429–446 (2023).
 10.  P. K. Ajikumar, W.-­H. Xiao, K. E. Tyo, Y. Wang, F. Simeon, E. Leonard, O. Mucha, T. H. Phon,         34. M. Askenazi, E. M. Driggers, D. A. Holtzman, T. C. Norman, S. Iverson, D. P. Zimmer,
      B. Pfeifer, G. Stephanopoulos, Isoprenoid pathway optimization for Taxol precursor                     M.-­E. Boers, P. R. Blomquist, E. J. Martinez, A. W. Monreal, Integrating transcriptional and
     overproduction in Escherichia coli. Science 330, 70–74 (2010).                                   metabolite profiles to direct the engineering of lovastatin-­producing fungal strains. Nat.
 11.  B. W. Biggs, C. G. Lim, K. Sagliani, S. Shankar, G. Stephanopoulos, M. De Mey,                         Biotechnol. 21, 150–156 (2003).
        P. K. Ajikumar, Overcoming heterologous protein interdependency to optimize                35.  E. Butelli, L. Titta, M. Giorgio, H.-­P. Mock, A. Matros, S. Peterek, E. G. Schijlen, R. D. Hall,
     P450-­mediated Taxol precursor synthesis in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.               A. G. Bovy, J. Luo, Enrichment of tomato fruit with health-­promoting anthocyanins by
     113, 3209–3214 (2016).                                                                      expression of select transcription factors. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1301–1308 (2008).
 12.   J. Shi, C. Zhang, R. Deng, A. R. Fernie, M. Chen, Y. Zhang, The biosynthesis and diversity of      36.  T. Coombe-­Tennant, X. Zhu, S. Wu, G. J. Loake, Recent advances in paclitaxel biosynthesis
     taxanes: From pathway elucidation to engineering and synthetic biology. Plant Commun.        and regulation. J. Exp. Bot. 76, 124–133 (2025).
      6, 101460 (2025).                                                                              37.  C. Yu, X. Luo, C. Zhang, X. Xu, J. Huang, Y. Chen, S. Feng, X. Zhan, L. Zhang, H. Yuan,
 13.   J. Lin, X. Yin, Y. Zeng, X. Hong, S. Zhang, B. Cui, Q. Zhu, Z. Liang, Z. Xue, D. Yang, Progress              Tissue-­specific study across the stem of Taxus media identifies a phloem-­specific TmMYB3
    and prospect: Biosynthesis of plant natural products based on plant chassis. Biotechnol.           involved in the transcriptional regulation of paclitaxel biosynthesis. Plant J. 103, 95–110
     Adv. 69, 108266 (2023).                                                                              (2020).
 14.  X. Liu, P. Zhang, Q. Zhao, A. C. Huang, Making small molecules in plants: A chassis for           38.  K. Kazan, J. M. Manners, MYC2: The master in action. Mol. Plant 6, 686–703 (2013).
     synthetic biology-­based production of plant natural products. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 65,          39.  C. Brzycki Newton, E. M. Young, S. C. Roberts, Targeted control of supporting pathways in
     417–443 (2023).                                                                                       paclitaxel biosynthesis with CRISPR-­guided methylation. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 11,
 15.  B. Jiang, L. Gao, H. Wang, Y. Sun, X. Zhang, H. Ke, S. Liu, P. Ma, Q. Liao, Y. Wang,                   1272811 (2023).
     Characterization and heterologous reconstitution of Taxus biosynthetic enzymes leading      40.   J. Lin, W. Li, Y. Liu, F. Yang, L. Liang, Y. Zeng, Y. Li, Z. Xue, C. E. French, J. Guo, B. Cui, Z. Liang,
     to baccatin III. Science 383, 622–629 (2024).                                                      D. Yang, Engineering Salvia miltiorrhiza hairy roots as a scalable platform for
 16.   J. Li, I. Mutanda, K. Wang, L. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Wang, Chloroplastic metabolic engineering            high-­yield production of paclitaxel and ginsenoside precursors. Plant Commun. 7,
     coupled with isoprenoid pool enhancement for committed taxanes biosynthesis in             101830 (2026).
     Nicotiana benthamiana. Nat. Commun. 10, 4850 (2019).                                        41. M. I. Love, W. Huber, S. Anders, Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for
 17.   J. C.-­T. Liu, R. De La Peña, C. Tocol, E. S. Sattely, Reconstitution of early paclitaxel                   RNA-­seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550 (2014).
     biosynthetic network. Nat. Commun. 15, 1419 (2024).                                          42.  G. Gambino, I. Perrone, I. Gribaudo, A rapid and effective method for RNA extraction from
 18.  Y. Zhang, L. Wiese, H. Fang, S. Alseekh, L. P. de Souza, F. Scossa, J. J. Molloy, M. Christmann,           different tissues of grapevine and other woody plants. Phytochem. Anal. 19, 520–525
      A. R. Fernie, Synthetic biology identifies the minimal gene set required for paclitaxel                (2008).
     biosynthesis in a plant chassis. Mol. Plant 16, 1951–1961 (2023).                                43.  E. Nims, C. P. Dubois, S. C. Roberts, E. L. Walker, Expression profiling of genes involved in
 19.  L. Xie, J. Gao, Y. J. Zhou, Synthetic biology for Taxol biosynthesis and sustainable                     paclitaxel biosynthesis for targeted metabolic engineering. Metab. Eng. 8, 385–394
     production. Trends Biotechnol. 42, 674–676 (2024).                                                  (2006).
 20.  E.-­K. Lee, Y.-­W. Jin, J. H. Park, Y. M. Yoo, S. M. Hong, R. Amir, Z. Yan, E. Kwon, A. Elfick,             44.  S.-­D. Yoo, Y.-­H. Cho, J. Sheen, Arabidopsis mesophyll protoplasts: A versatile cell system for
       S. Tomlinson, Cultured cambial meristematic cells as a source of plant natural products.             transient gene expression analysis. Nat. Protoc. 2, 1565–1572 (2007).
      Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 1213–1217 (2010).                                                         45.  T. Thanh, V. T. Q. Chi, M. P. Abdullah, H. Omar, S. Napis, Efficiency of ligation-­mediated PCR
 21.   J. C. Linden, M. Phisalaphong, Oligosaccharides potentiate methyl jasmonate-­induced          and TAIL-­PCR methods for isolation of RbcS promoter sequences from green microalga
     production of paclitaxel in Taxus canadensis. Plant Sci. 158, 41–51 (2000).                       Ankistrodesmus convolutus. Mol. Biol. 46, 58–64 (2012).
 22.  K. Higo, Y. Ugawa, M. Iwamoto, T. Korenaga, Plant cis-­acting regulatory DNA elements
     (PLACE) database: 1999. Nucleic Acids Res. 27, 297–300 (1999).                         Acknowledgments: We thank Y. Mao, X. Chen, and J. Lin for discussion. We thank the
 23.  A. Djamei, K. Schipper, F. Rabe, A. Ghosh, V. Vincon, J. Kahnt, S. Osorio, T. Tohge,           members of the Loake laboratory for discussion and technical advice. Funding: The
      A. R. Fernie, I. Feussner, Metabolic priming by a secreted fungal effector. Nature 478,          Wellcome-­University of Edinburgh Institutional Strategic Support Fund (to B.C.),
     395–398 (2011).                                                              The Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC) grant UK BB/
 24.  A. I. Andreou, N. Nakayama, Mobius Assembly: A versatile Golden-­Gate framework         W510269/1 (to G.J.L.), The BBSRC grant UK BB/R017603/1 (to G.J.L.), The BBSRC grant UK BB/
     towards universal DNA assembly. PLOS ONE 13, e0189892 (2018).                        V003461/1 (to G.J.L.), The BBSRC grant UK BB/R505493/1 (to G.J.L.), CONACYT scholarships of
 25.  Y. Yukimune, H. Tabata, Y. Higashi, Y. Hara, Methyl jasmonate-­induced overproduction of     Mexico (M.O.-­V.), and BBSRC Collaborative Awards in Science and Engineering Award (to
      paclitaxel and baccatin III in Taxus cell suspension cultures. Nat. Biotechnol. 14,                   S.H.). Author contributions: Conceptualization: B.C. and G.J.L. Methodology: B.C., Q.P., M.O.-­V.,
     1129–1132 (1996).                                                                                        S.H., R.A., and Z.Y. Investigation: B.C., Q.P., M.O.-­V., S.H., R.A., and Z.Y. Visualization: B.C., Q.P.,

Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eaee6211 (2026)  5 June 2026                                                                                10 of 11


[PDF physical page 11]
S c i e n c e A d va n c e s  | R e s e a r c h A r t i c l e


M.O.-­V., and S.H. Validation: R.A., S.H., B.C., and Q.P. Formal analysis: S.H., B.C., and Q.P. Funding      Information database under the series accession number ERP000352 (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
acquisition: G.J.L. and B.C. Project administration: M.O.-­V., B.C., and G.J.L. Supervision: G.J.L., R.A.,    sra?term=ERP000352). This study did not generate new materials.
and B.C. Writing: B.C., Q.P., M.O.-­V., S.H., C.E.F., and G.J.L. Data curation: B.C. Competing
interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data, code, and           Submitted 9 December 2025
materials availability: All data and code needed to evaluate and reproduce the results in the     Accepted 24 April 2026
paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. The transcriptome used in    Published 5 June 2026
this study are deposited and are available in the National Center for Biotechnology               10.1126/sciadv.aee6211





Pan et al., Sci. Adv. 12, eaee6211 (2026)  5 June 2026                                                                                11 of 11