
[PDF physical page 1]
       Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4
                    Pseudotaxus chienii   Analysis genome of
   reveals insights into the origin and evolution
   of taxane biosynthesis



        Received: 27 January 2025              Mingshuang Wang1, Ruoyun Ma1, Zijin Fang1, Lingxiao Zhang1, Yibo Zhang1,
                                        Mengyin Zheng1, Enhui Bai1, Wanting Lin1, Yanyan Pei2, Yue Zang1, Huijie Ma1,
       Accepted: 10 December 2025
                                       Shangguo Feng1, Xiaori Zhan1, Chunna Yu1, Shuling Wang2, Huizhong Wang1,
                                           Chenliang Yu  3  & Chenjia Shen   1


          Check for updates

                                       As a sister genus to Taxus, Pseudotaxus holds signiﬁcant importance for
                                           studying the origin and evolution of the taxane biosynthesis pathway. How-1234567890():,;                 1234567890():,;
                                                ever, the reference genome of Pseudotaxus chienii is yet unavailable. Here, we
                                            report a chromosome-level genome assembly of P. chienii (15.6 Gb). We show
                                               that P. chienii only possesses a partial taxane pathway, which terminates before
                                           taxane 2α-O-benzoyl transferase (TBT), a crucial enzyme responsible for the
                                          production of 10-deacetylbaccatin III. With the emergence of the Taxus genus,
                                           the limitation posed by the lacking of functional TBT is overcome, allowing for
                                           the extension of the existing taxane biosynthesis pathway into a complete
                                          Taxol biosynthesis. The protein structure of metal ion catalysis sites in tax-
                                          adiene synthase (TS) is conserved across the Pseudotaxus and Taxus genera,
                                            providing potential sites for enhancing TS activity through enzyme engi-
                                              neering. This comparative genomic analysis contributes to our understanding
                                             of the origin and evolution of taxane biosynthesis within the Taxaceae family.




        Taxaceae, a well-known family of non-ﬂowering conifers with con-    aril and stomatal bands on the backlit surface of leaves1,7. As an old,
         siderable medicinal and ecological value,  is primarily distributed   rare tree, P. chienii is an ideal material for studying environmental
        across Asia, North America, and Europe1. Plants of the genus Taxus,   adaptation and evolution. The Pseudotaxus genus, which has one
       which belong to the Taxaceae family, have gained prominence for their   living  representative,  diverged  from  its  sister  genus,  Taxus,
        secondary metabolite, paclitaxel (also named as Taxol), a chemother-   approximately  54-65  million  years ago (MYA)  (Palaeocene  or
        apeutic agent applied in the treatment of various cancers2. Due to its   Eocene), making it an evolutionary relict7,8. Evolutionary analyses of
        low abundance in natural Taxus tissues, the price of Taxol has been   P. chienii genus provided insights into the mechanisms driving spe-
         steadily increasing3,4. Therefore, studying the origin and evolution of   ciation for conifers9.
        Taxus-speciﬁc Taxol biosynthesis is of great signiﬁcance for future       Diterpenoids, comprised of several isoprene structural cores, are
         research.                                                          derived from geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP)10. Most diterpenoids
            Phylogenetic  analysis speculated  that Taxaceae sensu  lato   share a common upstream biosynthetic pathway known as the 2-C-
        comprises six extant genera: Amentotaxus, Austrotaxus, Pseudotaxus,   methyl-D-erythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway, which supplies essen-
        Taxus, Torreya, and Cephalotaxus 5. Pseudotaxus chienii, belonging to    tial precursors. They depend on diterpene synthases (diTPSs) to initi-
        the monotypic genus Pseudotaxus, is an endangered conifer endemic   ate the  species-speciﬁc diterpenoid biosynthesis  pathway11. The
        to China6. The iconic feature of the P. chienii tree is the peculiar white   functional diversity of diterpenoids is attributed to the core sequences



         1College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. 2College of Pharmacy, Hangzhou Normal University,
        Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. 3National Key Laboratory for Development and Utilization of Forest Food Resources, Zhejiang A&F University, Hangzhou,
         Zhejiang, China.    e-mail: yuchenliang@zafu.edu.cn; shencj@hznu.edu.cn



        Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                                                         1


[PDF physical page 2]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4

of diTPS, which are categorized into three distinct types: class  I  Results
(DDXXD/E motif), class II (DXDD motif), and bifunctional class I/II   Visualization of metabolite locations in the stems and leaves of
diTPSs12. In gymnosperms, bifunctional diTPSs are the predominant   P. chienii
type, in contrast to the monofunctional diTPSs found in angiosperms13.   P. chienii is a rare gymnosperm with limited research, and its economic
For example, AgAS from Abies grandis, GbLPS from Ginkgo biloba, and   value remains unclear. Exploring the medicinal active ingredients of P.
SmCPSKSL1 from Selaginella moellendorfﬁi are typical bifunctional   chienii is essential for the effective and protective utilization of this
diTPSs14–16. Despite being a gymnosperm, the taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene   ancient and rare species, which has a long history. Given that taxanes,
derived from Taxus plants is synthesized directly by a class I diTPS,   iconic metabolites of the Taxus genus, are a type of diterpenoid
taxadiene synthase (TS)17. Once the taxane core is formed, a series of  compound, MALDI-IMS was employed to detect various potential
taxoid hydroxylases, including the 2α-, 5α-, 7β-, 9α-, 10β-, and 13α-   diterpenoids in the leaves and stems of P. chienii (Fig. 1a). The optical
hydroxylases, are involved in modifying the core18. The origin and   images of its leaf and stem sections are shown in Fig. 1b. The MALDI-
evolution of such a complex pathway for synthesizing Taxol in Taxus  IMS analysis produced a series of colored maps comprising a total of
plants remain unknown.                                          9,999 data points, indicating the tissue-speciﬁc accumulation of active
    Since the ﬁrst isolation of Taxol from the stem bark of T. brevi-   ingredients  (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Data  1). After database
folia, researchers have also detected taxanes in other plant species19.   matching, most metabolites were annotated and categorized into
Taxol and its precursor, baccatin III, were identiﬁed in the leaves of   various KEGG pathways (Supplementary Fig. 1).
Cephalotaxus hainanensis, an important member of the Taxaceae         All identiﬁed metabolites were separated into ﬁve principal
family20. Anticancer taxanes, including 10-deacetylbaccatin III, bac-  components (PCs) associated with different stem and leaf tissues. For
catin   III,  cephalomannine,  and  paclitaxel,  were  detected  in   the stems, four major tissues, including endodermis (PC1), epidermis
Turkish Hazelnut (Corylus avellana L.)21. However, it remains unclear   (PC2/5), xylem (PC4), and pith (PC3), were visualized (Supplementary
whether the Taxol biosynthesis pathway in P. chienii is fully estab-   Fig. 2a, b). To identify stem tissue-speciﬁc accumulated metabolites
lished.  Recently,  chromosome-level  genomes  of  Taxus  and   (SAMs), clustering analyses identiﬁed 1512 endodermis-, 3237 epi-
Torreya  have  been  published  in  succession,  deepening  our   dermis-, 1494 pith-, and 1531 xylem-SAMs. In addition, 390 metabolites
understanding of Taxaceae plants22–25. Recently, the coding genes for   accumulated in both epidermis and xylem (Supplementary Fig. 2c). For
the last several key enzymes, such as TOT1, T9a oxidase, TCPR, and   the leaves, three major tissues, including epidermis (PC1), mesophyll
CYP1,  were  cloned,  which  improved  the  Taxol  biosynthesis   (PC2/3/5), and bundle sheath (PC4), were visualized (Supplementary
pathway26–29.                                                                  Fig. 3a, b). To identify leaf tissue-SAMs, clustering analyses identiﬁed
     In this study, we assemble the genome of P. chienii. Our   1833 epidermis-, 5201 mesophyll-, and 1248 bundle sheath-SAMs. In
comparative genomic analysis contributes to our understanding   addition, 336 metabolites accumulated in both epidermis and meso-
of the origin and evolution of taxane biosynthesis and provides   phyll (Supplementary Fig. 3c).
insights into the genome structure and organization of the Tax-       Several active diterpenoids were detected using the MS-Imaging
aceae family.                                                            analysis method (Supplementary Data 2). In the stems, geranyl-PP, a





Fig. 1 | Analysis of the data from timsTOF ﬂeX MALDI-2. a A picture of the twig of    analysis of ten typic diterpenes in the leaves and stems of P. chienii. Color scale
P. chienii. The blue line indicated the sample site of the leaf, and the red line        ranges from 0 to 100%. Blue indicated a low accumulation level, and red indicated a
indicated the sampling site of the stem. b The optical images of the P. chienii leaf   high accumulation level. e Proportion of various metabolites in leaves and stems
and stem sections. c Mean mass spectrogram and segmentation analysis of the P.   was showed by a histogram. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
chienii samples. Stem and leaf samples were performed on a single chip. d Imaging



Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                            2


[PDF physical page 3]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4


core precursor for terpenoid synthesis, and 3D,7D,11D-phytanic acid   (99.0%) of the assembled sequences were anchored on 12 pseudo-
were predominantly accumulated in the epidermis; while ζ-carotene  chromosomes ranging in size from 0.8 Gb to 1.5 Gb (Fig. 2b and Sup-
epoxide, presqualene-PP, and taxine B were highly concentrated in the   plementary Fig. 4c).
xylem. Additionally, erinacine D, resiniferatoxin, jesaconitine, and      To evaluate the completeness and accuracy of the assembly, the
azadirachtin exhibited a non-tissue-speciﬁc accumulation pattern   Illumina short reads and transcriptome data were aligned to the
(Fig. 1d). The proportions of different active ingredients in the stems   assembly. The result showed mapping rates of 99.33% and 98.58%,
and leaves are shown in Fig. 1e.                                           respectively. BUSCO evaluation using the protein model revealed that
                                                                85.2% (1,376 out of 1614) of the core embryophytic genes were iden-
Genome assembly and annotation                                  tiﬁed in the P. chienii genome, showing relatively high completeness of
To explore the chromosome-level genome of P. chienii, twigs from a  genome assembly among gymnosperms (Supplementary Table 2). The
wild P. chienii tree were collected for genome sequencing (Fig. 2a). A   LAI value was estimated to be 10.1, which is larger than the proposed
total of 652.4 Gb of Illumina clean data was obtained. The P. chienii   standard for a reference-level assembly (LAI > 10)30, indicating a high
genome was estimated to be 16.8 Gb (~ 39ⅹ) based on 19-mer analyses   quality of the chromosome-level assembly of P. chienii.
(Supplementary Fig. 4a, b). By using 586.5 Gb PacBio HiFi reads, a     Genome annotation yielded 35,404 protein-coding genes with an
15.6 Gb non-redundant assembly was generated, comprising 954 con-   average mRNA length of 29,725 bp were annotated. The average CDS
tigs with a contig N50 of 65.6 Mb and a GC content of 35.2% (Supple-   length is 1060 bp, and the average number of exons per gene is 4.2
mentary Table 1). Using 2.34 Tb Hi-C clean data, a total of 15.5 Gb   (Supplementary Table 3). A total of 32,166 (90.9%) completed genes





Fig. 2 | Genomic features of P. chienii. a Pictures of a wild P. chienii tree used for    for orthologous protein-coding gene clusters in P. chienii, T. grandis, T. mairei, T.
genomic DNA sequencing. b Circos plot of P. chienii genome. Track Ⅰrepresents the   yunnanensis, and T. wallichiana. The number in each sector of the diagram
length of the chromosomes (Gb); Ⅱand Ⅲrepresent GC content and gene density,   represents the total number of genes across different comparisons. f Gene family
respectively; Ⅳ-Ⅵrepresent gene expression without or with MeJA treatment,      expansion and contraction during the evolution of green plants. The maximum
respectively; Ⅶ-Ⅸshow the distribution of transposons, Gypsy, and Copia LTRs,     likelihood phylogeny was built with a number of low-copy orthologous groups.
respectively. These features were calculated in 10 Mb windows. Center, the syntenic   Numbers on branches are the sizes of expanded (red) and contracted (green) gene
regions were linked by curve lines. c Analysis of insertion time based on the total    families at each node.
LTR. d Analysis of insertion time based on different types of LTR. e Venn diagram



Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                        3


[PDF physical page 4]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4


could be functionally annotated by searching against various known   related genes, including 342 carbohydrate metabolic process-related
databases (Supplementary Data 3).                                   genes, 194 lipid metabolic process-related genes, and 114 glutathione
                                                                 metabolic process-related genes (Supplementary Fig. 6b). Our study
Analysis of repeat sequence                                      provides sufﬁcient candidates to improve the metabolic ﬂux and
The genome size of P. chienii is much larger than that of the closely   enhance the environmental adaptation of P. chienii. It is worth men-
related Taxus species (~ 10 Gb). We identiﬁed a greatly high percentage   tioning that 587 genes were grouped into a taxane biosynthesis-related
of repetitive sequences (86.12%) in the P. chienii genome, with trans-  GO term “paclitaxel biosynthetic process”, suggesting a potential
posable elements (TEs) and tandem repeats accounting for 82.73% and   biosynthetic ability for taxanes in P. chienii (Supplementary Fig. 6c and
3.39% of the genome, respectively. Most of the Long Terminal Repeat   Supplementary Data 4).
Retrotransposon (LTR-RT) expansions in gymnosperms happened     A  total  of 591  putative TF genes belonging  to 10 major
between 25 to 7 MYA. The estimation of the insertion time showed that   metabolism-related TF families were identiﬁed in P. chienii (Supple-
the LTR-RT expansion in P. chienii experienced an extremely long   mentary Data 5). To investigate the evolutionary processes of TF
period, the burst of LTR-RT insertions range from about 60 to 10 MYA,   families in the Taxaceae family, we identiﬁed an average of 1075 and
with the accumulation reaching a peak at about 23 MYA (Fig. 2c). These   1877 TFs consisting of ten families in ten gymnosperm and eight
results suggested that continuous insertions of LTR-RTs leads to the   angiosperm genomes, respectively. This indicated a 1.8-fold and a 3.2-
giant genome of P. chienii. LTR-RTs comprise the majority of those TEs   fold increase compared to P. chienii (Supplementary Fig. 7). This sug-
(82.06%), with Gypsy and Copia contributing 40.87% and 9.04% of the   gests that the genome of P. chienii is relatively ancient and that copy
total, respectively (Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 4). The results of  number expansion of these TF families has occurred in other plant
tandem repeat sequence analysis are shown in Supplementary Table 5.   species.

Whole genome duplication (WGD)                              Origin and evolution of the taxane biosynthesis pathway
A synteny analysis between P. chienii and two other Taxaceae species  We observed that the genome of P. chienii contains many genes
(T. grandis and T. mairei) found that 86% and 81% of genes in P. chienii   involved in the taxane biosynthesis, making P. chienii an ideal species
had one-to-one syntenic orthologs  in  T. mairei and  T. grandis,   for investigating the evolution of the Taxol biosynthetic pathway. A
respectively, while only 1% and 3% of genes in P. chienii had one-to-   comprehensive search of the P. chienii genome revealed a complete
more synteny orthologs in T. mairei and T. grandis, respectively  MEP pathway, suggesting that P. chienii has the capacity to provide
(Supplementary Fig. 5a, b). These results indicated the lack of a recent   precursors for taxane biosynthesis. A nearly complete Taxol bio-
WGD event in P. chienii. We next tried to seek evolutionary relics of   synthesis pathway has been published recently26,31. In the P. chienii
WGD in P. chienii by detecting paralogous synteny gene blocks. How-  genome, a partial Taxol biosynthesis pathway was identiﬁed. It is
ever, we only detected 60 synteny blocks including 672 genes (~ 2.0 %   interesting that neither TBT nor BAPT genes were detected (Fig. 3a).
of all genes), further supporting the absence of recent WGD.            Similar to the Taxus genus plants, most of the genes involved in the
                                                                 taxane biosynthesis pathway in P. chienii are arranged into two gene
Synteny comparison and gene family evolution                     clusters located on Chr 9 and 11, respectively (Fig. 3b).
Homologous synteny blocks between P. chienii and other Taxaceae       Furthermore, we found that 14 identiﬁed taxane biosynthesis-
species were identiﬁed. The results showed that nearly perfect macro-   related genes were located in the 142.04–245.71 Mb region of chro-
synteny is observed among the three Taxus species, suggesting a high  mosome 9 and the 16.56–101.93 Mb region of chromosome  11,
degree of similarity in their genomic structures. Although macro-   respectively (Fig. 3b and Supplementary Data 6). Previous study
synteny is also present between P. chienii and the Taxus species,  showed that all these corresponding genes are distributed on the
extensive chromosomal  rearrangements and  intra-chromosomal   195.41–486.53 Mb region of chromosome 10 of T. wallichiana23. Given
inversions exist. The reorganization of the genome is even more evi-   the conserved genome structures between P. chienii and T. wall-
dent when comparing the genomic structures of P. chienii and T.   ichiana, as well as their phylogenetic relationship, it appears that the
grandis (Supplementary Fig. 5c). These results coincide with the phy-   taxane biosynthesis gene-enriched regions of chromosomes 9 and 11 in
logeny of these species. We identiﬁed a core set of 10,419 gene families   P. chienii have undergone translocations with inversions, aligning with
shared among these species, along with 5977 gene families speciﬁc to   the corresponding region of chromosome 10 in T. wallichiana (Fig. 3c).
P. chienii (Fig. 2e). To investigate the evolutionary processes of gene   Despite evolutionary divergence, P. chienii and T. wallichiana  still
families in P. chienii, we identiﬁed 20,986 orthologous groups across   share an ancestral lineage, suggesting that taxane biosynthesis path-
16 land plant species, including 10 gymnosperms, 5 angiosperms, and 1  way has a common origin.
lycophyte (Fig. 2f). Phylogenetic analysis and molecular dating using
184 single-copy genes indicated that P. chienii diverged from Taxus   Taxusin is one of potential end products of taxane biosynthesis
around 48.3 million years ago. Furthermore, we found 190 expanded  pathway in P. chienii
and only 1 contracted gene family in the common ancestor of the   Untargeted metabolomic analysis was conducted to detect the varia-
Taxaceae family. The extinct ancestors of Pseudotaxus and Taxus   tions in the metabolic proﬁles of three typical Taxaceae species
exhibited expansions and contractions of 73 and 38 gene families,   (Supplementary Fig. 8a and Supplementary Data 7). A PCA indicated
respectively. The Taxus lineages uniquely contain 170 expanded and   clear separation among the metabolomes of P. chienii, T. wallichiana,
32 contracted gene families, which may be related to their diversiﬁ-  and T. grandis (Supplementary Fig. 8b). Based on their annotations,
cation compared to other Taxaceae species  (Fig.  2f).  P. chienii   8,780 metabolites were identiﬁed (Supplementary Fig. 8c).
demonstrated an expansion of 161 gene families, many of which con-      To elucidate the completeness of the Taxol biosynthesis pathway
tained conserved domains linked to catabolic processes, responses to   in three closely related Taxaceae species, we compared the genomes
abiotic stimuli, secondary metabolic processes, and reproduction.      of P. chienii, T. wallichiana, and T. grandis23,25. The complete MEP
                                                            pathway exists in all three selected Taxaceae species (Fig. 4a). TBT
Identiﬁcation of functional genes                                    catalyzes the conversion of 2-debenzoyl-7,13-diacetylbaccatin  III to
GO analysis revealed a great number of environmental adaptation-   7,13-diacetylbaccatin  III32. TOT1 (from T. mairei), also named CYP1
related genes, including 275 defense response-related genes, 237   (from T. media), catalyzes an oxidative rearrangement in paclitaxel
herbicide response-related genes, and 147 oxidative stress response-   oxetane formation26,28,29. The absence of TBT and TOT1 (also known as
related genes (Supplementary Fig. 6a). Moreover, many metabolism-  CYP1 or CYP725A55) may be a signiﬁcant reason why P. chienii is unable



Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                     4


[PDF physical page 5]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4





Fig. 3 | Origin and evolution of the taxane biosynthetic pathway. a The possible    acetyltransferase (DBAT), 13-O-(3-amino-3-phenylpropanoyl) transferase (BAPT),
taxol biosynthetic pathway. The solid and dotted arrows represent the character-    taxane 2’α-hydroxylase (T2’OH), N-debenzoyl-2’-deoxytaxol-N-benzoyltransferase
ized and unknown reactions, respectively. Red forks indicated the genes thatdonot   (DBTNBT). b Overview of the known genes involved in taxane biosynthesis. (c)
exist in P. chienii. The abbreviation is as follows: taxadiene synthase (TS), taxane 5α-   Genome rearrangements between P. chienii and T. wallichiana. Physical and
hydroxylase (T5OH), taxane 13α-hydroxylase (T13OH), taxadien-5α-ol-O-acetyl-       genetic maps of the 142.04–245.71 Mb region of chromosome 9 and
transferase (TAT), Taxus cytochrome P450 reductase (TCPR), taxane 2α-            6.56–101.93 Mb region of chromosome 11 were extracted from the P. chienii gen-
hydroxylase (T2OH), taxane 7β-hydroxylase (T7OH), taxane 10β-hydroxylase       ome, and the 195.41–486.53 Mb region of chromosome 10 wasextracted from the T.
(T10OH), taxane 9-oxidase (T9OH), taxane oxetanase 1 (TOT1, also named CYP1 or   wallichiana genome. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
CYP725A55), taxane 2α-O-benzoyl transferase (TBT), 10-deacetyl-baccatin III-10-O-



to synthesize 10-deacetylbaccatin III and the subsequent intermediates    its analogs instead of Taxol (Fig. 4b). No homologous genes for TS were
following 10-deacetylbaccatin  III. Certainly, there may be another   identiﬁed in T. grandis, indicating that this species lacks the taxane
pathway that consumes an amount of 10-deacetylbaccatin III or bac-   biosynthesis pathway.
catin III, making them undetectable. Moreover, the T2OH and T7OH      As expected, taxusin is highly accumulated in P. chienii, particu-
genes were identiﬁed in P. chienii (Supplementary Table 6 and Sup-    larly in its stems, while it is minimally accumulated in T. wallichiana
plementary Fig. 9). A feeding experiment showed that the activities of  and undetected in T. grandis. 10-Deacetylbaccatin III is highly accu-
T2OH and T7OH from P. chienii were similar to those from T. mairei   mulated T. wallichiana and undetected in both of P. chienii and T.
(Supplementary Fig. 10). The quality control parameters and raw   grandis (Fig. 4c). LC-MS/MS analysis conﬁrmed that the content of
spectra were showed in Supplementary Table 7 and Supplementary   taxusin in the twigs of P. chienii is 3.5-fold higher than that in T. wall-
Fig. 11–15. Considering the presence of both T2OH and T7OH, taxusin   ichiana (Fig. 4d, e). Several other taxoids, including Taxol, 10-deace-
can be hydroxylated into 2α,7β-dihydroxytaxusin33. Taxusin and its   tyltaxol, and 10-deacetyl-7-xylosyltaxol C, were only detected in T.
analogs are highly acetylated intermediates in an alternative route of   wallichiana through untargeted metabolomic analysis (Fig. 4f). Tax-
the Taxol biosynthesis pathway26. We hypothesized that blocking at   usin can serve as a precursor for Taxol synthesis because of its
TBT and TOT1 (CYP1) might redirect metabolic ﬂow towards taxusin or   exceptionally high content in P. chienii.



Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                          5


[PDF physical page 6]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4





Fig. 4 | Accumulation of taxusin in P. chienii. a The number of genes encoding    of six biological repeats. Statistical analyses were performed using one-way
each key enzyme involved in the taxane biosynthesis. b Speculative metabolic    ANOVA, unpaired t test with Welch’s correction. Bar graphs were plotted using
pathway block in P. chienii. c Determination of the contents of taxusin and 10-    GraphPad Prism 10.6. f Determination of the contents of taxol and its derivatives,
deacetylbaccatin III in P. chienii, T. wallichiana, and T. grandis. d MS spectra of    including 10-deacetyltaxol, 10-deacetyl-7-xylosyltaxol C, 13-acetyl-9-
taxusin in P. chienii and T. wallichiana. e The contents of taxusin in the P. chienii   dihydrobaccatin III, and cephalomannine. Source data are provided as a Source
and T. wallichiana twigs. ****P < 0.0001. Data are presented as mean values +/−SD   Data ﬁle.


Functional identiﬁcation of the TS genes in P. chienii              seedlings (Fig. 5b). The leaf samples expressing PcTS1 were extracted
To date, Taxus is the only genus among gymnosperms known to   using hexane and analyzed via GC-MS. As expected, we a peak at a RT
produce Taxol, although all plants possess the TPS enzymes, which   of 11.875 mins in samples expressing PcTS1 and TwTS1, respectively
catalyze isoprenoid cyclization reactions to produce a variety of nat-    (Fig. 5c and Supplementary Fig. 16). The mass spectrum matched with
ural products34. The TS enzymes catalyze the initial key step of taxane   the analog of taxadiene, eicosane (Fig. 5d). Similar to its homologous
biosynthesis from GGPP. Phylogenetic analysis has revealed that TPSs   gene in Taxus, the heterologous expression of PcTS1 can also be uti-
from gymnosperms form a distinct clan, while TPSs from angiosperms   lized for the heterologous production of taxadiene in tobacco.
are grouped into two separate branches, consisting of Class I and Class
II TPSs (Fig. 5a).                                                 Protein structure analysis of TPSs from Taxaceae
   To conﬁrm the function of PcTS1 in the initial step of the taxane   Interestingly, TPSs from the Taxaceae family differ from those found in
biosynthesis pathway, pBWA(V)HS-PcTS1 vector was constructed and   other gymnosperms, as they belong to Class I, while TPSs from other
genetic transformed into N. benthamiana to produce transgenic  gymnosperms  are  classiﬁed  as  bifunctional.  Multiple  sequence



Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                      6


[PDF physical page 7]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4





Fig. 5 | Functional identiﬁcation of the TS genes in P. chienii. a Phylogenetic     peak of taxadiene. d Mass spectra proﬁle of the compound at 11.857 min matched
analysis of the TPS family members in different plants. Purple stars indicated the    exactly with the taxadiene mass spectra. e Multiple sequence alignment analysis of
TPS from P. chienii (PcTS1/2). Green dots indicated the TPS containing Class I       the DXDD and DDXXD/E motifs from different TPS proteins. f Structure modeling
(DDXXD/E) motif, red dots indicated the TPS containing Class II (DXDD) motif, and   of PcTS1 by the SWISS-MODEL program using 3p5p.1.A model as template. The
yellow dots indicated the TPS containing the bifunctional motif (DDXXD/E +         bioactive center of PcTS1 zoom in through a red box. g Protein structure analysis of
DXDD). b Identiﬁcation of positive transgenic tobacco expressing PcTS1 and TwTS1,   the typical TPSs from the Angiosperm (Class I), Angiosperm (Class II), and other
respectively. c GC–MS analysis of hexane extracts from the seedlings expressing    gymnosperms (bifunctional TPS), respectively. Source data are provided as a
PcTS1 and TwTS1, and controls (CK), respectively. Time (11.857) indicates the target   Source Data ﬁle.



alignment analysis showed that the TPSs from other gymnosperms  OcCPSsyn and ScCPS from Class II, GrTPS4 and AtEKS from Class I, and
contain both of the DXDD and DDXXD/E motifs, as well as the (N,D)   PsTPS_LAS and AgAS from bifunctional TPS group, were analyzed
DXX(S,T)XXXE motif; however, TPSs from the Taxaceae family lack the    (Fig. 5g). TM-score analysis demonstrated that PcTS1 exhibit a greatest
characteristic DXDD motif (Fig. 5e). A previous study reported the X-ray   structural similarity to the bifunctional TPSs and a lowest structural
crystal structure and substrate binding sites of the TS from the Paciﬁc   similarity to the Class II TPSs (Supplementary Table 8).
yew (T. brevifolia)35. Using the known 3p5p.1.A model as a template, the
3D structure and substrate/Mg2+ binding sites of TS1 from P. chienii were  CYP super-family in P. chienii
predicted using the SWISS-MODEL program. The amino acid residues  CYP superfamily-mediated oxygenation plays crucial roles in the reg-
forming DDXXD/E motif, such as 668-D, 669-D, 670-M, 671-A, and 672-D,   ulation of plant secondary metabolism. Genes from the CYP725 clan
and (N,D)DXX(S,T)XXXE motif, such as 812-N, 813-D, and 820-E, were   have been reported to participate in Taxol biosynthesis36. In P. chienii,
surrounding the Mg2+ binding sites, suggesting that the DDXXD/E and   548 genes from the CYP superfamily were identiﬁed and categorized
(N,D)DXX(S,T)XXXE motifs are essential for catalytic activity, whereas   into 52 clans, with 62 of these genes belonging to the CYP725 clan
the DXDD motif is not (Fig. 5f). The 3D structures of six typic TPSs,   (Supplementary Fig. 17 and Supplementary Data 8). Phylogenomic



Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                                 7


[PDF physical page 8]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4





Fig. 6 | Analysis of CYP family in P. chienii. a Heat map of the number of CYP450   treated samples. f The accumulation level of taxusin in the twigs of P. chienii under
genes in P. chienii and other 10 representative plant species. Each CYP450 family is  CK and MeJA treatments (24 h and 48 h). Each value is the mean ± standard devia-
represented as a square, with the blue color representing the number of genes in    tion of six biological repeats. ****P < 0.0001 and **P < 0.01. Statistical analyses were
the corresponding family. The heatmap scale ranges from 0 to 100. b Distribution   performed using one-way ANOVA, unpaired t test with Welch’s correction. Bar
of CYP725 subfamily genes on the chromosomes 9 and 11 in P. chienii. The color bar   graphs were plotted using GraphPad Prism 10.6. g The average numbers of two
showed the number of CYP725 genes distributed in different chromosomes. c The   reported MeJA responsive cis-elements, G-box (CACGTGG) and G-box like
expression pattern of CYP450 family genes under MeJA treatments. d The         (AACGTG), in the promoters of CYP genes and CYP725 genes, were counted in ‘+’
expression levels of taxusin biosynthesis-related genes under MeJA treatments. The   and ‘−’ directions, respectively. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
heatmap scale ranges from 0 ~ 1000 FPKM. e MS spectra of taxusin in CK and MeJA



analysis demonstrated that several CYP Clans, including CYP725,   (Supplementary Fig. 18b). GO enrichment analysis revealed that the
CYP728, CYP867, and CYP98, were greatly expanded in the Taxaceae   MeJA-responsive genes were signiﬁcantly enriched in the GO terms
family compared to nine other representative species, which encom-   ‘paclitaxel  biosynthetic  process’ and  ‘taxoid  14-beta-hydroxylase
pass gymnosperms, angiosperms, and bryophytes (Fig. 6a and Sup-    activity’ (Supplementary Fig. 18c).
plementary Data 9). The genes from the CYP725 clan are primarily       Expression analysis showed that only the P. chienii CYP725 sub-
distributed in Chr 9 (24 genes) and Chr11 (37 genes), suggesting that   family genes were speciﬁcally up-regulated compared to the other CYP
the CYP725 clan has undergone large-scale expansion due to tandem   subfamilies by MeJA treatments (Fig. 6c). Furthermore, the majority of
duplication events (Fig. 6b).                                         the identiﬁed taxane biosynthesis-related genes were signiﬁcantly up-
                                                                    regulated by MeJA treatment (Fig. 6d), suggesting that taxane bio-
Expression response to MeJA treatment                            synthesis was induced by MeJA treatment. LC-MS/MS analysis con-
Under MeJA treatment, a total of 3,338 and 4,191 DEGs were identiﬁed  ﬁrmed thatthe content of taxusinin the MeJA-treated twigs of P. chienii
at 24 h and 48 h, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 18a). Most of the    is 4.7- and 4.4-fold higher than that in the CK twigs (Fig. 6e, f and
DEGs were regulated by MeJA treatment at both 24 h and 48 h   Supplementary Table 9).



Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                       8


[PDF physical page 9]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4


   To elucidate the genetic basis of the MeJA-induced expression   belongs to a monotypic genus closely related to Taxus41. The genome
patterns of CYP725 subfamily genes and other identiﬁed taxane   size of P. chienii (2n) is approximately 15.6 Gb, which is larger than the
biosynthesis-related genes, we extracted their 1500-bp promoter  known genomes of Taxus species, such as T. mairei (10.2 Gb), T. wall-
sequences from the P. chienii genome. We counted the average num-   ichiana (10.9 Gb), and T. yunnanensis (10.7 Gb)22–24. WGD is a dramatic
bers of two reported MeJA-responsive cis-elements, G-box (CACGTGG)  genomic event that supplies a source of genetic material, thereby
and G-box-like (AACGTG), in the promoters of CYP genes and CYP725   increasing  both  the  complexity and  size  of  the genome  in
genes in both the ‘+’ and ‘−’ directions, respectively. The average   angiosperms42. However, the occurrence of WGD events in gymnos-
numbers of these cis-elements in the promoters of all protein-coding  perms has been a subject of controversy43. Previous studies have
genes were treated as controls. The average number of G-box (+) and   reported that a recent WGD event has happened during the evolution
G-box (−) in the CYP725 promoters were 0.23 and 0.08, respectively,   of  T.  mairei, whereas no obvious WGD was observed  for  T.
higher than those in the CYP promoters (0.07 and 0.06). The average   wallichiana22,23. Our data also indicated the absence of a recent WGD
numbers of G-box-like (+) and G-box-like (−) in the CYP725 promoters   event in the P. chienii genome (Supplementary Fig. 5c), suggesting that
were 0.33 and 0.47, respectively, also signiﬁcantly higher than those in   the complexity of WGD within gymnosperms, particularly within the
the CYP promoters (0.14 and 0.16). Interestingly, the above MeJA-   Taxaceae family, is noteworthy44. Most of the LTR-RT expansions in the
responsive cis-elements were greatly enriched in the promoters of the   Taxus genomes happened between 24 to 8 MYA22; however, the
identiﬁed taxane biosynthesis-related genes (Fig. 6f). This suggests a   expansion in the P. chienii genome experienced an exceptionally long
possible explanation for the increased expression levels of CYP725   duration, ranging from approximately 60 to 10 MYA (Fig. 2c, d).
family genes and taxane biosynthesis-related genes under MeJA   Continuous insertions of LTR-RTs have enlarged the size of P. chienii
treatment.                                                       genome45.
                                                            The origin and evolution of the taxane biosynthesis pathway have
Transcription regulation of taxusin biosynthesis                    consistently been a focal point in plant secondary metabolism46. Pre-
The biosynthesis of active ingredients in medicinal plants is coordi-   vious research pointed out that the loss of essential gene families,
nated by various complex transcriptional regulatory networks37. We   particularly the orthologues of TS, results in the absence of Taxol and
identiﬁed 78 MeJA responsive TFs by integrating genomic and tran-    its analogs in T. grandis25. Evolutionary analysis suggests that T. grandis
scriptomic data (Supplementary Data 10 and Supplementary Fig. 19a).    is the oldest plant in the Taxaceae family, based on ﬁve selected spe-
Most of the MeJA responsive TFs were signiﬁcantly up-regulated by the   cies with complete genomes (Fig. 2f). Following the emergence of the
MeJA treatment, indicating their important roles in the MeJA-induced   Taxaceae family, P. chienii has evolved TPS with taxadiene synthase
accumulation of active ingredients  in  P.  chienii (Supplementary   activity and diverged from  T. grandis approximately 48.3 MYA.
Fig.  19b).  Pearson  correlation  analysis  revealed  several  taxane   Although P. chienii has entered the initial stages of taxane biosynthesis,
biosynthesis-related TF genes (Supplementary Fig. 19c). Four impor-    it possesses only a partial pathway for Taxol biosynthesis, which ter-
tant cis-elements, including ABRE and G-box (bHLH binding elements),   minates before the production of the enzyme responsible for synthe-
MBE (MYB binding element), and W-box (WRKY binding element),   sizing  10-deacetylbaccatin   III, known  as  TBT47.  Approximately
were identiﬁed in the promoter regions of the taxane biosynthesis-   24.3–25.6 MYA, the evolution of the Taxus genus formed an inde-
related genes (Supplementary Fig. 19d). Our data suggest that MYB12,   pendent branch, diverging from the Pseudotaxus lineage (Fig. 2f). With
MYB13, bHLH18, and WRKY6 may serve as potential regulators   the formation of the Taxus genus, the limitation caused by the absence
involved in the regulation of taxane biosynthesis in P. chienii.           of TBT was addressed, leading to the extension of the existing taxane
                                                                      biosynthesis pathway in P. chienii and resulting in a complete Taxol
Discussion                                                        biosynthesis pathway (Fig. 3).
P. chienii, commonly known as white-berry yew, has a limited geo-        In P. chienii, the incomplete Taxol biosynthetic pathway results in
graphical distribution in several southern provinces in China38. Taxus is   the accumulation of an acetylated taxane, taxusin (Fig. 4a, b), which
the sister genus of Pseudotaxus, which is well-known for its capability   exhibits minimal anti-tumor activity48. Taxol contains only two acety-
of producing the anti-cancer active ingredient Taxol and has been   lated sites (C4 and C10), whereas taxusin contains four acetylated sites
extensively studied in recent years26,39. The natural populations of P.   (C5, C9, C10, and C13)49. Previous study has demonstrated that taxusin
chienii are relatively dispersed throughout China, exhibiting repro-   can be efﬁciently deacetylated by treatment with K2CO3 in THF/MeOH
ductive isolation among them. In our previous study, we reported the   at 0 °C for 3 days33. Consequently, taxusin was selected as an industrial
presence of 10-deacetylbaccatin III and paclitaxel in P. chienii samples   substrate for the production of taxoids due to its high natural abun-
collected from a wild population located in Mount Tianmu (30.33° N/   dance in yew heartwoods50. Our study showed that P. chienii contains a
119.42° E, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China)40. However, paclitaxel was not   large amount of taxusin and is a good raw material for industrial
detected in P. chienii samples reported in the present study, which   production of Taxol (Fig. 4e, f). Undoubtedly, P. chienii has both eco-
were collected from a wild population located in Nanjianyan Scenic   logical and medicinal value.
Resort (28.36° N/119.09° E, Lishui, Zhejiang, China).We speculated that        In Taxus plants, taxane biosynthetic genes are arranged in one or
we might have mistakenly collected some Taxus specimens and con-  two gene clusters, which is also observed in P. chienii22–24. Taking T.
sidered them as P. chienii due to the lacking of experience in distin-   wallichiana as an example, several taxane biosynthesis-related gene
guishing Taxus and Pseudotaxus for our previous study40. Phenotypes   clusters were located in Chr10, which expanded on this chromosome
of Taxus and Pseudotaxus are highly similar. It’s critical to sample the   through tandem duplication23. We veriﬁed genomic rearrangements
plant materials in the fall when the colors of the fruits are developed,   between the Chr9/11 of P. chienii and the Chr10 of T. wallichiana
which are the critical character to distinguish Taxus and Pseudotaxus.    (Fig. 3). These results conﬁrm a common origin between the taxane
Since the plant materials used for the current study coming from dif-   biosynthetic pathway of P. chienii and the Taxol biosynthetic pathway
ferent batch of sampling, we are conﬁdent that the spatial distribution   of T. wallichiana.
of various types of active compounds reported in the current study is        Investigating terpene synthases, which catalyze isoprenoid cycli-
reliable (Fig. 1).                                                       zation reactions, offers valuable insights into the evolution of plant-
    Although the complete genomes of various Taxaceae plants are   speciﬁc terpenoid biosynthesis in terrestrial plants34. Diterpenoid
publicly available, the reason why Taxol is synthesized exclusively in   biosynthesis can be initiated by three distinct enzymes: Class I TPSs,
Taxus species remains unclear22–24. Our study presents the complete   Class II TPSs, and bifunctional Class I/Class II TPSs, all utilizing GGPP as
genome of P. chienii (Fig. 2a, b), a relict conifer endemic to China that   a precursor51. Bifunctional TPSs have been identiﬁed in gymnosperms



Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                      9


[PDF physical page 10]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4


and lycophytes, such as Abies grandis, Abies balsamea, Ginkgo biloba,   catalysis sites, TS, are conserved across both the Pseudotaxus and
and Selaginella involvens15. The initial committed step in taxane bio-   Taxus genera.
synthesis involves the cyclization of linear GGPP to form taxa-
4(5),11(12)diene, catalyzed by TS52. A previous study has indicated that  Methods
the TS protein in T. brevifolia is a Class I TPS51. The classiﬁcation of TPS   Plant material
proteins is primarily based on the presence or absence of two motifs:  The tissues of Pseudotaxus chienii (specimen ID: ZQBX) were collected
DXDD and DDXXD/E. It is noteworthy that the known TSs from the  from the Nan Jian Yan Scenic Area (28.0°20.0’39.19”N, 119.0°6.0'0.97”E,
Taxaceae plants, which lack the classic “DDXD” motif, are classiﬁed as   Altitude:1197 m) in Zhejiang Province, China, in November 2022, for
Class  I TPSs rather than bifunctional TPSs, indicating a distinctive  genome sequencing. The distinguishing feature of P. chienii is the
characteristic of the Taxaceae family within gymnosperms (Fig. 5a).   presence of a white aril and two distinct white stomatal bands on the
Comprehensive sequence analysis showed that the protein sequence   underside of mature leaves.
surrounding the core DXDD motif, which is the iconic sequence of
Class II TPSs, has a high similarity between TPSs from Taxaceae and  MS imaging (MSI) analysis
other gymnosperms, indicating its conserved role during the evolution  Young leaves and stems of P. chienii were sheared into 20-μm sections
process. In the future, this peculiar phenomenon needs further  on the MALDI-2 conductive slide using a freezing microtome (Leica
attention of researchers.                                        CM1950). The sections were vacuum dried with N2 gas. The tissue
    X-ray crystal structure analysis showed that a TS protein from T.   sections were dried and kept in −80 °C for long-term preservation
brevifolia possesses a complete class I-type C-terminal domain and a   after vacuum packaging. The MALDI-2 special matrix containing 2,5-
vestigial class II-type N-terminal domain, suggesting it activates the   dihydroxybenzoic acid and 2,5-dihydroxyacetophenone was pur-
isoprenoid substrate by ionization, rather than protonation35. Using   chased from Bruker company. Prior to MS analysis, a MALDI-2 special
the 3p5p.1.A model as a template, the structure of PcTS1 is closer to the   matrix was sprayed onto the slides using a TM-sprayer (HTX Tech-
Class I type TPSs than to the bifunctional TPSs present in gymnos-   nologies) with the default parameters. No signa of the matrix back-
perms, indicating that it may be an evolutionary transitional form.   ground was detected. The size of MALDI-2 chip is 2.5 ⅹ7.5 cm. We
Previous studies uncovered the function of the DDXXD and (N,D)   placed the leaf and stem materials on the same chip to ensure com-
DXX(S,T)XXXE motifs as metal-binding sites in class I-type terpenoid   parability between them.
cyclase35,53. In PcTS1, the residues D668 and D669 of the “DDXXD”      Compounds in the slides were visualized using a timsTOF ﬂeX
motif, along with N812, D813, and E820 of the (N,D)DXX(S,T)XXXE  MALDI2 (Bruker) equipped with a smartbeam 3D laser operating at
motif, are predicted to be located the divalent cation binding site   10 kHz. MSI was conducted in both of positive and negative ion modes
(Fig. 5b, c). This observation suggests that the structure of the metal   across a m/z range of 50–1500. The spatial resolution of MSI was set to
ion catalysis site is conserved among TS enzymes across the Pseudo-  20 μm, and the laser frequency was adjusted to 10 Hz. MS imaging data
taxus and Taxus genera52. Heterologous expression of PcTS1 produced   were ﬁrstly normalized using the Root Mean Square method and
taxadiene in tobacco, conﬁrming its complete functionality as TS   processed with SCiLS Lab software (ver. 2021c, Bruker, Billerica, USA).
(Fig. 5e–g).                                                         Metabolites were identiﬁed by comparing the measured m/z values
     In Taxus plants, several CYP725 subfamily genes were identiﬁed to   (with an accuracy of < 0.006 Da) against an in-house standard data-
be candidates for Taxol biosynthesis22. Comparative genomic analysis   base and the Bruker Library MS-Metabobase 3.0 database. Receiver
showed that CYP725 is a gymnosperm-speciﬁc CYP subfamily, indi-   Operation Characteristic analysis and Student’s t test analysis were
cating  its specialized functions in the secondary metabolism of   applied to determine the signiﬁcance of differences between the
gymnosperm54. In plants, many members of the CYP family showed   samples. Corrected p-value < 0.01 were used to screen signiﬁcant
high inducibility in response to MeJA55. In Taxus cell suspension cul-   changed metabolites.
tures, MeJA elicitation is an effective strategy to induce and enhance
biosynthesis of Taxol56. RNA-seq analysis demonstrated that MeJA  Genome sequencing
treatment signiﬁcantly up-regulated the expression of CYP725 genes,  Genomic DNA was isolated from the twigs of P. chienii using the clas-
implying a potential coordinated regulatory pattern in their expres-    sical  cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide method. After  quality
sion. Gene expression is regulated by various cis-acting elements, and   checking, the genome was surveyed through the Illumina NovaSeq
the distribution of these elements within the plant genome is uneven.  6000 platform using a paired-end library (read length of 150 bp, insert
Consequently, genes that are clustered together may be inﬂuenced by   size of 350 bp).
the same regulatory elements and display similar expression patterns.     A HiFi SMRTbell library was constructed using the SMRTbell Prep
Most of the CYP725 genes are situated within a very restricted genomic   Kit 3.0 (Paciﬁc Biosciences of California) and sequenced on the PacBio
region (Fig. 6), which may account for the consistent response of   Revio sequencing platform at Wuhan Benagen Tech Solutions Com-
CYP725 to MeJA treatment. In Taxus, several TFs belonging to the MYB,   pany Limited (Wuhan, China). The consensus HiFi reads were gener-
bHLH, and WRKY families were identiﬁed as regulators involved in the   ated using circular consensus sequencing software (ver.6.4.0) with
regulation of Taxol biosynthesis57,58. Co-expression analysis identiﬁed a   default parameters. The Hi-C library was prepared using fresh twigs of
number of MeJA responsive TFs, such as MYB12, MYB13, bHLH18, and   P. chienii. Brieﬂy, the tissues of P. chienii were ﬁxed with a 2% for-
WRKY6, providing a valuable resource outlining the regulation of tax-   maldehyde. Nuclei were extracted and then digested by the restriction
ane biosynthesis.                                          enzyme DPN II. The end of digested fragments was labeled with biotin
     In conclusion, analysis of the high-quality chromosome-level  and ligated randomly with T4 DNA ligase (NEB)and reverse crosslinked
genome assembly of P. chienii presented here reveals insights into   using proteinase K (NEB). Then, DNA fragments were sequenced on
the origin and evolution of taxane biosynthesis in the Taxaceae   the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform.
family. P. chienii, belonging to an older genus than Taxus, possesses
only a partial pathway for Taxol biosynthesis, as it lacks a key enzyme  Genome assembly
known as TBT. This deﬁciency results in the accumulation of taxusin,  The raw data of short reads was ﬁltered to remove adapters and low-
a highly acetylated form of taxane. With the emergence of the Taxus   quality reads using fastp software (ver. 0.21.0)59. The genome size and
genus, the limitations imposed by the absence of this transferase   heterozygosity were  estimated  using  Jellyﬁsh  v2.2.10 and GCE
have been overcome, resulting in a complete biosynthetic pathway   (ver.1.0.0) with the K-mer method60. The Hiﬁsequences were ﬁrst
for Taxol. Protein structure analysis showed that the metal ion   assembled into contigs using hiﬁasm (ver. 0.16.1)61, followed by two



Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                              10


[PDF physical page 11]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4


rounds of polishing using Pilon with short reads62. Purge_dups (ver.   substitutions (Ks) value of each syntenic gene pair was calculated using
1.2.5) was used to eliminated redundant Haplotigs63. For pseudochro-   the PAML program (ver. 4.9 package)84.
mosome level scaffolding, clean reads of the Hi-C data were aligned to
the pre-assembled genome using the HICUP software (ver. 0.8.0) to   Phylogenetic analysis and genomic comparison
obtain unique mapped paried reads64. The preliminary assembly of the  The longest transcripts of each coding gene from 15 representative
draft genome sequence was anchored onto chromosomes using   species, including Arabidopsis thaliana, Vitis vinifera, Oryza sativa,
ALLHIC (ver. 0.9.8)65. Finally, a chromosome-level assembly of P.  Nymphaea colorata, Amborella trichopoda, Taxus yunnanensis, Taxus
chienii was obtained through manual curation using Juicebox (ver.   wallichiana, Taxus mairei, Torreya grandis, Fokienia hodginsii, Gnetum
1.11.08)66. To estimate the assembly completeness, clean Illumina reads  montanum, Pinus densiﬂora, Ginkgo biloba, Cycas panzhihuaensis,
were mapped onto the reference sequence using the BWA software   Selaginella moellendorfﬁi, and P. chienii were used to construct gene
(ver. 0.7.17)67. BUSCO program (ver. 4.1.2) was used to evaluate the   families using the program OrthoFinder (ver. 2.09)85. Phylogenetic
integrity of genome assembly based on lineage-speciﬁc proﬁle library   analysis was conducted using IQ-TREE (ver. 2.1.3) with the best model
embryophyta_odb10.2024-01-0868.                                     selected by ModelFinder86. The resultant phylogenetic tree was
                                                                    applied to calculate the divergence time by the MCMCTREE program
Gene prediction and annotation                              from the PAML (ver. 4.9 package)84. Divergence times between O.
The gene structure of the P. chienii genome was predicted using three   sativa and G. biloba (326.4 - 336.8 million years ago [Mya]), G. mon-
strategies, including transcript mapping, ab initio gene prediction, and  tanum and C. panzhihuaensis (275.3–316.4 Mya), and A. trichopoda and
homologous gene alignment69. For transcriptome-based prediction,   N. colorata (179.9– 205.0 Mya) were collected from Timetree (http://
full-length cDNA transcripts were ﬁrst aligned to the reference   timetree.org/) for use as fossil calibration points. The expansion and
sequence using Minimap2 (ver. 2.17) assembled with Stringtie2 (ver.   contraction of gene families were identiﬁed using CAFE (ver. 4.2.1)87.
2.1.5)70,71, and gene models were then predicted using TransDecoder
(ver.  5.7.0)  (https://github.com/TransDecoder/TransDecoder).  For  Untargeted metabolomic proﬁling
homology-based gene prediction, peptide sequences from T. wall-  The stem and leaf samples of different Taxaceae trees, including P.
ichiana, T. yunnanensis, T. mairei, and T. grandis were aligned to the P.   chienii, T. wallichiana, and T. grandis (50 mg each sample, N = 6), were
chienii genome using tblasn (ver. 2.13.0) and gene models were pre-   ground with 800 μL pre-cooled methanol solution (50%) in a tube. The
dicted using Exonerate (ver. 2.4.0)72. For ab initio prediction, Augustus   tissue samples were added with 500 μL of pre-cold chloroform/
and GlimmerHMM were used with a custom training set from tran-   methanol/H2O (v:v:v, 1:3:1) and subjected to ultrasonication for 5 min
scriptome and protein-based gene model73,74. At last, all the results   at 4 °C. The chromatographic separation of the tissue sample was
from the above three distinct methods were combined and integrated   carried out using a SCIEX UPLC system (Applied Biosystems, Foster
to produce a high-conﬁdence gene structure by Maker (ver. 2.31.10)75.   City, USA) with an ACQUITY BEH Amide column (2.1 × 100 mm, 1.7 μm
    For functional annotation, the protein encoding sequences of P.   particle size; Waters, Milford, USA). The ﬂow rate in the column was
chienii were searched against several protein databases, including NR   0.4 mL/min, and the working temperature was 35 °C88.
(ver. 2022-03-09), UniProt and TrEMBL (ver. 2022-03-09), and Kyoto      An efﬁcient MS/MS SCIEX Triple-TOF-5600 plus system (Applied
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) using the BLASTp pro-   Biosystems) was used to detect metabolites eluted by the reversed-
gram. The Pfam domain and Gene Ontology (GO) classiﬁcation was   phase separation. The MS data pretreatments, such as peak picking,
performed using InterProScan (ver. 5.55-88.0)76.                    peak grouping, retention time (RT) correction, and adduct annotation,
                                                            were conducted using XCMSsoftware. The MS data wasconverted into
Prediction of repeat sequence                                 an mz.XML format ﬁle and identiﬁed by checking the RT and m/z
To identify repeat sequences in the P. chienii genome, we ﬁrst gener-   values. The metabolite was annotated by matching the exact m/z value
ated a de novo repeat sequence library using RepeatModeler (ver.   of each MS ion to the KEGG database. The molecular formula of each
2.0.4)77. LTR elements were identiﬁed using LTR_FINDER and LTRhar-   presumptive compound was validated by the isotopic distribution
vest (ver. 1.6.0)78,79. The above two libraries were then combined with   according to an in-house MS library. The intensity of each ion peak was
the Repbase library and used as the input data for RepeatMasker (ver.   calculated by software metaX. The Wilcoxon test was conducted to
2.0.4, https://www.repeatmasker.org/). The TE Protein type repeat   analyze the metabolic differences between the two sample groups. The
sequences were predicted using RepeatProteinMask (ver. 4.1.5) in the  P value was adjusted and corrected by false discovery rate (FDR) with
RepeatMasker software. Tandem repeat prediction was performed   the Benjamini–Hochberg method. A VIP cut-off value of 1.0 was used to
using the software Look4TRs80. To calculate the insertion time (T) of   select important features.
LTRs, the following formula was used:
                                                                Identiﬁcation of taxane biosynthesis-related genes
    T = Kðnucleotide distanceÞ=2rðnucleotide substitution rateÞ    ð1Þ  The  full sequences of taxane  biosynthesis-related proteins were
                                                           downloaded from the published Taxus genomes and used as baits to
where the r for gymnosperm is 2.2 × 10−9 substitutions per year per   search against the P. chienii genome22–24. Homologous genes in P. chienii
synonymous site and the K value was calculated using Distmat from   were obtained by using OrthoFinder ver.2.09 with default parameters85.
the EMBOSS (ver. 6.5.7.0) package81. The LTR Assembly Index was   Furthermore, important gene classes, including the CYP (Pfam ID:
calculated using LTR_retriever (ver. 2.9.0)30.                         PF00067), TRF (Pfam ID: PF02458), and TPS (Pfam ID: PF03936 and
                                                            PF00432) families, were identiﬁed by performing HMM searches. To
Synteny and whole-genome duplication analysis                     identify the gene with a complete function domain, a gene body con-
To investigate genome collinearity, syntenic gene pairs between P.   taining a continuous long gag (N > 10) in the multiple sequence align-
chienii, T. yunnanensis, T. wallichiana, T. mairei, and T. grandis were  ment was removed.  Multiple sequence  alignment  analysis was
identiﬁed using JCVI (ver. 0.84) with default parameters82. For whole-   performed using the ClustalOmega program (http://www.clustal.org/).
genome duplication analysis, an all-versus-all analysis with BLASTp was
performed using all proteins sequences of P. chienii with an e-value  Homology modeling of TPS family members
cutoff of 10−5, query coverage of 0.3, and an alignment threshold of  The 3D models of TPS proteins were built using the SWISS-MODEL
100 amino acids. The syntenic regions with collinearity of paralog pairs  program (https://swissmodel.expasy.org/). The protein 3D struc-
were detected by MCScan X with default parameters83. Nucleotide   tures were predicted based on the published crystal structure of T.



Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                                                          11


[PDF physical page 12]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4


brevifolia TS protein (PDB ID: 3p5p.1, resolution: 2.25 Å)35. For each   pressure: 35 psi; and atomizing gas and auxiliary gas: 50/55 psi. Multi-
TPS family member, the sequence alignments between template and   quant 3.0.2 software was used to extract chromatographic peak area
target sequences were performed by Clustal Omega (http://www.  and RT. The standard of the target compound was used to correct the
clustal.org/). The model with the lowest overall energy was selected   RT. The retention time of taxusin is 7.48 min. The transition of m/z
as the ﬁnal structure of the target protein. The PBD ﬁles of selected   527.3 →467.2 was used for taxusin quantiﬁcation, and the transitions of
TPS proteins were generated and download from the SWISS-MODEL   m/z 527.3 →407.2 were utilized for conﬁrmation. Limit of detection is
program. TM score was analyzed using the alphafold3 online tool   2 ng/mL.
with referring PBD ﬁle.
                                                           Experimental validation of PcTS genes
MeJA treatment and RNA-seq analysis                              Total RNA was isolated from the twigs of P. chienii using an RNeasy
P. chienii cutting seedings were used for MeJA treatment and RNA-seq   plant mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). High-quality RNA was used
analysis. For MeJA treatment, 100 μM MeJA ethanol solution was   for cDNA library construction using a PrimeScript RT reagent kit. ORF
sprayed onto the leaves of P. chienii seedings and inoculated for 24 h   of TS1 (PchiChr11G299420.1) was ampliﬁed with Biorun Pfu PCR Mix
and 48 h, respectively. Leaves inoculated with ethanol were harvested   (Up-cagtGGTCTCacaacatggctcagccctcatttaattcagctc/  cagtGGTCTCa-
as the controls. RNA extraction, cDNA library construction, Illumina   tacatcatactttaattggttcaatataaacttttcttatataat-Down) and ligated into
sequencing, sequence alignment, and quality evaluation were per-  pBWA(V)HS vector (Biorun Bio-tech, https://plant.biorun.com/). Pur-
formed. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were analyzed using the   iﬁed construct was transformed into Agrobacterium tumefaciens cells
DESeq2 program according to criteria: the FDR < 0.05 and absolute   (GV3101) using Eppendorf Eporator (Hamburg, Germany). After pre-
fold change ≥289.                                                   paring a resuspension of A. tumefaciens with OD600 = 0.2, the tobacco
                                                                       leaves were inoculated with the resuspension for 10 min91.
Promoter analysis
The 1500-bp promoters of 581 CYP superfamily genes and 16 taxane  GC-MS analysis of taxadiene
biosynthesis pathway genes were extracted from the P. chienii gen-   For GC-MS analysis, 500 mg of transgenic tobacco leaves were har-
ome. The promoter sequences were scanned using the PlantCARE   vested and ground to powder in liquid N2. The powder was extracted
software     (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/plantcare/   with 5 mL hexane for 20 min sonication treatment. Tissue samples
html/). Two MeJA-related cis-elements, including G-box (CACGTGG)   were extracted with mixed solution (hexane:ethyl acetate = 4:1, v/v)
and G-box like (AACGTG), and four TF binding elements, including   containing 200 ng of internal standard (eicosane, CAS: 112-95-8). After
ABRE (ACGTG), G-box (CACGAC and TAACACGTAG), MBE (CAACTG   dried under a stream of N2 gas, the samples were redissolved in 1 mL of
and CAACCA), W-box (TTGACC), were screened and visualized by   hexane: ethyl acetate (4:1, v/v) mixed solution. Then, 1 μL of each
TBtools90.                                                     sample solution was injected into a Trace GC Ultra gas chromatograph
                                                              coupled to an ISQ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientiﬁc). Separation
Transient expression in N. benthamiana and substrate feeding   was performed with an HP5ms column (30 m × 250 μm × 0.25 μm) in
experiments                                                                  splitless mode92. Taxadiene was detected according to the peak area of
The full-length sequences of T2OH (PchiChr11G298480.1) and T7OH   the internal standard. All analyses were conducted using three biolo-
(PchiChr11G298490.1) from P. chienii, and T2OH (ctg2120_gene.6) and   gically independent samples.
T7OH (ctg2120_gene.1) from T. mairei were cloned into pBWA(V)HS
vectors and transferred into Agrobacterium (strain GV3101). Agro-   Reporting summary
bacterium strains containing the gene constructs were grown in 10 mL   Further information on research design is available in the Nature
of LB with antibiotics (50 mg/L kanamycin and 25 mg/L rifampicillin)   Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
for 16 h at 28 °C and 200 rpm, then the cells were centrifuged at
2000 × g for 10 min, and the supernatant was removed. After incuba-  Data availability
tion at room temperature for 2 h, inﬁltration was performed using a  Genome assembly has been deposited in GenBank under accession
1 mL syringe without needle on underside side of 4- week-old N. ben-   GCA_053640655.1   [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/genome/
thamiana leaves. After 4 days, 100 μg/mL taxusin was inﬁltrated into   GCA_053640655.1]. The genomic raw sequencing data have been
the underside side of previously Agrobacterium-inﬁltrated leaves with a   deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) database under
needleless 1 mL syringe. Leaves were collected after 1 day post-inﬁl-   accession PRJNA1205499. The transcriptomic raw sequencing data
tration, extracted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.                        generated and analyzed during the current study are available in the
                                                         NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession GSE288094.
LC-MS/MS analysis of taxusin content                      Genome annotation ﬁles are available at Figshare [https://doi.org/10.
The twig samples are harvested from P. chienii cuttings and ground   6084/m9.ﬁgshare.29084240]. The raw data of MS imaging analysis has
with liquid nitrogen. The sample power was added with 800 μL of  been uploaded to the Metaspace database with project ID m-2025
extract solution containing zirconia beads. Then, the sample solution   [https://metaspace2020.org/api_auth/review?prj=07a71fa8-5c9a-11f0-
was sonicated in ice for 25 min and kept in a constant temperature   a049-b3ec65131efb&token=KzN_YV6IGpbf]. Source data are provided
extract solution for 1 h. The entire supernatant was precisely trans-   in this paper.
ferred to a new clean microtube and vacuum dried.
    Taxusin standard (CAS: 19605-80-2, ≥99.0%) was purchased from  Code availability
Shyuanye company (https://www.shyuanye.com/). An appropriate  Codes used to perform the analyses are available at Figshare [https://
amount of standard solution was used to prepare a gradient calibration   doi.org/10.6084/m9.ﬁgshare.29084240].
curve working solution. The parameters of LC-MS/MS analysis are as
follows. Column: ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 (100 × 2.1 mm, 1.7 μm);  References
Mobile phase: 0.1% formic acid water solution (A solution) and    1.   Dörken, V. M., Nimsch, H. & Rudall, P. J. Origin of the Taxaceae aril:
methanol solution (B solution); Flow  rate: 0.3 mL/min; Injection        evolutionary implications of seed-cone teratologies in Pseudotaxus
volume: 10 μL; Column temperature: 30 °C; Ion source: ESI; Ion scan-         chienii. Ann. Bot. 123, 133–143 (2019).
ning mode: multiple reaction monitoring; Ion source temperature:   2.   Yu, C. et al. Integrated mass spectrometry imaging and single-cell
500 °C; Ion source voltage: 4500 V; Collision gas: medium; Air curtain       transcriptome atlas strategies provide novel insights into taxoid



Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                                       12


[PDF physical page 13]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4


     biosynthesis and transport in Taxus mairei stems. Plant J. 115,        23. Cheng, J. et al. Chromosome-level genome of Himalayan yew
    1243–1260 (2023).                                                    provides insights into the origin and evolution of the paclitaxel
3.   Sabzehzari, M., Zeinali, M. & Naghavi, M. R. Alternative sources and        biosynthetic pathway. Mol. Plant 14, 1199–1209 (2021).
    metabolic engineering of Taxol: Advances and future perspectives.   24. Song, C. et al. Taxus yunnanensis genome offers insights into
     Biotechnol. Adv. 43, 107569 (2020).                             gymnosperm phylogeny and taxol production. Commun. Biol. 4,
4.   Yu, C. et al. Role of an endodermis-speciﬁc miR858b-MYB1L mod-       1203 (2021).
     ule in the regulation of Taxol biosynthesis in Taxus mairei. Plant J.    25.  Lou, H. et al. The Torreya grandis genome illuminates the origin and
     122, e70135 (2025).                                                     evolution of gymnosperm-speciﬁc sciadonic acid biosynthesis. Nat.
5.   Ghimire, B., Lee, C. & Heo, K. Leaf anatomy and its implications for      Commun. 14, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37038-2 (2023).
    phylogenetic relationships in Taxaceae s. l. J. Plant Res. 127,         26.  Jiang, B. et al. Characterization and heterologous reconstitution of
    373–388 (2014).                                                  Taxus biosynthetic enzymes leading to baccatin III. Science 383,
6.   Liu, L., Wang, Z., Su, Y. & Wang, T. Population transcriptomic           622–629 (2024).
    sequencing reveals allopatric divergence and local adaptation in     27.  Zhang, Y. et al. Synthetic biology identiﬁes the minimal gene set
    Pseudotaxus chienii (Taxaceae). BMC Genomics 22, 388 (2021).           required for paclitaxel biosynthesis in a plant chassis. Mol. Plant 16,
7.   Kou, Y. et al. Evolutionary history of a relict conifer, Pseudotaxus         1951–1961 (2023).
     chienii (Taxaceae), in south-east China during the late Neogene: old   28. Yang, C. et al. Biosynthesis of the highly oxygenated tetracyclic
     lineage, young populations. Ann. Bot. 125, 105–117 (2020).              core skeleton of Taxol. Nat. Commun. 15, 2339 (2024).
8.   Leslie, A. B. et al. Hemisphere-scale differences in conifer evolu-     29.  Li, C. et al. A cytochrome P450 enzyme catalyses oxetane ring
     tionary dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 16217–16221 (2012).       formation in paclitaxel biosynthesis. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 63,
9.   Bolte, C. E. & Eckert, A. J. Determining the when, where and how of      e202407070 (2024).
     conifer speciation: a challenge arising from the study ‘Evolutionary   30. Ou, S., Chen, J. & Jiang, N. Assessing genome assembly quality
     history of a relict conifer Pseudotaxus chienii’. Ann. Bot. 125,             using the LTR Assembly Index (LAI). Nucleic Acids Res. 46,
     v–vii (2020).                                                      e126–e126 (2018).
10.  Lange, B. M. & Conner, C. F. Taxanes and taxoids of the genus      31.  Liu, J. C., De La Peña, R., Tocol, C. & Sattely, E. S. Reconstitution of
    Taxus - A comprehensive inventory of chemical diversity. Phy-           early paclitaxel biosynthetic network. Nat. Commun. 15,
    tochemistry 190, 112829 (2021).                                       1419 (2024).
11.  Zerbe, P. & Bohlmann, J. Plant diterpene synthases: exploring        32.  Walker, K. & Croteau, R. Taxol biosynthesis: molecular cloning of a
    modularity and metabolic diversity for bioengineering. Trends Bio-       benzoyl-CoA:taxane 2alpha-O-benzoyltransferase cDNA from taxus
     technol. 33, 419–428 (2015).                                    and functional expression in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
12.  Tong, Y. et al. Structural and mechanistic insights into the precise      USA 97, 13591–13596 (2000).
    product synthesis by a bifunctional miltiradiene synthase. Plant      33.  Li, H., Horiguchi, T., Croteau, R. & Williams, R. M. Studies on Taxol
     Biotechnol. J. 21, 165–175 (2023).                                          biosynthesis: preparation of taxadiene-diol- and triol-derivatives by
13.  Keeling, C. I. et al. Identiﬁcation and functional characterization of       deoxygenation of Taxusin. Tetrahedron 64, 6561–6567 (2008).
    monofunctional ent-copalyl diphosphate and ent-kaurene syn-      34. Pemberton, T. A. et al. Exploring the inﬂuence of domain archi-
    thases in white spruce reveal different patterns for diterpene syn-        tecture on the catalytic function of diterpene synthases. Biochem-
    thase evolution for primary and secondary metabolism in                     istry 56, 2010–2023 (2017).
    gymnosperms. Plant Physiol. 152, 1197–1208 (2010).                 35.  Köksal, M., Jin, Y., Coates, R. M., Croteau, R. & Christianson, D. W.
14.  Mafu, S., Hillwig, M. L. & Peters, R. J. A. novel labda-7,13e-dien-15-ol-       Taxadiene synthase structure and evolution of modular archi-
    producing bifunctional diterpene synthase from Selaginella moel-        tecture in terpene biosynthesis. Nature 469, 116–120 (2011).
     lendorfﬁi. Chembiochem 12, 1984–1987 (2011).                      36. Zhan, X. et al. Mass spectrometry imaging and single-cell tran-
15.  Peters, R. J. et al. Abietadiene synthase from grand ﬁr (Abies grandis):        scriptional proﬁling reveal the tissue-speciﬁc regulation of bioac-
     characterization and mechanism of action of the “pseudomature”          tive ingredient biosynthesis in Taxus leaves. Plant Commun. 4,
    recombinant enzyme. Biochemistry 39, 15592–15602 (2000).           100630 (2023).
16.  Schepmann, H. G., Pang, J. & Matsuda, S. P. Cloning and char-       37.  Shi, M. et al. Molecular regulation of the key specialized metabolism
     acterization of Ginkgo biloba levopimaradiene synthase which          pathways in medicinal plants. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 66,
     catalyzes the ﬁrst committed step in ginkgolide biosynthesis. Arch.       510–531 (2024).
    Biochem. Biophys. 392, 263–269 (2001).                           38. Deng, Q., Su, Y. J. & Wang, T. Microsatellite loci for an old rare
17.  He, S., Abdallah, I. I., van Merkerk, R. & Quax, W. J. Insights into           species, Pseudotaxus chienii, and transferability in Taxus wall-
    taxadiene synthase catalysis and promiscuity facilitated by mut-          ichiana var. mairei (Taxaceae). Appl. Plant Sci. 1, https://doi.org/10.
     ability landscape and molecular dynamics. Planta 259, 87 (2024).       3732/apps.1200456 (2013).
18.  Chau, M., Jennewein, S., Walker, K. & Croteau, R. Taxol biosynthesis:   39. Wang, M. et al. Correlation analysis of secondary metabolism and
    Molecular cloning and characterization of a cytochrome P450           endophytic fungal assembles provide insights into screening efﬁ-
     taxoid 7 beta-hydroxylase. Chem Biol 11, 663–672 (2004).                 cient Taxol-related fungal elicitors. Plant Cell Environ. https://doi.
19.  Wani, M. C., Taylor, H. L., Wall, M. E., Coggon, P. & McPhail, A. T.         org/10.1111/pce.15422 (2025).
     Plant antitumor agents. VI. The isolation and structure of taxol, a     40. Yu, C. et al. Omic analysis of the endangered Taxaceae species
    novel antileukemic and antitumor agent from Taxus brevifolia. J.         Pseudotaxus chienii revealed the differences in taxol biosynthesis
    Am. Chem. Soc. 93, 2325–2327 (1971).                              pathway between Pseudotaxus and Taxus yunnanensis trees. BMC
20. Qiao, F. et al. De novo characterization of a Cephalotaxus haina-           Plant Biol. 21, 104 (2021).
     nensis transcriptome and genes related to paclitaxel biosynthesis.    41.   Li, S., Wang, Z., Su, Y. & Wang, T. EST-SSR-based landscape
    PLoS ONE 9, e106900 (2014).                                         genetics of Pseudotaxus chienii, a tertiary relict conifer endemic to
21.  Kutlutürk, G. Z. et al. Analysis of anticancer taxanes in Turkish            China. Ecol. Evol. 11, 9498–9515 (2021).
    Hazelnut (Corylus avellana L.) genotypes using high-performance    42.  Jiao, Y. et al. Ancestral polyploidy in seed plants and angiosperms.
     liquid chromatography. Turk. J. Pharm. Sci. 21, 367–375 (2024).          Nature 473, 97–100 (2011).
22.  Xiong, X. et al. The Taxus genome provides insights into paclitaxel   43. Van de Peer, Y., Mizrachi, E. & Marchal, K. The evolutionary sig-
     biosynthesis. Nat. Plants 7, 1026–1036 (2021).                         niﬁcance of polyploidy. Nat. Rev. Genet. 18, 411–424 (2017).



Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                                      13


[PDF physical page 14]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4


44.  Stull, G. W. et al. Gene duplications and phylogenomic conﬂict      67.  Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with
     underlie major pulses of phenotypic evolution in gymnosperms.         Burrows-Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics 25, 1754–1760 (2009).
     Nat. Plants 7, 1015–1025 (2021).                                    68. Simão, F. A., Waterhouse, R. M., Ioannidis, P., Kriventseva, E. V. &
45. Zhao, M. & Ma, J. Co-evolution of plant LTR-retrotransposons and       Zdobnov, E. M. BUSCO: assessing genome assembly and annota-
     their host genomes. Protein Cell 4, 493–501 (2013).                        tion completeness with single-copy orthologs. Bioinformatics 31,
46.  Kui, L., Majeed, A. & Dong, Y. Reference-grade Taxus genome           3210–3212 (2015).
    unleashes its pharmacological potential. Trends Plant Sci. 27,        69. Leng, L. et al. Cepharanthine analogs mining and genomes of Ste-
    10–12 (2022).                                                       phania accelerate anti-coronavirus drug discovery. Nat. Commun.
47. Wang, H. et al. Construction of acetyl-CoA and DBAT hybrid               15, 1537 (2024).
    metabolic pathway for acetylation of 10-deacetylbaccatin III to       70. Kovaka, S. et al. Transcriptome assembly from long-read RNA-seq
    baccatin III. Acta Pharm. Sin. B 11, 3322–3334 (2021).                    alignments with StringTie2. Genome Biol. 20, 278 (2019).
48.  Bai, J. et al. Taxoids and abietanes from callus cultures of Taxus       71.   Li, H. Minimap2: pairwise alignment for nucleotide sequences.
     cuspidata. J. Nat. Prod. 68, 497–501 (2005).                              Bioinformatics 34, 3094–3100 (2018).
49. Horiguchi, T., Rithner, C. D., Croteau, R. & Williams, R. M. Studies on   72.  Slater, G. S. C. & Birney, E. Automated generation of heuristics for
     taxol biosynthesis. Preparation of taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5 alpha-           biological sequence comparison. BMC Bioinform. 6, 31 (2005).
    acetoxy-10 beta-ol by deoxygenation of a taxadiene tetraacetate     73.  Stanke, M. & Waack, S. Gene prediction with a hidden Markov
    obtained from Japanese yew. J. Org. Chem. 67, 4901–4903 (2002).      model and a new intron submodel. Bioinformatics 19,
50. Perez-Matas, E. et al. Exploring the interplay between metabolic            ii215–ii225 (2003).
    pathways and taxane production in elicited Taxus baccata cell sus-   74.  Majoros, W. H., Pertea, M. & Salzberg, S. L. TigrScan and Glim-
    pensions. Plants 12, https://doi.org/10.3390/plants12142696 (2023).      merHMM: two open source ab initio eukaryotic gene-ﬁnders.
51.  Hu, Z. et al. Recent progress and new perspectives for diterpenoid         Bioinformatics 20, 2878–2879 (2004).
     biosynthesis in medicinalplants. Med. Res. Rev. 41, 2971–2997 (2021).   75.  Holt, C. & Yandell, M. MAKER2: an annotation pipeline and genome-
52.  Hezari, M., Lewis, N. G. & Croteau, R. Puriﬁcation and character-         database management tool for second-generation genome pro-
     ization of taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene synthase from Paciﬁc yew (Taxus            jects. BMC Bioinform. 12, 491 (2011).
     brevifolia) that catalyzes the ﬁrst committed step of taxol bio-        76.  Jones, P. et al. InterProScan 5: genome-scale protein function
     synthesis. Arch Biochem. Biophys. 322, 437–444 (1995).                   classiﬁcation. Bioinformatics 30, 1236–1240 (2014).
53. Schrepfer, P. et al. Identiﬁcation of amino acid networks governing   77.  Flynn, J. M. et al. RepeatModeler2 for automated genomic dis-
     catalysis in the closed complex of class I terpene synthases. Proc.       covery of transposable element families. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
     Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, E958–E967 (2016).                                  117, 9451–9457 (2020).
54.  Liao, W. et al. Transcriptome assembly and systematic identiﬁcation   78.  Xu, Z. & Wang, H. LTR_FINDER: an efﬁcient tool for the prediction of
     of novel cytochrome P450s in Taxus chinensis. Front. Plant Sci. 8,         full-length LTR retrotransposons. Nucleic Acids Res. 35,
    1468 (2017).                                            W265–W268 (2007).
55. Du, Z. et al. Identiﬁcation and functional characterization of three    79.  Ellinghaus, D., Kurtz, S. & Willhoeft, U. LTRharvest, an efﬁcient and
    cytochrome P450 genes for the abietane diterpenoid biosynthesis       ﬂexible software for de novo detection of LTR retrotransposons.
     in Isodon lophanthoides. Planta 257, 90 (2023).                 BMC Bioinform. 9, 18 (2008).
56.  Patil, R. A., Lenka, S. K., Normanly, J., Walker, E. L. & Roberts, S. C.    80. Velasco, A. II, James, B. T., Wells, V. D. & Girgis, H. Z. Look4TRs: a de
    Methyl jasmonate represses growth and affects cell cycle progres-       novo tool for detecting simple tandem repeats using self-supervised
     sion in cultured Taxus cells. Plant Cell Rep. 33, 1479–1492 (2014).         hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics 36, 380–387 (2019).
57.  Yu, C. et al. Tissue-speciﬁc study across the stem of Taxus media     81.  Rice, P., Longden, I. & Bleasby, A. EMBOSS: The European Molecular
     identiﬁes a phloem-speciﬁc TmMYB3 involved in the transcriptional       Biology Open Software Suite. Trends Genet. 16, 276–277 (2000).
     regulation of paclitaxel biosynthesis. Plant J. 103, 95–110 (2020).     82. Tang, H. et al. JCVI: A versatile toolkit for comparative genomics
58. Zhan, X. et al. Single-cell ATAC sequencing illuminates the cis-            analysis. iMeta 3, e211 (2024).
     regulatory differentiation of taxol biosynthesis between leaf         83. Wang, Y. et al. MCScanX: a toolkit for detection and evolutionary
    mesophyll and leaf epidermal cells in Taxus mairei. Ind. Crop. Prod.        analysis of gene synteny and collinearity. Nucleic Acids Res. 40,
    205, 117411 (2023).                                           e49 (2012).
59. Chen, S., Zhou, Y., Chen, Y. & Gu, J. fastp: an ultra-fast all-in-one     84. Yang, Z. PAML 4: phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood.
   FASTQ preprocessor. Bioinformatics 34, i884–i890 (2018).               Mol. Biol. Evol. 24, 1586–1591 (2007).
60. Liu, B. et al. Estimation of genomic characteristics by analyzing      85. Emms, D. M. & Kelly, S. OrthoFinder: phylogenetic orthology
    k-mer frequency in de novo genome projects. Quant. Biol. 35,            inference for comparative genomics. Genome Biol. 20, 238 (2019).
    62–67 (2013).                                                    86. Nguyen, L. T., Schmidt, H. A., von Haeseler, A. & Minh, B. Q. IQ-TREE:
61.  Cheng, H., Concepcion, G. T., Feng, X., Zhang, H. & Li, H. Haplotype-       a fast and effective stochastic algorithm for estimating maximum-
    resolved de novo assembly using phased assembly graphs with           likelihood phylogenies. Mol. Biol. Evol. 32, 268–274 (2015).
    hiﬁasm. Nat. Methods 18, 170–175 (2021).                            87. Han, M. V., Thomas, G. W., Lugo-Martinez, J. & Hahn, M. W. Esti-
62. Walker, B. J. et al. Pilon: an integrated tool for comprehensive           mating gene gain and loss rates in the presence of error in genome
     microbial variant detection and genome assembly improvement.        assembly and annotation using CAFE 3. Mol. Biol. Evol. 30,
    PLoS ONE 9, e112963 (2014).                                        1987–1997 (2013).
63. Guan, D. et al. Identifying and removing haplotypic duplication in    88. Yu, C. et al. Comparative metabolomics reveals the metabolic
    primary genome assemblies. Bioinformatics 36, 2896–2898 (2020).        variations between two endangered Taxus species (T. fuana and T.
64. Wingett, S. et al. HiCUP: pipeline for mapping and processing Hi-C       yunnanensis) in the Himalayas. BMC Plant Biol. 18, 197 (2018).
     data. F1000Res. 4, 1310 (2015).                                    89. Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold
65. Zhang, X., Zhang, S., Zhao, Q., Ming, R. & Tang, H. Assembly of         change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol.
     allele-aware, chromosomal-scale autopolyploid genomes based on        15, 550 (2014).
    Hi-C data. Nat. Plants 5, 833–845 (2019).                          90. Chen, C. et al. TBtools-II: A “one for all, all for one” bioinformatics
66. Robinson, J. T. et al. Juicebox.js Provides a cloud-based visualiza-        platform for biological big-data mining. Mol. Plant 16,
     tion system for Hi-C data. Cell Syst. 6, 256–258.e251 (2018).             1733–1742 (2023).



Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                                   14


[PDF physical page 15]
Article                                                                                   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4


91.  Sunilkumar, G., Vijayachandra, K. & Veluthambi, K. Preincubation of   Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
    cut tobacco leaf explants promotes Agrobacterium-mediated       Chenliang Yu or Chenjia Shen.
    transformation by increasing vir gene induction. Plant Sci. 141,
    51–58 (1999).                                               Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anon-
92.  Li, J. et al. Chloroplastic metabolic engineering coupled with iso-   ymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A
    prenoid pool enhancement for committed taxanes biosynthesis in   peer review ﬁle is available.
     Nicotiana benthamiana. Nat. Commun. 10, 4850 (2019.
                                                                    Reprints and permissions information is available at
Acknowledgements                                           http://www.nature.com/reprints
This research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (32271905 (C.J.S.) and 32270382 (C.N.Y.)), the Zhejiang Provincial   Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
Natural Science Foundation of China (LY23C160001 (C.J.S.),               isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
LY18C050005 (C.J.S.), LY19C150005 (C.J.S.), and LY19C160001 (C.J.S.)).
                                                    Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Author contributions                                         Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
C.L.Y., C.J.S., and M.S.W. conceived and designed the study. R.Y.M.,     which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
C.L.Y., and C.J.S. prepared the genome sequencing material. M.S.W.,     reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
R.Y.M., Z.J.F., L.X.Z., and Y.B.Z. led the bioinformatics analyses. S.L.W.     credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
and H.Z.W. provided the Taxus and P. chienii materials. M.Y.Z., E.H.B.,     Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed
W.T.L., and Y.Z. performed the untargeted metabolome and RNA-seq     material. You do not have permission under this licence toshare adapted
analyses. R.Y.M., Y.Y.P., and H.J.M. cloned the PcTS1 and TwTS1 genes.   material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third
M.S.W., S.G.F., X.X.Z., and C.J.S. developed the ﬁgures. M.S.W., R.Y.M.,   party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
C.N.Y., C.L.Y., and C.J.S. interpreted the data and drafted the manu-    Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
script. M.S.W., C.L.Y., and C.J.S. wrote the manuscript. M.S.W., S.L.W.,    material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
H.Z.W., C.L.Y., and C.J.S. revised the manuscript. All authors read and    licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
approved the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.                        exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
                                                              from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
Competing interests                                          creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
The authors declare no competing interests.
                                        © The Author(s) 2025
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-67849-4.





Nature Communications| (2026)17:1088                                                                                        15