
[PDF physical page 1]
Plant Communications                                                                                                                                                                                  llll
Review article

The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes: From
pathway elucidation to engineering and synthetic
biology

Jingcheng Shi1,2,5, Caibin Zhang2,3,5, Rui Deng2,3,5, Alisdair R. Fernie4, Moxian Chen1,*
and Youjun Zhang2,3,*
1State Key Laboratory of Green Pesticide, Key Laboratory of Green Pesticide and Agricultural Bioengineering, Ministry of Education, Centre for R&D of Fine
Chemicals of Guizhou University, Guiyang 550025, China
2State Key Laboratory of Seed Innovation, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China
3College of Advanced Agricultural Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Am Mu¨ hlenberg 1, 14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany

5These authors contributed equally to this article.

*Correspondence: Moxian Chen (cmx2009920734@gmail.com), Youjun Zhang (yjzhang@genetics.ac.cn)

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xplc.2025.101460


ABSTRACT

Taxanes are diterpenoid natural products found in yew trees (Taxus spp.) and include three anticancer
agents: paclitaxel, docetaxel, and cabazitaxel. Despite nearly 500 reported taxane compounds, only the
biosynthetic pathway of the type I taxane skeleton leading to paclitaxel is close to being fully elucidated.
Traditional extraction of these compounds is unsustainable, and chemical synthesis is commercially nonvi-
able. With emerging drug resistance and limited compound diversity, there is a critical need to expand the
taxane library and develop sustainable production methods. Here, we propose strategies to elucidate the
biosynthetic pathways of various taxane skeletons by identifying and engineering key enzymes such as di-
terpene synthases, cytochrome P450s (CYP450s), acetyltransferases, and BAHD acyltransferases (BEAT,
AHCT, HCBT, and DAT). We examine the roles of metabolon-forming enzyme complexes in optimizing
metabolic flux and highlight the use of plant chassis such as Nicotiana benthamiana or microbial chassis
such as Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae for sustainable taxane biosynthesis. Techniques
such as compartmentalization and CRISPRi-dCas9-based gene circuits are discussed as means to
enhance production  efficiency. Additionally,  artificial  intelligence (AI)-guided directed evolution of
CYP450s is proposed as a strategy to engineer enzymes with desired properties, facilitating the production
of novel and new-to-nature taxane derivatives. The integration of these approaches would support the
development of a comprehensive taxane library, which could accelerate the discovery of new therapeutic
agents.

Key words: taxanes, anticancer agents, diterpenoids, biosynthesis, synthetic biology, AI tools

Shi J., Zhang C., Deng R., Fernie A.R., Chen M., and Zhang Y. (2025). The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes:
From pathway elucidation to engineering and synthetic biology. Plant Comm. 6, 101460.


INTRODUCTION                                       2010) (Supplemental Table 2). These three compounds share
                                                                 the classical 6/8/6 taxane skeleton (Figure 1); the latter two are
Taxanes are a class of diterpenoid natural products first identified    paclitaxel derivatives. Paclitaxel, the first taxane used in clinical
in 1971 as the main bioactive constituents in yew trees (genus      trials, possesses broad-spectrum antitumor effects (Rowinsky
Taxus; Wani et al., 1971). Eleven known precursor skeletons of   and Donehower, 1995). Notably, paclitaxel exerts its effects by
taxanes have been  identified,  leading  to  nearly 500  well-    binding to the β-tubulin subunit  in microtubules, leading to
characterized compounds (Lange and Conner, 2021). Taxanes    abnormal  stabilization  of  microtubules  that  causes  their
have attracted substantial attention since the commercialization    dysfunction and promotes cell death during mitosis (Xiao et al.,
of three prominent members of this family: paclitaxel (Taxol,    2006). Intriguingly, paclitaxel’s antiproliferative properties have
1993), docetaxel (Taxotere, 1995), and cabazitaxel (Jevtana,   been repurposed for vascular diseases, particularly peripheral


                      Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025 © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of     1
     CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Chinese Society for Plant Biology.
                 This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).


[PDF physical page 2]
Plant Communications                                    The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes





Figure 1. The diversity and biosynthesis of taxanes.
The central circle illustrates the MEP and MVA pathways, which catalyze the formation of GGPP. The upper section represents the MEP pathway,
synthesizing GGPP from pyruvate, whereas the lower section depicts the MVA pathway, synthesizing GGPP from acetyl-CoA. The first ring displays the
11 known taxane skeletons, from types I to XI. The second ring shows potential intermediates involved in the synthesis of representative compounds. The
third (outermost) ring presents representative compounds derived from the corresponding skeletons. In the color bar, blue indicates taxane skeletons
with known and well-defined metabolic pathways, such as the biosynthesis of paclitaxel; white indicates unknown taxane biosynthetic pathways.


artery disease (PAD) and in-stent restenosis. When delivered    Although the sales of Taxol and its derivatives have exceeded $50
locally via drug-coated balloons (DCBs) or stents, paclitaxel in-     billion, market demand continues to grow. Historically, the acqui-
hibits neointimal hyperplasia by targeting smooth muscle cell     sition of paclitaxel heavily relied on extraction from yew tree tis-
(SMC) migration and proliferation—a mechanism distinct from    sues. This method is clearly unsustainable and environmentally
its microtubule-stabilizing action in cancer (Dake et al., 2016).    unfriendly due to the low yield of paclitaxel, which ranges from
Paclitaxel’s unique mode of action in killing tumor cells sets it   0.001% to 0.05%, even in the most productive species, Taxus
apart from other antitumor compounds such as guanosine     brevifolia (Malik et al., 2011). Subsequently, considerable effort
triphosphate,  colchicine,  vinblastine,  and  podophyllotoxin,    has been devoted to the chemical semi-synthesis of paclitaxel
rendering  it singular among known antitumor agents (Burkhart    using the intermediate baccatin  III as a starting material. This
et al., 1994; Scribano et al., 2021). Moreover, the existing dual-   compound is abundant in the twigs and needles of Taxus species
scenario applications of paclitaxel fully demonstrate the thera-    (Fu et  al., 2009). This method  is currently the mainstream
peutic potential of taxane-derived drugs (Supplemental Table 2).    approach  for paclitaxel production, but  it  will inevitably be

2     Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025


[PDF physical page 3]
The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes                                     Plant Communications

unable  to meet  increasing market demand  in  the  future.    importance. However, even   if  ideal  lead compounds  are
Concurrently, substantial breakthroughs have been made in the     identified through virtual screening, the large-scale production
total chemical synthesis  of  paclitaxel. Since the  first  total    of target taxanes for clinical testing remains challenging; apart
synthesis was reported in 1994, more than 60 research groups    from paclitaxel, the biosynthetic pathways of other taxanes are
have addressed this challenge over the past 30 years, leading      still unclear, making it difficult to advance them into later clinical
to the development of 11 entirely distinct synthetic routes (Min     trials.
et al., 2023). Whereas the total chemical synthesis of paclitaxel
has enhanced  researchers’  understanding  of  its  chemical    Here, we aim to underline the structural diversity of taxanes and
properties,  these  synthetic  routes  remain  unsuitable  for    propose a new perspective toward their biosynthesis, including
commercial production. The primary reason is the excessive    strategies for elucidating biosynthetic pathways, enriching tool-
length of these routes, even for the shortest and most efficient     kits for regulating heterologous expression, understanding the
synthesis currently available (Hu et al., 2021).                        interaction mechanisms of metabolons, and reprogramming
                                                                  modification enzymes under  artificial  intelligence (AI)–based
In addition to the aforementioned chemical synthesis methods,    guidance. By establishing a taxane library through biosynthesis,
biosynthesis represents another highly promising approach for    coupled with AI screening technologies, we believe promising
the production of taxanes. With recent advances in omics tech-    taxanes could be rapidly synthesized for functional validation,
nologies, abundant yew genomic resources have become avail-    thus shortening the development cycle of taxane-derived drugs.
able for the development in the post-genomic era (Guo et al.,    Furthermore, a well-designed plant chassis could be utilized to
2022). Accordingly, the genomic data of three different Taxus    manufacture any taxane compound designed, which  is an
species were reported by independent research groups (Cheng    exciting prospect. In the near future, we have ample reason to
et al., 2021; Song et al., 2021; Xiong et al., 2021), providing a    believe that the value of other taxane alternatives to paclitaxel
wealth  of resources  for  future  exploration  of the dynamic     will be increasingly recognized and validated by researchers.
biosynthetic network of paclitaxel and the post-modification en-
zymes involved in taxane biosynthesis. Shortly thereafter, the
biosynthetic pathway of paclitaxel was separately elucidated by    Diversity of taxanes
Fernie’s group (Zhang et  al., 2023b), Yan’s lab (Jiang et  al.,   The toxicity of yew trees has been widely recognized for thou-
2024a), and Sattely’s lab (McClune et al., 2024). It remains the    sands of years, but it was not until the early 1960s that the initial
only pathway among taxane biosynthetic routes (Figure 1) for     structural elucidations of taxane diterpenes and pseudoalkaloid
which  minimal gene  sets have been  identified  for  Taxol    diterpenoids were reported (Langley et  al., 1962). The term
biosynthesis—even if the reaction order and exact nature of the     ‘‘taxane’’ refers to a broad and diverse class of metabolites
pathway  intermediates  remain  unclear.  Nevertheless, we      initially isolated from species within the genus Taxus (yews).
believe  these approaches  hold  the  greatest  potential  for    With  the  successful  commercialization  of  representative
achieving large-scale paclitaxel production via the redesign of    taxanes, such as  paclitaxel and  its  derivatives  for cancer
plant cell factories in the future.                                    treatment,  the  potential  value  of  taxane compounds has
                                                                   gradually received widespread attention.
With the increasing clinical use of paclitaxel and its derivative
drugs, tumor cells have developed a multidrug-resistant pheno-   By 2018, based on new fingerprint profiling, Taxus species world-
type toward these agents, although the underlying mechanisms    wide had been reclassified into 15 distinct species—10 of which
remain unclear (Yang and Horwitz, 2017). The  initiation  of    are distributed in China (Liu et al., 2018). Nearly 500 structurally
research to discover new taxane compounds with improved    confirmed taxane compounds have been isolated from various
water solubility and tumor-targeted delivery remains an urgent    Taxus species. Here, we illustrate the remaining unidentified
priority  ( Skubnı´k et al., 2021). From another perspective, over    metabolic pathways  of  taxane  precursor  skeletons,  along
the past century, humanity has continuously battled various    with  representative  taxane compounds and  their  potential
infectious  diseases—from  the  1918   flu  to  the  human    intermediates (Figure 1; Supplemental Table 1). By 2021, 11
immunodeficiency virus epidemic in the 1980s, and from early    diterpene  skeletons had been  identified as  precursors  of
21st-century outbreaks of severe acute respiratory syndrome    taxanes based on the arrangement of their fused ring systems.
and Middle East respiratory syndrome to the recent coronavirus   Among these, the biosynthetic pathway that uses the 6/8/6
disease 2019 pandemic. Despite the immense damage these    skeleton with a linear tricyclic ring system as a precursor for the
diseases have inflicted on lives and economies worldwide, they    synthesis of paclitaxel is the only pathway that has been almost
have also driven substantial advances in the pharmaceutical     fully elucidated (highlighted in light blue in Figure 1).
industry, to which plant-derived natural products have made an
indelible contribution (Guo et al., 2022). In response to sudden    According to the existing nuclear magnetic resonance database
outbreaks of epidemic diseases, extensive screening of lead     for taxanes (http://langelabtools.wsu.edu/nmr), there are 353 de-
compounds  is  essential  to  design  novel  drug  scaffolds.     rivatives of the type I taxane skeleton and 126 derivatives of the
However, the limited scale and diversity of screening libraries    type II taxane skeleton, whereas only one derivative has been re-
have  long  represented  bottlenecks  in  the drug  discovery    ported for the type XI taxane skeleton. These reports indicate an
process  (Sadybekov  and  Katritch,  2023),  even  with  the    imbalance and insufficiency in the exploration of derivatives from
availability  of  affordable  high-throughput  screening  (HTS)     different taxane skeletons. There are two possible reasons for this
methods (Blay et al., 2020; Frey et al., 2024). Given the diversity    discrepancy. First, the type I taxane skeleton may serve as a pre-
and plasticity of taxanes, expansion of the taxane compound    cursor for the synthesis of paclitaxel, leading to a higher abun-
library  for  lead compound  screening  holds  considerable   dance of derivatives in Taxus species relative to other taxane

                                                                                 Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025    3


[PDF physical page 4]
Plant Communications                                    The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes

skeletons, which has likely attracted more research interest. Sec-       it is feasible to construct an artificial taxane library comprising mil-
ond, many taxane compounds may be unstable intermediates or     lions  of compounds—far exceeding the number  of taxanes
present in low abundance in Taxus, making their isolation and    currently isolated from Taxus species. This library considerably en-
identification  challenging.  As  previously  mentioned,  the    hances the potential for medicinal chemists to discover promising
increasing incidence of drug resistance associated with pacli-    lead compounds, which may help overcome clinical resistance is-
taxel and its derivatives in clinical settings highlights the urgent    sues associated with paclitaxel and its derivatives. Undoubtedly,
need to expand the taxane compound library for subsequent    the successful construction of a comprehensive taxane library
drug development and optimization. This is a considerable chal-     will be an exciting and highly impactful future development.
lenge that must be prioritized (Galletti et al., 2007). Given the
current  situation,  traditional  methods  of  tissue  extraction
followed  by NMR  structural  identification  are  becoming    Biosynthesis of taxane skeletons
increasingly challenging and inefficient for enriching the taxane   The precursor scaffold—fundamental to the structural diversity of
compound library. However, with the foundation established by    terpenoid natural products—plays a decisive role in determining
complete genome sequencing of three Taxus species, it is only     their physical and biological properties (Leach et al., 2010). For
a matter of time before the genomic data of the remaining 12    taxanes, there are as many as 11 different precursor scaffolds
species are obtained, enabling comprehensive annotation of    (taxane skeletons), which serve as the foundation for generating
the Taxus pangenome. As a result, analysis of omics data to   a diverse library of taxane compounds. In contrast to the type I
identify additional genes related to the biosynthesis of taxane    6/8/6 taxane skeleton (also referred to as ‘‘classical taxanes’’),
skeletons and their intermediates  will be a key strategy for    type V–IX taxane skeletons are known as cyclotaxanes (also
expanding this compound library.                                   called ‘‘complex taxanes’’). Cyclotaxanes are derived from the
                                                               type I 6/8/6 taxane skeleton by incorporating four cross-ring car-
Based on the existing compound library, from a stereochemical    bon–carbon bonds in various combinations, specifically between
perspective, structural diversity is inherently linked to the exis-   C3–C11, C14–C20, C4–C12, and C12–C20 (as indicated on the
tence of stereoisomers. The stereochemical properties of pacli-    corresponding skeletons in Figure 1). The presence of these
taxel influence its binding interactions with biological targets,    cross-ring carbon–carbon bonds adds additional strain to the
thereby affecting its efficacy. For instance, the S-isomer of pacli-    classical type I taxane skeleton, thereby imparting rigidity (i.e.,
taxel exhibits stronger anticancer activity than the R-isomer    reducing conformational freedom); it also creates up to five new
(Sarkar et  al., 2022). From the standpoint of natural-product    stereocenters at positions C3, C4, C11, C12, and C14 (Pan
drug chemistry, the diversity of natural products is not solely    et al., 2024). Among all taxane skeletons, the type IX taxane
dependent on the number of precursor scaffolds but is also    skeleton, which features three cross-ring carbon–carbon bonds,
closely related to the types of modifications that occur on these     is considered the most complex taxane skeleton identified thus
precursor skeletons. Accordingly, we conducted a statistical     far. The compound canataxpropellane, derived from the type IX
analysis of common modifications in taxanes (Figure 2C) to    taxane skeleton and isolated from Taxus canadensis, serves as
facilitate the future enumeration of potential compounds in the   a key representative of complex taxane compounds (Figure 1;
taxane compound library.                                     Supplemental Table 1). Additionally, type II–IV taxane skeletons
                                                                 are  identified  as  ‘‘abeotaxanes’’;  type X  and  XI  taxane
Using the type I 6/8/6 taxane skeleton as an example, the enzyme    skeletons are  referred  to as  ‘‘bicyclic  taxanes.’’ These 11
taxadiene synthase (TXS) catalyzes the formation of taxadiene    skeletons constitute the current precursor compound library of
(taxa-4(20),11(12)-diene). We attempted to estimate the theoretical    taxane compounds. Compared with the classical type I taxane
number of compounds that could be generated from taxadiene af-    skeleton, the biological activities and synthetic pathways of
ter conventional modifications. The taxadiene skeleton contains    taxane compounds derived from the remaining skeletons are
three chiral carbons and seven potential substitution sites, six      still underexplored.
of  which  can  form new  chiral  centers upon  substitution
(Figure  2B).  There  are seven  different  types  of  candidate    Throughout the history of natural-product synthesis, total chem-
substituents (Figure 2B), though not  all potential substitution     ical synthesis has often preceded chemoenzymatic and de novo
sites undergo modification. Computational analysis estimates    biosynthetic methods; this pattern is also applicable to the syn-
that the maximum possible number of derived taxanes exceeds    thesis of taxanes. From the first total chemical synthesis of pacli-
hundreds  of  thousands. However,  given  that 35  precursor    taxel (Nicolaou et al., 1994) to its synthesis in the model plant
derivatives of the 6/8/6 taxane skeleton are currently known, the    Nicotiana benthamiana  in 2023 (Zhang et  al., 2023b), there
total number  of  derivatives could  potentially reach  into the    has been a substantial gap of approximately 30 years. In the
millions. Furthermore, with up to 11 taxane scaffolds available,     field  of  total chemical  synthesis  of complex  taxanes,  the
the scalability of the taxane compound library could exceed tens    research group  led by  Tanja Gaich has made  extensive
of  millions. As shown  in  Figure  2C, we  summarized   all    contributions. In 2020, they achieved the first total synthesis of
modification types catalyzed by cytochrome P450 enzymes    canataxpropellane, representing successful total synthesis of
(CYP450s)   (light  green  region)  and BAHD  (benzylalcohol    the complex type IX taxane skeleton and  its representative
acetyltransferase, anthocyanin O-hydroxycinnamoyltransferase,    derivative  through  organic  chemistry  strategies  (Schneider
hydroxycinnamoyl-CoA:shikimate hydroxycinnamoyl transferase,    et al., 2020). In 2024, their latest work comprised the successful
and  deacetylvindoline  4-O-acetyltransferase)  protein  family     total synthesis of the complex type V,  VII, and IX taxane
enzymes (light yellow region) within taxane biosynthesis. These    skeletons, along with  their representative derivatives. These
enzyme-catalyzed reactions should be regarded as modular build-    achievements constitute milestones in taxane synthesis (Pan
ing blocks. By engineering the stereoselectivity of these enzymes,    et al., 2024). Their innovative design enabled total synthesis of

4     Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025


[PDF physical page 5]
The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes                                     Plant Communications

       A





       B





       C





Figure 2. Different modules used to construct the taxane library.
(A) The TXS open conformation, complexed with three clustered Mg2+ ions and the ligand GGPP, is shown in green. The TXS closed conformation,
complexed with Mg2+ ions and the ligand GGPP and predicted by AlphaFold 3, is shown in sky blue. Three loops functioning as lids are colored salmon
(D80–S93), lemon (S569–R580), and magenta (Y835–E846), respectively.
(B) Left: the structure of taxadiene, with orange-labeled carbon atoms representing the intrinsic chiral centers of the skeleton and blue-labeled carbon
atoms indicating new chiral centers formed after substitution. Center: seven distinct reported modifications of taxadiene; light green indicates regions
catalyzed by CYP450s, and light yellow indicates regions catalyzed by the BAHD protein family. Right: a comparison of the actual number of taxadiene-
derived compounds with the theoretical number of compounds generated by various combinations of modification types.
(C) A comprehensive collection of modification types currently observed in taxane compounds. Modifications catalyzed by CYP450s are shown in light
green, whereas those catalyzed by the BAHD protein family are shown in light yellow.





                                                                                 Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025    5


[PDF physical page 6]
Plant Communications                                    The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes

the most complex taxane skeletons and established a solid    strong discovery potential, then performing a comprehensive
foundation for exploring biosynthetic pathways and elucidating    analysis of its genome or transcriptome to extract relevant infor-
synthetic mechanisms for taxane skeletons.                       mation. In the second scenario, existing enzymes with well-
                                                                defined functions serve as probes to identify enzymes with similar
Considering the limitations of chemical synthesis, environmen-    or novel catalytic activities (Figure 3A).
tally friendly biosynthesis using microorganisms or plants as pri-
mary cell factories has a natural advantage in reducing the     In the process of discovering microbial diterpene cyclases, Liu’s
destruction of precious natural yew resources. Moreover, genet-    group observed that gene clusters for diterpene synthases often
ically well-defined and programmable microbial or plant chassis    contain conserved genes for geranylgeranyl diphosphate syn-
can optimize metabolic pathways to achieve production effi-    thases (GGPPS). Using GGPPS genes as probes, they conduct-
ciencies for taxane skeletons and their derivatives that far exceed   ed mining analyses of genomic data from Hericium erinaceum
those of chemical synthesis. Successful biosynthesis of these   and Corynebacterium striatum, leading to the identification and
precursors will provide robust support for constructing the exten-    characterization of a ubiquinone prenyltransferase A (UbiA)-like
sive taxane compound  library discussed above. Using the   membrane-bound diterpene cyclase, EriG (ent-kaurene oxidase
biosynthesis of several paclitaxel intermediates with the type  I    from Erigeron breviscapus). Subsequently, they used EriG as a
taxane skeleton as an example, researchers have achieved het-    probe  in public databases to  identify a potential diterpene
erologous expression of taxadiene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae    cyclase gene, StlTC (taxane hydroxylase or CYP450 enzyme)
(184.2 mg/L) (Zhang et al., 2023a), Yarrowia lipolytica (101.4 mg/    from Saprospira grandis, which can catalyze the formation of a
L) (Xu et al., 2023), and Bacillus subtilis (390 mg/L) (He et al.,    novel diterpene skeleton (Yang et al., 2017). There are several
2024), as well as expression of taxadien-5α-ol in Escherichia    cases where known diterpene cyclases with well-defined func-
coli (7 mg/L) (Wu et al., 2022) and cyanobacteria (4.32 mg/L)    tions have been used as probes to identify new enzymes in public
(Zhong et al., 2024). For the same reaction volume, the yield of    databases (Li et al., 2023b, 2023c; Mao et al., 2023). In addition to
taxane  intermediates  through  controllable  biosynthesis   is    the use of amino acid sequences as probes, strategies that utilize
several hundred times greater than that of chemical synthesis.    protein domain searches have achieved considerable success in
Additionally, the growth media used for microbial fermentation     identifying  ribosomally  synthesized  and  post-translationally
are readily available and inexpensive, highlighting the immense    modified peptides (RiPPs) with isoprenoid modifications. This
potential of taxane biosynthesis for industrial-scale production.    approach led to the first identification of cyclized C20 and C25
                                                                   prenylations  attached  to  RiPPs  (Hubrich  et   al.,  2024).
The diversity of precursor scaffolds in terpenoid natural products    Additionally, sequence similarity network (SSN) analysis has
often depends on terpene synthases (also known as terpene cy-    yielded  promising  results  in  identifying  hybrid  terpenoid
clases; Vattekkatte et al., 2018). In the biosynthesis of taxane    saccharides (Yuan et al., 2023; Tang and Zou, 2024). Although
skeletons, only one TXS has been identified to date; it catalyzes    AI-based methods demonstrate substantial advantages in accel-
the conversion of geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP, C20) to    erating  the  discovery   of  unknown  terpene  synthases
form the type  I taxane skeleton (Lin et al., 1996; Wildung and    (Samusevich et al., 2024), this approach is currently unsuitable
Croteau, 1996). Whereas type   II terpene cyclases use the     for identifying diterpene cyclases from Taxus due to the lack of
conserved DXDD motif (D = aspartic acid, X = any amino acid)     sufficient datasets.
to protonate the substrate, TXS—similar to most members of
the type  I cyclase family—utilizes three clusters of metal ions
along with  highly conserved motifs (DDXXD, (N/D)DXX(S/T)    Elucidation of the taxane biosynthetic pathway
XXXE, and NSE/DTE; N = asparagine, S = serine, T = threonine,    Building on the successful synthesis of various types of taxane
E = glutamic acid) to remove the diphosphate group from    skeletons, elucidation of the various sets of modifying enzymes
GGPP (ionization), forming a carbocation to initiate the next    that act on each taxane skeleton is crucial for efforts to synthesize
step of catalysis. Based on crystal structure data, TXS exhibits   a diverse library of taxane compounds. For example, regarding
a modular structure with three α-helical domains, which is com-    the biosynthesis of the paclitaxel intermediate baccatin  III, we
mon in diterpene cyclases (Ko¨ ksal et al., 2011). In the absence    previously mentioned that there are currently two pathways. Fer-
of substrate, the substrate-binding pocket of TXS exhibits an    nie’s lab achieved synthesis from GGPP to baccatin III using 13
open conformation (Figure 2A). However, upon binding to the    genes: TXS, two types of oxidases, three BAHD-like enzymes,
three clusters of magnesium ions and the diphosphate group,   and seven CYP450s (Zhang et al., 2023b). In contrast, Yan’s
the conformation of the substrate pocket shifts from open to    lab completed the synthesis with only eight genes: two BAHD-
closed (Figure 2A) (Christianson, 2006). This transition protects     like enzymes and  six CYP450s  (Jiang  et  al., 2024a). This
the carbocation from premature quenching.                         difference suggests  that  the  biosynthesis  of taxanes  is a
                                                        dynamic  synthetic  network  rather  than a  linear  pathway,
With a comprehensive understanding of the existing TXS, we are    although it is important to note that the baccatin III yield of the
now more focused on how to utilize TXS as a probe to discover    13-gene pathway was over 100-fold greater than that of the
new diterpene cyclases from Taxus species that can catalyze    eight-gene pathway (Fernie, 2024).
the formation of the remaining—or even unknown—types of tax-
ane skeletons. Here, we summarize methods used to discover    Taxanes with strong biological activity often involve longer syn-
other terpene cyclases, with the goal of providing insights     thetic pathways. Combined with their inherent instability and
for subsequent identification of new enzymes. There are two sce-    the difficulty of detecting most taxane intermediates, substantial
narios in the process of discovering diterpene cyclases. The first    challenges are involved in identifying the corresponding sets of
involves identifying a species (plant or microorganism) with   enzymes responsible for modifications of each taxane skeleton.

6     Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025


[PDF physical page 7]
The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes                                     Plant Communications

  A





  B





  C





Figure 3. Synthetic biology strategies supporting taxane biosynthesis.
(A) Gene identification in the taxane biosynthetic pathway. This process includes sequential steps such as omics data mining, phylogenetic analysis,
metabolic network analysis, and the assembly of heterologous biosynthetic pathways.
(B) Regulatory strategies for taxane biosynthesis. On the left side of the dashed line is the compartmentalization strategy. The first row depicts organelles,
including the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus; the second row shows the chloroplast and mitochondrion. The right side of the dashed line
presents synthetic biology regulatory toolkits based on the CRISPRi-dCas9 reversible gene circuit platform. This includes CRISPRi-dCas9-based NOR
gate circuits and combinations of promoters and enhancers of varying strengths.
(C) Metabolon engineering strategies for taxane biosynthesis. During substrate channeling, enzymes A, B, and C enable rapid transfer of substrates and
intermediates, ensuring efficient synthesis of the target product E. In the absence of substrate channeling, enzyme A may compete with enzyme D for
substrate I, leading to the formation of the non-target byproduct F. This byproduct may introduce toxic interference in the pathway, considerably im-
pairing the efficiency and yield of the desired product.



                                                                                 Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025    7


[PDF physical page 8]
Plant Communications                                    The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes

The most commonly identified taxane skeleton–modifying en-   ond and third parts, it is crucial to localize relevant enzyme sets to
zymes belong  to two major  families: CYP450 and BAHD    specific subcellular compartments, such as the cytosol or the
(Figure  2C). Among the  four classes  of taxanes,  classical   membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum. By breaking down the
taxanes  currently  have  the  highest number  of  identified    biosynthetic pathway into distinct segments, researchers can uti-
compounds and modifying enzyme types, whereas complex     lize gene-mining strategies to identify missing catalytic enzymes
taxanes  have  the  fewest.  The BAHD  protein  family   is      (i.e., ‘‘black boxes’’) or enhance the substrate selectivity of exist-
responsible for more than 30 different types of modifications on    ing  enzymes  through  directed  evolution.  Ultimately,  this
the  type    I  taxane  skeleton,  whereas  three  types  of    approach will enable the linkage of upstream and downstream
modifications  have  been  identified   for  complex  taxane     catalytic steps, leading to the complete elucidation of the taxane
skeletons (Lange and Conner, 2021).                               biosynthetic pathway.


In the broader field of phytochemistry, CYP450s—members of     AI, particularly deep learning, has emerged as a transformative
the  heme-dependent  superfamily—participate  in numerous    force in studies of biosynthetic pathways, achieving remarkable
oxidation reactions of plant-derived natural products (Zhang    progress in the synthesis and discovery of natural products.
and Wang, 2022). During taxane biosynthesis, they are involved    Figure 4A  illustrates a  deep-learning-based framework  for
in various modifications, including hydroxylation, carbonylation,    natural  product   prediction   that   integrates  data  from
epoxidation, and formation of the oxetane ring (Figure 2C).    biosynthetic  pathway  databases  (e.g., KEGG,  Reactome,
Oxetane ring modifications have only been detected in classical    MetaCyc), uses SMILES to represent molecular structures, uti-
taxanes and abeotaxanes; this unique modification is crucial for     lizes graph neural networks to extract molecular topological fea-
the biological activity of taxanes. According to reports from    tures, and combines Transformer encoders to further learn mo-
Fernie’s  lab, a newly  identified C4β–C20 epoxidase, which    lecular sequences and contextual information. This framework
belongs to the α-ketoglutarate/Fe(II)-dependent dioxygenase    enables the prediction of natural product structures, annotates
family (2OGD), can co-catalyze the synthesis of the oxetane    key functional groups, and provides guidance to optimize natural
ring on the type I taxane skeleton in conjunction with T5αH. More-    product synthesis. Biosynthetic pathways are essential for un-
over, two 2OGDs have been identified as T1βOH enzymes exhib-    derstanding the formation of natural products within biological
iting T9αOH activity (McClune et al., 2024). With an additional two    systems. However, their complexity and incomplete elucidation
deacetylases, a large amount of baccatin III was biosynthesized    often hinder their application in drug discovery, metabolic engi-
using the 19-gene set. In contrast, Yan’s lab achieved the    neering, and synthetic biology. Traditional methods for the anal-
synthesis of the oxetane ring using a newly identified CYP450    ysis of biosynthetic pathways primarily rely on manual annota-
enzyme, taxane oxetanase 1 (TOT1). Furthermore, CYP725A4 is     tion,   experimental    validation,   and   knowledge-driven
able to complete the synthesis of the oxetane ring through    computational approaches. These methods are time-consuming
consecutive catalysis, highlighting the substrate catalytic promis-   and labor-intensive; they struggle to manage the broad chemical
cuity of CYP450s (Zhao et al., 2024).                                  diversity and complex networks involved  in natural product
                                                                    biosynthesis. To  address  these  challenges,  AI-based  ap-
Among the enzyme sets responsible for taxane skeleton modi-    proaches have gradually become powerful tools for automating
fications, the BAHD protein family is essential for generating   pathway prediction, optimizing synthesis, and discovering novel
taxane diversity. According to our data, acylation modifications    bioactive compounds. In recent years, the potential of AI in
commonly include conventional groups such as  (O)-acetyl,    biosynthetic pathway research has been widely demonstrated.
(O)-benzoyl, O-β-D-glucopyranosyl, and O-cinnamoyl. Addi-    For example, NPClassifier utilizes deep-learning techniques to
tionally, acylation with cinnamoyl derivatives and alkanoyl acids    automate the structural classification of natural products, linking
(where 3 ≤n ≤10, with n representing the number of carbon    molecular structures to their biosynthetic pathways and providing
atoms) represents the second most common category of modi-   an efficient tool for studies of natural product biosynthesis (Kim
fication (Figure 2C). Once a comprehensive understanding of    et  al.,  2021).  In  the  field  of  metabolic pathway  design,
taxane skeleton modifications made by key enzyme sets  is   MooSeeker, a multi-objective optimization-based tool, integrates
achieved,  it  is only a matter of time  until researchers can    various biological parameters (e.g., pathway length, energy effi-
select  appropriate  probe  sequences  to  identify unknown    ciency, and product yield) to optimize metabolic networks, offer-
modifying enzymes.                                                ing comprehensive design solutions for metabolic engineering
                                                          (Cao  et   al.,  2023).  Deep-learning-focused  research  has
Elucidation of the taxane biosynthetic pathway critically depends    propelled  further  development  in  this  field.  For  instance,
on detecting stable intermediates. Here, we prioritize the struc-    BioNavi-NP combines molecular Transformer neural networks
tural dissection of taxanes. Unlike the process of chemical lysis    with planning algorithms to predict biosynthetic pathways with
in organic synthesis, we are not concerned with the stereoiso-    exceptionally high accuracy, achieving over 90% recognition of
meric properties of taxanes but rather use this approach to   known pathways in tested compounds (Zheng et al., 2022). More-
monitor the progress of their biosynthesis. This process can be    over, by using a retrieval-enhanced dual-view retrosynthesis
divided into three main parts. First, confirmation of the taxane    model, READRetro has made substantial advances in predicting
skeleton, which primarily involves identifying novel taxane diter-    pathways for complex plant secondary metabolites. Its general-
pene synthases. Second, biosynthesis of key taxane intermedi-     ization and pathway exploration capabilities have been validated
ates, which focuses on identifying enzyme sets that act on the    (Kim et  al., 2024). These studies demonstrate the immense
precursor skeleton. Third, synthesis of the final taxane com-    potential   of   AI   in   biosynthetic  pathway   applications
pound, which depends on identifying the enzyme sets respon-    (Supplemental Table  3), accelerating pathway  analysis and
sible for the modification of metabolic intermediates. For the sec-    providing new solutions for metabolic engineering and natural

8     Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025


[PDF physical page 9]
The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes                                     Plant Communications

      A





      B





Figure 4. Deep learning integrates natural product prediction and protein evolution to accelerate molecular design.
(A) A deep-learning-based framework for natural product prediction. The process involves obtaining biosynthetic pathway and molecular structure data
from databases (e.g., KEGG, Reactome, MetaCyc); using SMILES to represent molecular structures; utilizing graph neural networks to extract molecular
topological features; combining these features with Transformer encoders to learn molecular sequences and contextual information; and finally, pre-
dicting possible molecular structures of natural products, annotating key functional groups (in red) and pathway information, and guiding the synthesis
and optimization of natural products.
(B) AI-based directed evolution of proteins. A variant library is generated through gene diversification; variants are amplified, expressed, and screened;
and mutation data are integrated with artificial intelligence models to predict protein performance and function. The AI model uses the relationship
between screening results and sequence information to guide the next round of mutation design, enabling rapid, directional optimization of protein
performance and accelerating the process of protein engineering.


product synthesis. Such methods are  likely to advance the    chassis  (Dahmani  et   al.,  2023).  Metabolons  enable  rapid
identification  of taxane biosynthetic pathways  into a more    substrate catalysis by forming transient protein complexes that
efficient and possibly automated era.                               include a substrate channel, wherein the product of one enzyme
                                                                                      is  directly  transferred from  its  active  site  to serve as  the
                                                                  substrate  for  the  active  site  of  a  subsequent  enzyme.
Dynamic synthesis network of taxanes guided by            Furthermore,  they  regulate  metabolic  flux  via  binding and
metabolons within enzyme-enzyme complexes               dissociation   of  components,   strongly   influencing   global
Metabolons are recognized as dynamic enzyme-enzyme assem-    metabolism (Zhang and Fernie, 2021). As highlighted  in our
blies that can form during the synthesis of secondary metabolites,    previous review, mere physical interactions between enzymes
either through endogenous or heterologous expression in plant    are insufficient to establish the existence of metabolons. Rather,

                                                                                 Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025    9


[PDF physical page 10]
Plant Communications                                    The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes

functional channeling experiments—such as direct measurements     inhibited via rapid glucosylation catalyzed by the soluble uridine
of substrate channeling—are essential for validation. In paclitaxel    diphosphate-glucosyltransferase UGT85B1  (Ho¨sel and Schiel,
biosynthesis, it is crucial to experimentally confirm the potential    1984). Arrangement of the biosynthetic pathway in a metabolon
dynamic  assembly  and  substrate  channeling  of  relevant   can enhance the conversion of unstable and highly reactive
enzymes.  Numerous  methods  are  currently  available  to    intermediates  into  the  end  product.  Additionally,  dhurrin
determine  the  components  and  functions  of  metabolons,    biosynthesis  intermediates  are  labile  and  highly  cytotoxic
including isotope dilution to track substrate flow; fluorescence    (Winkel, 2004). Therefore, researchers have hypothesized that a
resonance  energy  transfer and  bioluminescence  resonance    metabolon  is formed  in sorghum seedlings to support rapid
energy transfer to observe transient enzyme interactions; and    synthesis of dhurrin and to isolate intermediates from other
co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry to capture and     cellular components (Dastmalchi and Facchini, 2016; Laursen
analyze enzyme complexes (Zhang and Fernie, 2021). Effective    et al., 2016). Consistent with this hypothesis, in vitro experiments
combination of these techniques can facilitate the identification    have revealed that the dhurrin biosynthetic pathway is highly
and validation of metabolons involved in paclitaxel biosynthesis.    channeled (Nielsen et al., 2008; Møller, 2010; Jensen et al., 2011).
The dynamic assembly and disassembly of metabolons can
rapidly regulate metabolic flux within pathways, particularly at   The complex and highly branched phenylpropanoid pathway
branch points. A comprehensive understanding of metabolons    has  been  suggested   to  operate   within  metabolons.
allows  optimization  of metabolic  flux by  regulating enzyme    This arrangement enables efficient channeling of intermediates
expression levels across the synthetic pathway via selection of   between  various  enzymes,  reducing  the   risk  of  toxic
appropriate expression elements  in  toolkits and the use  of   compound accumulation within the cell. Phenylpropanoid me-
compartmentalization strategies to alleviate stress on the host’s    tabolons may serve as a mechanism for sequestering toxic me-
metabolic network. Furthermore, this understanding can reveal    tabolites and protecting them from competing metabolic path-
regulatory  factors involved  in the heterologous synthesis  of   ways (Ralston and Yu, 2006). Similarly, complex metabolic
paclitaxel. When  integrated  with  precise  gene  regulation    pathways, such as the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, consist
technologies, this approach could ultimately enhance paclitaxel    of numerous enzymatic steps  that  require  effective mass
production efficiency. The presence of a metabolon enables    transfer of intermediates between active sites. The formation
spatial  clustering  of  enzymes  that  catalyze  consecutive    of  metabolons  within  the TCA  cycle,  as  well  as  the
reactions, thereby  facilitating  rapid and  efficient  transfer  of    interactions between  malate dehydrogenase (mMDH) and
metabolic intermediates while reducing intermediate loss and     citrate synthase  (CS), has received considerable research
the formation of toxic byproducts (Møller, 2010). For example, in    attention. Direct evidence of metabolon formation has been
dhurrin biosynthesis, highly unstable and cytotoxic intermediates    observed between recombinantly produced mMDH and CS
are  rapidly  converted  through  metabolic  channeling;  the    (Bulutoglu et al., 2016).
metabolon  structure  effectively protects  cells from  potential
toxic damage.                                                                                    It has been reported that metabolons may also form within the
                                                                        paclitaxel  synthesis  pathway.  5(12)-Oxa-3(11)-cyclotaxane
As shown in Figure 3C, the presence of a metabolon ensures    (OCT) and 5(11)-Oxa-3(11)-cyclotaxane (iso-OCT) may serve as
that  metabolic  intermediates  are  rapidly  and  accurately    intermediates in downstream pathways in Taxus species; they
transferred  between  enzymes,  minimizing  loss  of  these    are potentially more toxic than T5α-ol and thus are degraded by
intermediates to nonproductive pathways and reducing the    the plant’s underground metabolism. This hypothesis is sup-
potential  formation  of  toxic  byproducts.  In  biochemical    ported by findings that only a small amount of OCT was detected
pathways,  metabolic  intermediates  can  sometimes  be     in Taxus plant cell cultures (Edgar et al., 2016). It is conceivable
unstable or reactive, posing a risk of cellular damage  if they    that these oxygenated taxanes are the primary products of
are not rapidly converted to the next product in the pathway.   CYP725A4, whereas other diterpenoids may result from oxida-
By  physically  locating enzymes  that  catalyze consecutive     tion processes, although in lower quantities and with higher en-
reactions  in  close  proximity, a  functional metabolon can    ergy barriers relative to epoxidation (Jaladanki et  al., 2020).
ensure that these intermediates are efficiently channeled into   Some  of  these oxygenated compounds may be  transient
productive pathways, minimizing their exposure to potentially    metabolites  that degrade  into more  stable forms, are not
damaging conditions (Møller, 2010).                             metabolized during the resting stage, or are produced as late-
                                                              stage  products  due  to  increased  nicotinamide  adenine
For example, dhurrin biosynthesis is a metabolic pathway that ex-    dinucleotide phosphate and cofactor availability or structural
hibits such a protective mechanism. Aldoximes are important in    rearrangements (Nowicki, 2000).
dhurrin  biosynthesis;  they  also  serve  as  precursors  for
glucosinolate biosynthesis (Jørgensen et al., 2005). These highly    Metabolons play critical roles in both detoxification and meta-
reactive molecules can  inhibit enzymes and have  potential    bolic regulation, allowing cells to rapidly adapt to environmental
cytotoxic effects (Sakurada et al., 2009). Cyanogenic glycosides   changes by modifying  their composition and  activity.  This
release  cyanide—a  harmful  compound—during  enzymatic    enables efficient regulation of metabolic flux in response to
breakdown, serving as a herbivore defense mechanism (Ohlen    fluctuations in nutrient availability, oxygen levels, and other envi-
et al., 2017). Metabolic channeling between closely associated    ronmental signals. Given the recent development of a CRISPR-
active sites is observed in this case to prevent the cell from   based strategy to create  artificial metabolons (Mitkas et  al.,
exposure to its own toxic intermediates. Cyanohydrin undergoes    2022; Zhang and  Fernie, 2022),   it  is conceivable  that the
decomposition  to  form  p-hydroxybenzaldehyde  and  toxic    advantages conferred by metabolons can be integrated into
hydrogen  cyanide.  In  living systems,  this decomposition  is    contemporary metabolic engineering workflows.

10    Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025


[PDF physical page 11]
The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes                                     Plant Communications

Creation of synthetic toolkits for taxane production           rate-limiting steps. These include enzymatic acetylation for inter-
                                                           mediate protection, compartmentalization of the endoplasmic re-
Synthetic biology operates on the design-build-test-learn frame-    ticulum, and overexpression of taxadiene synthase along with
work, an interdisciplinary field integrating biology, engineering,    P450-reductase fusion proteins. Enzyme grouping strategies
computer science, and related disciplines. Its goal is to enable    such as protein scaffolding, organelle targeting, and enzyme
programmable control over foundational biological entities—    fusion have demonstrated improved taxane production. Scaf-
including microorganisms, plants, and plant suspension cells,    folding reduces taxadiene leakage, and fusion enzymes increase
and mammalian cells—to produce high-value products such as    oxidized product levels by threefold. Additionally, dynamic regu-
active natural compounds, functional proteins, antibodies, and     lation and synthetic microbial consortia can further optimize the
vaccines (Liu and Stewart, 2015; Mortimer, 2018). Over the past    metabolic burden. Future  efforts should integrate metabolic
few decades, important advancements have been made  in    modeling with protein engineering to achieve scalable production
using microorganisms to synthesize complex natural products.    (Mutanda et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2024; Yin et al., 2025). Therefore,
Achievements include the de novo synthesis of artemisinic acid   enzyme set grouping and intermediate  stabilization  will be
(Paddon et al., 2013), cannabinoids (Luo et al., 2019), tropane    essential to ultimately obtain the desired taxane products. A
alkaloids (Srinivasan and Smolke, 2020), vinblastine (Zhang    secondary goal is optimization of the metabolic pathway. In
et  al., 2022), and QS21 (saponin adjuvant derived from the     particular, it is important to identify which enzymes are limiting
Quillaja saponaria  tree)  (Liu  et  al., 2024)  in  S.  cerevisiae.    under production conditions; this information helps to eliminate
Nonetheless, there are limitations in expressing plant-derived    bottlenecks and enhance  the  yield  of  target  metabolites.
enzyme sets via microbial chassis for the production of complex    Metabolic flux analysis in plants is considered a key strategy for
natural products. For instance, many enzymes fail to fold into the    the rapid identification of such metabolic bottlenecks (Shih and
correct conformation or tend to form inclusion bodies in E. coli    Morgan, 2020; Koley et al., 2024). Although this strategy has
(Sabate et  al., 2010). Additionally, the correct expression of    not yet been used to optimize the taxane metabolic pathway,
CYP450s in E. coli or yeast often requires redesigning protein   we  believe   it  could  substantially  improve  taxane  yields.
localization  or  folding  pathways.  Therefore,  the de  novo    Furthermore, a rich library of regulatory elements is crucial for
synthesis of taxanes in microbial chassis remains challenging    metabolic engineering. A library of synthetic promoters with
because the catalytic  activity of CYP450s  is imperative  for    varying strengths has been established (Jores et al., 2021) and
functional taxane biosynthesis.                               can be used to regulate gene expression levels within the
                                                             taxane synthesis network. This library provides a foundation for
Plants, as powerful and reliable chassis in the field of synthetic    overcoming metabolic bottlenecks. New synthetic enhancer
biology, are increasingly recognized for their ability to synthesize   sequences have also been  identified  that can elevate the
complex natural products. Unlike microorganisms that rely on    expression levels of heterologous genes in the tobacco chassis
carbon sources from growth media, plant chassis utilize natural    (Jores  et   al.,  2020).  Despite  these  advances,  the  high
carbon  fixation through photosynthesis to absorb CO2  (Lin    compatibility  required  between  enhancers  and  promoters
et  al.,  2023b).  This  strategy  positions them  as  a more    presents  a  challenge  in  designing  expression  constructs.
sustainable and environmentally  friendly platform  for  future    However,  insulator-like sequences have been  reported  to
advancements   in  synthetic  biology   (Liu  et   al.,  2023).    regulate the interactions between enhancers and promoters,
Furthermore,  plant chassis possess a  rich endomembrane    enabling target genes to be expressed at high levels and with
system and organelles that provide a favorable environment for    greater stability (Park et al., 2021).
expressing enzyme sets involved in taxane synthesis. These
characteristics make them an ideal model system for studying    Compartmentalization is a key strategy used by plants to accu-
taxane biosynthesis. To date, mainstream plant chassis include    mulate  high  levels  of  potentially  toxic  metabolites  without
tobacco leaves, rice endosperm, tobacco  fruits, suspension    affecting  their  viability  (Molina-Hidalgo  et  al.,  2021).  In N.
cell cultures of various species, and hairy roots (Lin et  al.,    benthamiana,  the  combination  of  chloroplastic  metabolic
2023c). Although Taxus cell cultures have made considerable    engineering with strategies to expand the precursor GGPP pool
advancements  in  paclitaxel  bioproduction  (Brzycki Newton     facilitated an increase in taxadiene yield. In that study, one
et   al.,  2023),  tobacco  heterologous  expression  systems   phenomenon sparked  our  interest:  the  wild-type enzymes
demonstrate superior potential for elucidating cryptic taxane    derived from Taxus species, when heterologously expressed in
biosynthetic  pathways.  N.  benthamiana  has   attracted    N. benthamiana, were distributed across various organelles,
considerable attention due to its large biomass, short growth    preventing  complete  synthesis  of  taxanes.  Researchers
cycle, and ease of genetic manipulation, gradually becoming   compared the effects of cytoplasmic accumulation and chloro-
the primary chassis for taxane biosynthesis. In the following    plast compartmentalization on taxane synthesis. The results
section, we propose a modular strategy for taxane production   showed that the compartmentalization strategy increased yield
based on the tobacco chassis (Figure 3B).                     by approximately 20-fold  (Li et  al., 2019), emphasizing the
                                                            importance  of compartmentalization  in taxane biosynthesis.
Given the complex enzyme set involved in taxane biosynthesis, a    Moreover,  the  chloroplastic  metabolic  engineering  strategy
primary goal is ensuring that all enzymes achieve correct folding     utilized in that study involved a relatively small set of enzymes,
and expression. The detection of enzyme activity relies on identi-   and its applicability to multi-enzyme catalysis for taxane synthe-
fying intermediates through mass spectrometry. However, as     sis requires exploration. It is still unclear whether other organ-
previously mentioned, most taxane intermediates are unstable.     elles, including the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus,
Recent advances in taxane biosynthesis have made extensive   and mitochondria, can contribute to the accumulation of taxane
progress in stabilizing metabolic intermediates and optimizing    intermediates. However, relevant localization signal sequences

                                                                                 Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025   11


[PDF physical page 12]
Plant Communications                                    The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes

have been elucidated, providing a solid foundation for future    However,  the  effectiveness  of  substrate  channeling   is
research on compartmentalization strategies in other organelles    dependent on specific conditions (DeLisa and Conrado, 2009;
and the targeted transport of taxane intermediates.                 Keasling, 2012). As the development of natural or synthetic
                                                                             cellular compartments continues to grow in synthetic biology,
An effective strategy to improve taxane biosynthesis involves the    the incorporation of transport metabolons into organelles to
integration of plant cell culture systems with metabolon engineer-    regulate the movement of intermediates across  intracellular
ing to refine the spatial and functional organization of pathway en-   membranes represents a promising avenue for future research
zymes. Through synthetic scaffolding and protein complex engi-    (Oreb, 2020).
neering, metabolic flux can be enhanced by promoting substrate
channeling, increasing enzyme colocalization, and reducing non-       It has recently become possible to construct an artificial com-
specific interactions. This approach is grounded in mechanistic    plex between an endogenous sugar transporter and a heterolo-
insights  into the taxane  biosynthetic network (Perez-Matas   gous xylose isomerase in S. cerevisiae (Thomik et al., 2017).
et al., 2023), particularly the roles of key intermediates such as    Direct  channeling  of  xylose  via  the  transporter–enzyme
baccatin III and 10-deacetylbaccatin III, which serve as immedi-   complex accelerated xylose consumption and  substantially
ate  precursors  to  paclitaxel  and  docetaxel  (Thornburg    reduced  the  production  of  xylitol  as  an  undesired  side
et al., 2017).                                                  product while increasing ethanol production. This underlying
                                                                        principle could likely be implemented in other biotechnological
Metabolon engineering achieves this refinement by targeting the    applications.
organization of these enzymes within the cell. Techniques such
as protein engineering, synthetic biology, and metabolic engi-     Efforts have been made to create enzyme cascades as metabo-
neering are utilized to create or modify metabolons that favor tax-    lon biomimics, but there is limited understanding of enzyme–
ane production. For instance, scaffold proteins may be intro-   enzyme interactions in natural metabolons due to their dissocia-
duced  to  serve as  organizational  hubs,  bringing  together     tion during isolation. Protein engineering and computer modeling
enzymes  that  catalyze  sequential  reactions  in  the  taxane    have been used to propose a symmetric model for the mMDH-
pathway. Alternatively, they may enhance affinity between en-    CS-aconitase complex in the Krebs cycle metabolon (Wu and
zymes, ensuring efficient intermediate transfer and minimizing    Minteer, 2015). Within this model, a continuous surface region
off-target reactions.                                                  of  positive  potential  was   illustrated  through  numerical
                                                                      simulation, enabling efficient substrate channeling within the
The isotope dilution technique is commonly used as a reliable    complex.
method to demonstrate substrate channeling. In this method,
an isotopically labeled  initial substrate  is introduced  into a   One  notable  challenge  in  metabolon  engineering  is  the
series of reactions; isotope accumulation in the final product    complexity and redundancy of metabolic pathways. The taxane
is measured after the addition of a large amount of unlabeled    biosynthetic pathway, in particular, is known for its intricate reg-
intermediate. If the intermediate is channeled, isotope accumula-    ulatory mechanisms and the presence of alternative metabolic
tion in the final product will not be affected by the unlabeled    routes. Thus, a comprehensive understanding of the pathway’s
intermediate  because  the enzyme  exclusively  utilizes  the    architecture and regulation is crucial for successful engineering
labeled  intermediate  channeled  through  the  metabolon     efforts.
(Achnine  et  al.,  2004).  Isotope  dilution  experiments have
successfully demonstrated  substrate  channeling  in  various    Given that the aforementioned strategies involve regulating taxane
enzyme complexes of the TCA cycle, both in vitro and in plant    biosynthesis within a single temporal or spatial dimension, the uti-
mitochondria (Sumegi  et  al., 1991;  Williams  et  al.,  2011).     lization of a CRISPRi-dCas9-based reversible gene circuit plat-
However, this method has not yet been utilized to investigate    form in plants offers another powerful approach for precise spatio-
oxaloacetic acid channeling within the MDH-CS metabolon    temporal control of the synthetic network. This approach further
(Omini et al., 2024).                                           reduces the toxic impact of metabolic products on the tobacco
                                                                    chassis. The use of this system to construct gene circuits offers
In research on dhurrin, a styrene–maleic acid copolymer was    several potential advantages. First, it allows dynamic and revers-
used to isolate the intact metabolon via affinity chromatography     ible regulation. Second,  it enables easy scalability by adding
(Lee et al., 2016). This approach avoids the use of detergents,   more single-guide RNA units to build hierarchical logic gates, as
which disrupt complexes, and fusion tags, which can interfere    well as the ability to simultaneously target multiple endogenous
with protein folding. It has the potential to enable researchers     sites without requiring modified or added recognition elements
to  isolate  all molecular components of metabolons and to     in promoters. Moreover, a toolkit of engineered repressible pro-
characterize membrane platforms hosting metabolic machinery.    moters of different strengths has shown promising results in the
Further investigations using similar strategies can be conducted    application of this gene circuit platform (Khan et al., 2024). Once
on various non-metabolic components that co-precipitate or   a NOT OR (i.e., NOR) logic gate is established, adjustment of its
co-localize with metabolic enzymes (Møller, 2010; Dastmalchi    parameters will be sufficient for constructing complex multilayer
et al., 2016).                                                            logic circuits. We believe that the establishment of multilayer
                                                           Boolean logic gate circuits will enable precise spatiotemporal
The concept of substrate channeling is highly intuitive and has    control over the  catalytic synthesis  of taxanes by complex
been widely accepted by the metabolic engineering community   enzyme sets. Coupled with the synthetic  toolkits mentioned
as a means to address metabolic bottlenecks through the con-    above, we are therefore optimistic about the future large-scale
struction of artificial protein complexes (Dueber et al., 2009).    production of taxanes in plant chassis.

12    Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025


[PDF physical page 13]
The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes                                     Plant Communications

AI-guided CYP450 engineering to synthesize ‘‘new’’        CYP450s  that  are   difficult  to  identify  within  the  taxane
taxanes                                                            biosynthetic pathway. In previous studies regarding the directed
                                                                     evolution of CYP450s, high-throughput screening methods were
Directed evolution is the primary method for optimizing and    successfully  utilized to enhance enzyme  activity (Ruff et  al.,
developing protein variants in the laboratory. Through an iterative    2012) and  alter  the  stereoselectivity  of  carbene  reactions
process of mutation and screening, it has become a key technol-    (Brandenberg et  al., 2019). These methods often require the
ogy  in protein engineering (Wang et  al., 2021). Despite  its    careful design of chromogenic groups in the products, enabling
considerable  success,  directed  evolution  faces  a  major    rapid identification of improved mutants through flow cytometry–
challenge: the limitation of the protein fitness landscape, which   based sorting or spectrophotometric detection. When directed
arises from  resource consumption and  time  costs  in  the    evolution of CYP450s is conducted for selective hydroxylation
experimental  screening  process—especially when  handling    of   natural   products,   factors  such  as   regioselectivity,
large-scale variant libraries—where screening efficiency is often     diastereoselectivity, and activity must be considered (O’Reilly
low (Li et al., 2023a). Figure 4B illustrates an AI-based directed    et   al.,  2011).  In  the  synthesis  of  natural  products  such
evolution framework  in which a variant  library  is generated    as steroids (Acevedo-Rocha et al., 2018), nigelladine A (Loskot
through gene diversification, amplified, expressed, and screened    et al., 2017), artemisinin (Zhang et al., 2012), and parthenolide
to identify promising protein candidates. Mutation data are then    (Kolev  et   al.,  2014),  directed  evolution  strategies  have
integrated with AI models (Supplemental Table 3) to predict   been  successfully  implemented  to  optimize  the  substrate
protein performance and guide the next round of mutation     stereoselectivity of CYP450s, although the achievement of site-
design,  thereby  accelerating  the  optimization  of  protein    specific and  highly  selective  catalysis remains  challenging.
functionality. With the development of AI technologies, deep   Some researchers have demonstrated that AI tools can enhance
learning and language models have gradually become effective    the activity of P450 enzymes (Jang et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
tools for enhancing the efficiency of directed evolution. Through    2024). In the elucidation of most natural product biosynthetic
deep learning, AI can learn the relationship between protein    pathways,  identification  of  the  missing  P450  enzyme   is
sequences and functions, predict the fitness of mutants, and     particularly important due to its functional diversity. At present,
generate the most promising candidate variants, thus enabling    the application of AI models to alter P450 stereoselectivity and
efficient  screening  across  a  broader  fitness  landscape   expand  their  catalytic  substrate scope remains  difficult  for
(Ramı´rez-Palacios and  Marrink,  2023).  Additionally,  protein    several reasons.  First, AI models  still exhibit deficiencies  in
language models (such as the evolutionary scale modeling     interpretability and reliability with regard to enzymatic catalysis,
[ESM] series) learn representations from large-scale, unlabeled    given that they cannot  fully comprehend catalytic chirality or
protein  sequences,  enabling  them  to  uncover  potential     stereoselectivity (Zhou and Huang, 2024); they often  fail to
functions and  structural  features  of  proteins  (Rives  et  al.,    correctly interpret the input task. Second, CYP450s involved in
2021a). This allows effective prediction of the fitness of unseen    natural product catalysis are often difficult to purify and test at
mutants, leading to improved screening efficiency (Rives et al.,    scale in vitro, resulting in delayed experimental data feedback.
2021b; Lin et al., 2023a). Complementing these features, multi-    Although the aforementioned high-throughput methods have miti-
sequence  alignment  techniques combined  with  AI  further    gated this issue, their applicability is not universal. Moreover, the
improve the accuracy of mutation effect predictions by learning    lack of high-quality data severely compromises the training effi-
evolutionary information from protein families (Biswas et  al.,    cacy of large-scale models. In the future, efforts should also be
2021). Beyond sequence and evolutionary information, protein    focused on leveraging empirical data accumulated from traditional
three-dimensional  structures  provide  important  clues  for    directed evolution to train appropriate models capable of disen-
function prediction. With breakthroughs  in protein structure    tangling CYP450 catalytic promiscuity. We believe that AI-based
prediction technologies such as AlphaFold 3 (Abramson et al.,    directed evolution strategies will lay the foundation for the com-
2024), the application of structural information has become a    plete biosynthesis of taxanes.
key  direction  in  deep  learning  models.  SESNet,  which
combines protein sequence and structural information while
incorporating attention mechanisms,  effectively predicts the   Perspective
fitness of protein mutants. This model utilizes local evolutionary    Taxanes, a prominent class of diterpenoid natural products, have
context  from  homologous  sequences,  global  evolutionary    revolutionized cancer therapy since the commercialization of
information, and the  protein  structure microenvironment  to    paclitaxel (Taxol) in 1993. Derived primarily from yew trees (genus
precisely  capture  the  effects  of  mutations  on  function,    Taxus), taxanes exhibit potent antitumor activity by stabilizing mi-
outperforming existing models (Li et al., 2023a). Recently, the    crotubules, leading to disrupted mitosis and the onset of cell
EVOLVEpro method—combining protein language models with    death. Despite their clinical success and a cumulative market
a few-shot learning framework—has rapidly improved protein ac-    value exceeding $50 billion, the sustainable production of tax-
tivity  with  minimal  experimental  data,  demonstrating  the    anes remains a substantial challenge.  Traditional extraction
immense potential of AI in protein engineering (Jiang et  al.,   methods from yew tree tissues are environmentally unsustainable
2024b).  These  AI-driven  innovations  greatly  enhance  the   and  yield  paclitaxel  in  minimal amounts  (0.001%–0.05%),
screening  efficiency  and  accuracy  of  directed  evolution,    requiring the exploration of alternative production strategies.
providing more powerful tools for the field of protein engineering.
                                                          Chemical semi-synthesis using baccatin III—an abundant inter-
Here, we emphasize the modification of CYP450s’ stereoselectiv-    mediate  from  Taxus  species—has  been  the  mainstream
ity through AI-based directed evolution strategies (Supplemental    approach. However, this method  is insufficient to meet the
Table  3),  thereby supplementing  the  catalytic  reactions  of    increasing global demand for taxanes. Total chemical synthesis,

                                                                                 Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025   13


[PDF physical page 14]
Plant Communications                                    The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes

although valuable for advancing our understanding of taxane    gent need for innovative production strategies. Biosynthesis,
chemistry, is hindered by lengthy and inefficient routes unsuitable    supported by comprehensive genomic data and advanced meta-
for commercial-scale production. Consequently, biosynthesis    bolic engineering techniques, likely offers a sustainable and effi-
has emerged as a highly promising alternative, leveraging ad-    cient pathway to meet this global demand.
vances in omics technologies and genomic resources from Taxus
species to unravel the intricate biosynthetic pathways of taxanes.   The structural diversity of taxanes, coupled with the potential for
                                                                 extensive modification through enzyme engineering, positions
Recent breakthroughs in elucidating the paclitaxel biosynthetic   them as versatile candidates for next-generation anticancer ther-
pathway  by  multiple  research  groups  highlight  important    apies. The integration of AI into this landscape accelerates dis-
milestones.  These  comprehensive  pathways,  involving  a    covery and optimization processes, enabling rapid generation
dynamic network of enzymes—including CYP450s and BAHD    of novel taxane derivatives with tailored properties. Metabolon
acyltransferases—provide a foundation for metabolic engineer-    engineering and compartmentalization strategies are likely to
ing efforts aimed at enhancing taxane production. The integration     further enhance the efficiency and stability of taxane biosyn-
of AI, particularly deep learning, into synthetic biology offers     thesis,  resolving challenges created by unstable and  toxic
transformative potential. AI-driven tools can accelerate the dis-    intermediates.
covery and  optimization  of  biosynthetic pathways,  predict
enzyme functions, and design  efficient metabolic networks,   As research progresses, the establishment  of robust plant
thus overcoming traditional limitations in pathway elucidation    chassis and synthetic toolkits will be instrumental in realizing
and enzyme engineering.                                         the full potential of taxanes. Collaboration between computa-
                                                                            tional tools and experimental biology will streamline biosynthetic
The structural diversity of taxanes—with over 21 000 reported   pathway elucidation and pave the way for large-scale, sustain-
chemical structures and 11 precursor skeletons—underscores    able production of high-value taxane compounds. This holistic
the vast potential for discovering novel taxane derivatives with    approach promises to overcome current production bottlenecks,
improved pharmacological properties. Engineering plant cell fac-    ensuring that taxanes continue to play a crucial role in cancer
tories, such as N. benthamiana, equipped with optimized biosyn-    therapy and beyond.
thetic pathways and synthetic toolkits, holds robust promise for
large-scale, sustainable production of diverse taxanes. Compart-     In summary, the future of taxane synthesis lies in the seamless
mentalization and metabolon  engineering  strategies  further    integration of synthetic biology and  artificial intelligence. By
enhance the efficiency and stability of taxane biosynthesis by    leveraging these technologies, we can unlock the vast potential
ensuring precise enzyme interactions and minimizing the forma-    of taxanes, drive advancements  in medical treatments, and
tion of toxic intermediates.                                          establish sustainable production frameworks. The continued
                                                                   exploration and engineering of taxane biosynthetic pathways
Moreover, the application of AI in enzyme evolution—particularly     will undoubtedly lead to substantial breakthroughs, enhancing
in modifying the stereoselectivity of CYP450s—addresses critical    the therapeutic arsenal against cancer and contributing to the
challenges in taxane synthesis. Machine learning models can    broader field of natural product–based drug discovery.
predict the effects of mutations on enzyme activity and selec-
tivity, streamlining the directed evolution process and enabling   FUNDING
the generation of highly selective enzyme variants. This synergy   We thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no.
between AI and synthetic biology will expedite the production    32470416), the Guizhou Provincial Basic Research Program (Natural Sci-
of existing taxanes while facilitating the creation of novel com-    ence)-ZK[2023]-099, and the Central Government Guides Local Science
pounds  with  enhanced  therapeutic  efficacy and  reduced    and  Technology  Development  Fund  Projects  (Qiankehezhongyindi
resistance.                                                                (2024) 007) for supporting this work.

In the broader context of natural product drug discovery, there is  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
a need to expand the taxane compound library through biosyn-    The authors declare no conflict of interest.
thesis and AI-driven screening. The ability to rapidly synthesize
and validate promising taxanes can considerably shorten drug  AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
development cycles, addressing urgent clinical issues such as     J.S., C.Z, and R.D. wrote the manuscript, designed and generated the fig-
multidrug-resistant cancers and emerging infectious diseases.     ures, and managed the references; A.R.F., M.C., and Y.Z. revised the
As our understanding of taxane biosynthesis deepens, the inte-    manuscript and approved the article.
gration of advanced biotechnological tools will be essential for
harnessing the full potential of taxanes, ensuring their continued   SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
impact on medicine and biotechnology.                            Supplemental information is available at Plant Communications Online.

                                                                      Received: January 22, 2025
Concluding remarks                                               Revised: March 7, 2025
                                                                    Accepted: July 16, 2025
The synthesis and biosynthesis of taxanes represent an intersec-     Published: July 21, 2025
tion of natural product chemistry, synthetic biology, and artificial
intelligence. While traditional extraction and chemical synthesis   REFERENCES
methods have laid the groundwork for taxane-based therapies,    Abramson, J., Adler, J., Dunger, J., Evans, R., Green, T., Pritzel, A.,
their limitations in scalability and sustainability underscore an ur-      Ronneberger, O., Willmore, L., Ballard, A.J., Bambrick, J., et al.

14    Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025


[PDF physical page 15]
The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes                                     Plant Communications

   (2024). Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with       Epoxidation  by  Taxadiene-5α-Hydroxylase.  ACS  Chem.   Biol.
   AlphaFold 3. Nature 630:493–500.                                       11:460–469.

Acevedo-Rocha, C.G., Gamble, C.G., Lonsdale, R., Li, A., Nett, N.,     Fernie, A.R. (2024). Post-genomic illumination of paclitaxel biosynthesis.
   Hoebenreich, S., Lingnau, J.B., Wirtz, C., Fares, C., Hinrichs, H.,       Nat. Plants 10:1875–1885. Advance Access published 2024.
   et al. (2018). P450-Catalyzed Regio- and Diastereoselective Steroid                                                                         Frey, M., Bathe, U., Meink, L., Balcke, G.U., Schmidt, J., Frolov, A.,
   Hydroxylation:  Efficient Directed Evolution Enabled by  Mutability                                                                     Soboleva, A., Hassanin, A., Davari, M.D., Frank, O., et al. (2024).
   Landscaping. ACS Catal. 8:3395–3410.                                                                           Combinatorial biosynthesis in yeast leads to over 200 diterpenoids.
Achnine, L., Blancaflor, E.B., Rasmussen, S., and Dixon, R.A. (2004).       Metab. Eng. 82:193–200.
   Colocalization of l-Phenylalanine Ammonia-Lyase and Cinnamate 4-                                                                      Fu, Y., Li, S., Zu, Y., Yang, G., Yang, Z., Luo, M., Jiang, S., Wink, M., and
   Hydroxylase   for   Metabolic   Channeling   in   Phenylpropanoid                                                                                  Efferth, T. (2009). Medicinal Chemistry of Paclitaxel and its Analogues.
   Biosynthesis. Plant Cell 16:3098–3109.                                                                                 Curr. Med. Chem. 16:3966–3985.
Biswas, S., Khimulya, G., Alley, E.C., Esvelt, K.M., and Church, G.M.                                                                                    Galletti, E., Magnani, M., Renzulli, M.L., and Botta, M. (2007). Paclitaxel
   (2021). Low-N protein engineering with data-efficient deep learning.                                                            And Docetaxel Resistance: Molecular Mechanisms and Development
   Nat. Methods 18:389–396.                                                                                   of New Generation Taxanes. ChemMedChem 2:920–942.
Blay, V., Tolani, B., Ho, S.P., and Arkin, M.R. (2020). High-Throughput                                                             Guo, L., Yao, H., Chen, W., Wang, X., Ye, P., Xu, Z., Zhang, S., and Wu,
   Screening: today’s biochemical and cell-based approaches. Drug                                                                      H. (2022). Natural products of medicinal plants: biosynthesis and
   Discov. Today 25:1807–1821.                                                                            bioengineering in post-genomic era. Hortic. Res. 9:uhac223.
Brandenberg,  O.F., Chen,  K., and Arnold, F.H.  (2019). Directed                                                             Guo, Q., Yang, Y.-X., Li, D.-X., Ji, X.-J., Wu, N., Wang, Y.-T., Ye, C., and
   Evolution of a Cytochrome P450 Carbene Transferase for Selective                                                                                 Shi, T.-Q. (2024). Advances in multi-enzyme co-localization strategies
   Functionalization  of  Cyclic  Compounds.  J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.                                                                                          for  the  construction  of  microbial  cell  factory.  Biotechnol. Adv.
   141:8989–8995.                                                                        77:108453.
Brzycki Newton, C., Young, E.M., and Roberts, S.C. (2023). Targeted    He, S., Bekhof, A.-S.M.W., Popova, E.Z., van Merkerk, R., and Quax,
   control  of  supporting pathways  in  paclitaxel  biosynthesis  with                                                                     W.J.  (2024). Improved taxadiene production by optimizing DXS
  CRISPR-guided methylation. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 11:1272811.                                                                          expression and fusing short-chain prenyltransferases. N. Biotech.
Bulutoglu, B., Garcia, K.E., Wu, F., Minteer, S.D., and Banta, S. (2016).       83:66–73.
   Direct Evidence for Metabolon Formation and Substrate Channeling in     Ho¨sel, W., and Schiel, O. (1984). Biosynthesis of cyanogenic glucosides:
  Recombinant TCA Cycle Enzymes. ACS Chem. Biol. 11:2847–2853.          In vitro analysis of the glucosylation step. Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
Burkhart, C.A., Berman, J.W., Swindell, C.S., and Horwitz, S.B. (1994).       229:177–186.
   Relationship between the Structure of Taxol and Other Taxanes on    Hu,  Y.-J., Gu, C.-C., Wang, X.-F., Min,  L., and  Li, C.-C. (2021).
   Induction of. Cancer Res. 54:5779–5782.                               Asymmetric Total Synthesis of Taxol. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143:17862–
Cao, Y., Zhang, T., Zhao, X., Jia, X., and Li, B. (2023). MooSeeker: A       17870, Advance Access published October. https://doi.org/10.1021/
   Metabolic  Pathway  Design  Tool  Based  on   Multi-Objective       jacs.1c09637.
   Optimization  Algorithm. IEEE ACM  Trans. Comput.  Biol.  Bioinf    Hubrich, F., Kandy, S.K., Chepkirui, C., Padhi, C., Mordhorst, S.,
   20:3609–3622.                                             Moosmann, P., Zhu, T., Gugger, M., Chekan, J.R., and Piel, J.
Cheng, J., Wang, X., Liu, X., Zhu, X., Li, Z., Chu, H., Wang, Q., Lou, Q.,        (2024). Ribosomal peptides  with  polycyclic  isoprenoid  moieties.
   Cai,  B., Yang,  Y., et  al.  (2021). Chromosome-level genome  of     Chem 10:3224–3242, published September 2024. https://doi.org/10.
   Himalayan yew provides insights into the origin and evolution of the       1016/j.chempr.2024.07.026.
   paclitaxel biosynthetic pathway. Mol. Plant 14:1199–1209.               Jaladanki, C.K., Gahlawat, A., Rathod, G., Sandhu, H., Jahan, K., and
Christianson, D.W. (2006). Structural Biology and Chemistry of the      Bharatam, P.V. (2020). Mechanistic studies on the drug metabolism
   Terpenoid Cyclases. Chem. Rev. 106:3412–3442.                      and toxicity originating from cytochromes P450. Drug Metab. Rev.
                                                                        52:366–394.
Dahmani, I., Qin, K., Zhang, Y., and Fernie, A.R. (2023). The formation
  and function of plant metabolons. Plant J. 114:1080–1092.             Jang, W.D., Kim, G.B., Kim, Y., and Lee, S.Y. (2022). Applications of
                                                                                                        artificial intelligence to enzyme and pathway design for metabolic
Dake, M.D., Ansel, G.M., Jaff, M.R., Ohki, T., Saxon, R.R., Smouse, H.
                                                                               engineering. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 73:101–107.
   B., Machan, L.S., Snyder, S.A., O’Leary, E.E., Ragheb, A.O., et al.
   (2016). Durable Clinical Effectiveness With Paclitaxel-Eluting Stents    Jensen, K., Osmani, S.A., Hamann, T., Naur, P., and Møller, B.L. (2011).
   in the Femoropopliteal Artery. Circulation 133:1472–1483.               Homology modeling of the three membrane proteins of the dhurrin
                                                                       metabolon:  Catalytic  sites, membrane  surface  association and
Dastmalchi, M., and Facchini, P.J. (2016). Plant metabolons assembled
                                                                                protein–protein interactions. Phytochemistry 72:2113–2123.
  on demand. Science 354:829–830.
                                                                        Jiang, B., Gao, L., Wang, H., Sun, Y., Zhang, X., Ke, H., Liu, S., Ma, P.,
Dastmalchi, M., Bernards, M.A., and Dhaubhadel, S. (2016). Twin
                                                                             Liao, Q., Wang, Y., et al. (2024a). Characterization and heterologous
   anchors  of  the soybean  isoflavonoid  metabolon:  evidence  for
                                                                                  reconstitution of Taxus biosynthetic enzymes leading to baccatin III.
   tethering of the complex to the endoplasmic reticulum by IFS and
                                                                      Science 383:622–629.
  C4H. Plant J. 85:689–706.
                                                                        Jiang,  K., Yan,  Z., Di Bernardo, M.,  Sgrizzi,  S.R.,  Villiger,  L.,
DeLisa, M.P., and Conrado, R.J. (2009). Synthetic metabolic pipelines.
                                                                   Kayabolen,  A.,  Kim,  B.J., Carscadden,  J.K.,  Hiraizumi,  M.,
   Nat. Biotechnol. 27:728–729.
                                                                    Nishimasu, H., et al. (2025). Rapid in silico directed evolution by a
Dueber, J.E., Wu, G.C., Malmirchegini, G.R., Moon, T.S., Petzold, C.J.,        protein language model with EVOLVEpro. Science 387:eadr6006.
   Ullal, A.V., Prather, K.L.J., and Keasling, J.D. (2009). Synthetic        https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adr6006.
   protein scaffolds provide modular control over metabolic flux. Nat.
                                                                      Jores, T., Tonnies, J., Dorrity, M.W., Cuperus, J.T., Fields, S., and
   Biotechnol. 27:753–759.
                                                                       Queitsch, C. (2020). Identification of Plant Enhancers and Their
Edgar,  S., Zhou,  K., Qiao,  K., King,  J.R., Simpson,  J.H., and       Constituent Elements by STARR-seq  in Tobacco Leaves[OPEN].
  Stephanopoulos, G. (2016). Mechanistic Insights  into Taxadiene        Plant Cell 32:2120–2131.

                                                                                 Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025   15


[PDF physical page 16]
Plant Communications                                    The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes

Jores, T., Tonnies, J., Wrightsman, T., Buckler, E.S., Cuperus, J.T.,      Li, Z., Zhang, L., Xu, K., Jiang, Y., Du, J., Zhang, X., Meng, L.-H., Wu,
   Fields, S., and Queitsch, C. (2021). Synthetic promoter designs        Q., Du, L., Li, X., et al. (2023b). Molecular insights into the catalytic
   enabled by a comprehensive analysis of plant core promoters. Nat.       promiscuity of a bacterial diterpene synthase. Nat. Commun. 14:4001.
   Plants 7:842–855.
                                                                                           Li, C., Wang, S., Yin, X., Guo, A., Xie, K., Chen, D., Sui, S., Han, Y., Liu,
Jørgensen, K., Rasmussen, A.V., Morant, M., Nielsen, A.H., Bjarnholt,         J., Chen, R., and Dai, J. (2023c). Functional Characterization and
   N., Zagrobelny, M., Bak, S., and Møller, B.L. (2005). Metabolon        Cyclization Mechanism  of a Diterpene Synthase  Catalyzing  the
   formation and metabolic channeling  in the biosynthesis of plant       Skeleton  Formation  of  Cephalotane-Type  Diterpenoids. Angew.
   natural products. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 8:280–291.                    Chem. Int. Ed. 62:e202306020.

Keasling, J.D. (2012). Synthetic biology and the development of tools for     Lin, X., Hezari, M., Koepp, A.E., Floss, H.G., and Croteau, R. (1996).
   metabolic engineering. Metab. Eng. 14:189–195.                      Mechanism  of  Taxadiene  Synthase, a  Diterpene  Cyclase  That
                                                                          Catalyzes  the  First Step  of Taxol Biosynthesis  in  Pacific Yew.
Khan, M.A., Herring, G., Zhu, J.Y., Oliva, M., Fourie, E., Johnston, B.,
                                                                          Biochemistry 35:2968–2977.
  Zhang,  Z., Potter,  J., Pineda,  L., Pflueger,  J.,  et  al.  (2025).
   CRISPRi-based circuits to control gene expression in plants. Nat.     Lin, Z., Akin, H., Rao, R., Hie, B., Zhu, Z., Lu, W., Smetanin, N., Verkuil,
   Biotechnol. 43:416–430, Advance Access published May 20, 2024.        R.,  Kabeli,  O., Shmueli,  Y.,  et  al.  (2023a).  Evolutionary-scale
   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-024-02236-w.                               prediction of atomic-level protein structure with a language model.
                                                                      Science 379:1123–1130.
Kim, H.W., Wang, M., Leber, C.A., Nothias, L.-F., Reher, R., Kang, K.
   B., van der Hooft, J.J.J., Dorrestein, P.C., Gerwick, W.H., and     Lin, X., An, T., Fu, D., Duan, S., Jin, H.-L., and Wang, H.-B. (2023b).
   Cottrell, G.W. (2021). NPClassifier: A Deep Neural Network-Based       Optimization of central carbon metabolism by Warburg effect of
   Structural Classification Tool  for Natural Products.  J. Nat. Prod.      human cancer cell improves triterpenes biosynthesis in yeast. Adv.
   84:2795–2807.                                                            Biotech. 1:4.

Kim, T., Lee, S., Kwak, Y., Choi, M.-S., Park, J., Hwang, S.J., and Kim,     Lin, J., Yin, X., Zeng, Y., Hong, X., Zhang, S., Cui, B., Zhu, Q., Liang, Z.,
   S.-G. (2024). READRetro: natural product biosynthesis predicting       Xue, Z., and Yang, D. (2023c). Progress and prospect: Biosynthesis of
   with  retrieval-augmented  dual-view  retrosynthesis. New  Phytol.        plant natural products based on plant chassis. Biotechnol. Adv.
   243:2512–2527.                                                       69:108266.

Ko¨ ksal, M., Jin, Y., Coates, R.M., Croteau, R., and Christianson, D.W.     Liu, W., and Stewart, C.N. (2015). Plant synthetic biology. Trends Plant
   (2011). Taxadiene synthase  structure and  evolution  of modular        Sci. 20:309–317.
   architecture in terpene biosynthesis. Nature 469:116–120.
                                                                                Liu, J., Milne, R.I., Mo¨ller, M., Zhu, G., Ye, L., Luo, Y., Yang, J.,
Kolev, J.N., O’Dwyer, K.M., Jordan, C.T., and Fasan, R. (2014).      Wambulwa, M.C., Wang, C., Li, D., and Gao, L. (2018). Integrating
   Discovery  of  Potent  Parthenolide-Based  Antileukemic  Agents      a comprehensive DNA barcode reference library with a global map of
   Enabled by Late-Stage P450-Mediated C—H Functionalization. ACS      yews   ( Taxus  L.)  for  forensic  identification.  Molecular Ecology
  Chem. Biol. 9:164–173.                                             Resources 18:1115–1131.

Koley, S., Jyoti, P., Lingwan, M., and Allen, D.K. (2024). Isotopically     Liu, X., Zhang, P., Zhao, Q., and Huang, A.C. (2023). Making small
   nonstationary metabolic flux analysis of plants: recent progress and       molecules   in  plants:  A  chassis   for  synthetic  biology-based
   future opportunities. New Phytol. 242:1911–1918.                          production of plant natural products. JIPB 65:417–443.

Lange, B.M., and Conner, C.F. (2021). Taxanes and taxoids of the genus     Liu, Y., Zhao, X., Gan, F., Chen, X., Deng, K., Crowe, S.A., Hudson, G.
   Taxus  –  A  comprehensive  inventory  of  chemical   diversity.        A., Belcher, M.S., Schmidt, M.,  Astolfi, M.C.T., et  al.  (2024).
   Phytochemistry 190:112829.                                        Complete  biosynthesis  of QS-21  in  engineered  yeast.  Nature
                                                                       629:937–944.
Langley, B.W., Lythgoe, B., Scales, B., Scrowston, R.M., Trippett, S.,
  and Wray, D. (1962). Taxine. Part II. Glycol cleavage fragments from O-    Loskot, S.A., Romney, D.K., Arnold, F.H., and Stoltz, B.M. (2017).
   cinnamoyltaxicin-I. J. Chem. Soc. 2972–2984. https://doi.org/10.1039/        Enantioselective Total Synthesis of Nigelladine A via Late-Stage C–H
   jr9620002972.                                                           Oxidation Enabled by an Engineered P450 Enzyme. J. Am. Chem.
                                                                      Soc. 139:10196–10199.
Laursen, T., Borch, J., Knudsen, C., Bavishi, K., Torta, F., Martens, H.
    J., Silvestro, D., Hatzakis, N.S., Wenk, M.R., Dafforn, T.R., et al.    Luo, X., Reiter, M.A., d’Espaux, L., Wong, J., Denby, C.M., Lechner, A.,
   (2016). Characterization  of a dynamic metabolon producing the      Zhang, Y., Grzybowski, A.T., Harth,  S., Lin, W., et  al. (2019).
   defense compound dhurrin in sorghum. Science 354:890–893.            Complete  biosynthesis   of  cannabinoids  and   their  unnatural
                                                                      analogues in yeast. Nature 567:123–126.
Leach, A.R., Gillet, V.J., Lewis, R.A., and Taylor, R. (2010). Three-
   Dimensional Pharmacophore Methods in Drug Discovery. J. Med.    Malik, S., Cusido´ , R.M., Mirjalili, M.H., Moyano, E., Palazo´ n, J., and
  Chem. 53:539–558.                                                              Bonfill, M. (2011). Production of the anticancer drug taxol in Taxus
                                                                     baccata suspension cultures: A review. Process Biochem. 46:23–34.
Lee, S.C., Knowles, T.J., Postis, V.L.G., Jamshad, M., Parslow, R.A.,
   Lin, Y., Goldman, A., Sridhar, P., Overduin, M., Muench, S.P.,    Mao, Y., Wang, G., Li, J., Feng, Z., Ren, Y., Sun, Y., and Wang, Y. (2023).
   et al. (2016). A method for detergent-free isolation of membrane       Discovery of Class  I Diterpene Cyclases Producing a Tetracyclic
   proteins in their local lipid environment. Nat. Protoc. 11:1149–1162.       Cephalotene Skeleton in Plum Yews. ACS Catal. 13:8600–8612.
  Advance Access published 2016.
                                                             McClune, C.J., Liu, J.C.-T., Wick, C., De La Pen˜ a, R., Lange, B.M.,
Li, J., Mutanda, I., Wang, K., Yang, L., Wang, J., and Wang, Y. (2019).       Fordyce, P.M., and Sattely, E.S. (2024). Multiplexed perturbation of
   Chloroplastic metabolic engineering coupled with isoprenoid pool      yew reveals cryptic proteins that enable a  total biosynthesis  of
  enhancement  for  committed  taxanes  biosynthesis  in  Nicotiana       baccatin III and Taxol precursors. Preprint at bioRxiv. https://doi.org/
   benthamiana. Nat. Commun. 10:4850.                                   10.1101/2024.11.06.622305.

Li, M., Kang, L., Xiong, Y., Wang, Y.G., Fan, G., Tan, P., and Hong, L.    Min, L., Han, J.-C., Zhang, W., Gu, C.-C., Zou, Y.-P., and Li, C.-C.
   (2023a). SESNet: sequence-structure feature-integrated deep learning        (2023). Strategies and Lessons Learned from Total Synthesis of
  method for data-efficient protein engineering. J. Cheminf. 15:12.              Taxol. Chem. Rev. 123:4934–4971.

16    Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025


[PDF physical page 17]
The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes                                     Plant Communications

Mitkas, A.A., Valverde, M., and Chen, W. (2022). Dynamic modulation of    Rives, A., Meier, J., Sercu, T., Goyal, S., Lin, Z., Liu, J., Guo, D., Ott, M.,
  enzyme  activity by synthetic CRISPR–Cas6 endonucleases. Nat.        Zitnick, C.L., Ma, J., and Fergus, R. (2021b). Biological structure and
  Chem. Biol. 18:492–500.                                                    function emerge from scaling unsupervised learning to 250 million
                                                                                protein sequences. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 118:e2016239118.
Molina-Hidalgo, F.J., Vazquez-Vilar, M., D’Andrea, L., Demurtas, O.C.,
   Fraser, P., Giuliano, G., Bock, R., Orza´ ez, D., and Goossens, A.    Rowinsky, E.K., and Donehower, R.C. (1995). Paclitaxel (Taxol). N. Engl.
   (2021). Engineering Metabolism in Nicotiana Species: A Promising         J. Med. 332:1004–1014. Advance Access published 1995.
   Future. Trends Biotechnol. 39:901–913.
                                                                            Ruff, A.J., Dennig, A., Wirtz, G., Blanusa, M., and Schwaneberg, U.
Møller, B.L. (2010). Dynamic Metabolons. Science 330:1328–1329.              (2012). Flow Cytometer-Based High-Throughput Screening System
Mortimer, J.C. (2019). Plant synthetic biology could drive a revolution in         for Accelerated Directed Evolution of P450 Monooxygenases. ACS
   biofuels and medicine. Exp. Biol. Med. 244:323–331. https://doi.org/        Catal. 2:2724–2728.
   10.1177/1535370218793890.                                       Sabate, R., de Groot, N.S., and Ventura, S. (2010). Protein folding and
Mutanda, I., Li, J., Xu, F., and Wang, Y. (2021). Recent Advances in       aggregation in bacteria. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 67:2695–2715.
   Metabolic  Engineering,  Protein  Engineering, and  Transcriptome-                                                              Sadybekov, A.V., and Katritch, V. (2023). Computational approaches
  Guided  Insights Toward  Synthetic  Production  of  Taxol.  Front.                                                                               streamlining drug discovery. Nature 616:673–685.
   Bioeng. Biotechnol. 9:632269, published February 5, 2021. https://
   doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2021.632269.                                Sakurada, K., Ikegaya, H., Ohta, H., Fukushima, H., Akutsu, T., and
                                                               Watanabe, K. (2009). Effects of oximes on mitochondrial oxidase
Nicolaou, K.C., Yang, Z., Liu, J.J., Ueno, H., Nantermet, P.G., Guy, R.
                                                                                              activity. Toxicol. Lett. 189:110–114.
   K., Claiborne, C.F., Renaud, J., Couladouros, E.A., Paulvannan, K.,
   et al. (1994). Total synthesis of taxol. Nature 367:630–634.             Samusevich, R., Hebra, T., Bushuiev, R., Bushuiev, A., Calounova´ , T.,
                                                       Smrckova´ , H., Chatpatanasiri, R., Kulha´ nek,  J., Perkovi c, M.,
Nielsen, K.A., Tattersall, D.B., Jones, P.R., and Møller, B.L. (2008).
                                                                       Engst, M., et  al.  (2024). Highly accurate discovery  of terpene
   Metabolon  formation   in  dhurrin  biosynthesis.  Phytochemistry
                                                                        synthases powered by machine learning reveals functional terpene
   69:88–98.
                                                                                    cyclization in Archaea. Preprint at bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/
Nowicki,  J. (2000). Claisen, Cope and Related Rearrangements  in       2024.01.29.577750.
   the Synthesis  of Flavour and Fragrance Compounds. Molecules
                                                                       Sarkar,  K., Torregrossa-Allen,  S.E., Elzey,  B.D., Narayanan,  S.,
   5:1033–1050.
                                                                     Langer,  M.P., Durm,  G.A., and Won,  Y.-Y.  (2022).  Effect  of
Ohlen, M.,  Herfurth,  A.-M., and Wittstock, U.  (2017). Herbivore        Paclitaxel Stereochemistry on X-ray-Triggered Release of Paclitaxel
   Adaptations to Plant Cyanide Defenses. IntechOpen.                     from  CaWO4/Paclitaxel-Coloaded PEG-PLA  Nanoparticles.  Mol.
Omini, J., Dele-Osibanjo, T., Kim, H., Zhang, J., and Obata, T. (2024). Is       Pharm. 19:2776–2794.
   the TCA cycle malate dehydrogenase-citrate synthase metabolon an    Schneider, F., Samarin, K., Zanella, S., and Gaich, T. (2020). Total
   illusion? Essays Biochem. 68:99–106.                                      synthesis  of  the complex  taxane  diterpene  canataxpropellane.
Oreb,  M.  (2020).  Construction  of   artificial  membrane  transport       Science 367:676–681.
   metabolons – an emerging strategy in metabolic engineering. FEMS                                                                    Scribano, C.M., Wan, J., Esbona, K., Tucker, J.B., Lasek, A., Zhou, A.
   Microbiol. Lett. 367:fnaa027.                                                                                         S., Zasadil, L.M., Molini, R., Fitzgerald, J., Lager, A.M., et al. (2021).
O’Reilly,  E.,  Ko¨ hler,  V.,  Flitsch,  S.L., and  Turner,  N.J.  (2011).      Chromosomal instability sensitizes patient breast tumors to multipolar
  Cytochromes P450 as useful biocatalysts: addressing the limitations.        divisions induced by paclitaxel. Sci. Transl. Med. 13:eabd4811.
  Chem. Commun. 47:2490–2501.
                                                                         Shih,  M.-L., and Morgan,  J.A.  (2020). Metabolic  flux  analysis  of
Paddon, C.J., Westfall, P.J., Pitera, D.J., Benjamin, K., Fisher, K.,       secondary metabolism in plants. Metab. Eng. Commun. 10:e00123.
  McPhee, D., Leavell, M.D., Tai, A., Main, A., Eng, D., et al. (2013).
                                                                           Skubnı´k, J., Pavlı´ckova´ , V., Ruml, T., and Rimpelova´ , S. (2021). Current
   High-level  semi-synthetic  production  of  the  potent  antimalarial
                                                                           Perspectives on Taxanes: Focus on Their Bioactivity, Delivery and
   artemisinin. Nature 496:528–532.
                                                                     Combination Therapy. Plants 10:569.
Pan, L., Schneider, F., Ottenbruch, M., Wiechert, R., List, T., Schoch,
                                                               Song, C., Fu, F., Yang, L., Niu, Y., Tian, Z., He, X., Yang, X., Chen, J.,
   P., Mertes, B., and Gaich, T. (2024). A general strategy for the
                                                                    Sun, W., Wan, T., et al. (2021). Taxus yunnanensis genome offers
   synthesis of taxane diterpenes. Nature 632:543–549.
                                                                                    insights into gymnosperm phylogeny and taxol production. Commun.
Park, J.Y., Kovar, L., LaFayette, P.R., Wallace, J.G., and Parrott, W.A.         Biol. 4:1203–1208.
   (2021). Plant-derived insulator-like sequences for control of transgene
                                                                         Srinivasan, P., and Smolke, C.D. (2020). Biosynthesis of medicinal   expression. Preprint at bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.11.04.
                                                                         tropane alkaloids in yeast. Nature 585:614–619.   467280.
Perez-Matas, E., Hidalgo-Martinez, D., Escrich, A., Alcalde, M.A.,    Sumegi, B., Sherry, A.D., Malloy, C.R., Evans, C., and Srere, P.A.
  Moyano,  E.,  Bonfill,  M.,  and  Palazon,  J.  (2023).  Genetic        (1991).  Is there  tight channelling  in the  tricarboxylic acid cycle
   approaches in improving biotechnological production of taxanes: An       metabolon? Biochem. Soc. Trans. 19:1002–1005.
   update. Front. Plant Sci. 14:1100228.                               Tang, Y.-J., and Zou, Y. (2024). Cyclo-farnesyl Diphosphate-Dependent
Ralston, L., and Yu, O. (2006). Metabolons involving plant cytochrome        Prenylation in Fungi. Org. Lett. 26:8366–8370. https://doi.org/10.1021/
   P450s. Phytochem. Rev. 5:459–472.                                        acs.orglett.4c03154.

Ramı´rez-Palacios, C., and Marrink, S.J. (2023). Super High-Throughput    Thomik, T., Wittig, I., Choe, J.Y., Boles, E., and Oreb, M. (2017). An
   Screening of Enzyme Variants by Spectral Graph Convolutional Neural          artificial transport metabolon facilitates improved substrate utilization
   Networks. J. Chem. Theor. Comput. 19:4668–4677.                              in yeast. Nat. Chem. Biol. 13:1158–1163.

Rives, A., Meier, J., Sercu, T., Goyal, S., Lin, Z., Liu, J., Guo, D., Ott, M.,    Thornburg, C.K., Walter, T., and Walker, K.D. (2017). Biocatalysis of a
   Zitnick, C.L., Ma, J., and Fergus, R. (2021a). Biological structure and        Paclitaxel Analogue: Conversion of Baccatin III to N-Debenzoyl-N-(2-
   function emerge from scaling unsupervised learning to 250 million        furoyl)paclitaxel and Characterization of an Amino Phenylpropanoyl
   protein sequences. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 118:e2016239118.        CoA Transferase. Biochemistry 56:5920–5930.

                                                                                 Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025   17


[PDF physical page 18]
Plant Communications                                    The biosynthesis and diversity of taxanes

Vattekkatte,  A., Garms,  S., Brandt, W., and Boland, W.  (2018).     Yin, J.-Y., Lai, M., Yu, X.-Y., Su, D.-D., Xiong, X.-Y., and Li, Y.-L. (2025).
  Enhanced structural diversity  in terpenoid biosynthesis: enzymes,      Comprehensive strategies for paclitaxel production: insights from plant
   substrates and cofactors. Org. Biomol. Chem. 16:348–362.                     cell culture, endophytic microorganisms, and synthetic biology. Hortic.
                                                                       Res. 12:uhae346.
Wang, Y., Xue, P., Cao, M., Yu, T., Lane, S.T., and Zhao, H. (2021).
   Directed Evolution: Methodologies and Applications. Chem. Rev.    Yuan, G.-Y., Zhang, J.-M., Xu, Q.-D., Zhang, H.-R., Hu, C., and Zou, Y.
   121:12384–12444.                                                             (2023). Biosynthesis of Cosmosporasides Reveals the Assembly Line
                                                                                          for Fungal Hybrid Terpenoid Saccharides. Angew Chem.  Int. Ed.
Wang, Q., Liu, X., Zhang, H., Chu, H., Shi, C., Zhang, L., Bai, J., Liu, P.,
                                                                                Engl. 62:e202308887.
    Li, J., Zhu, X., et al. (2024). Cytochrome P450 Enzyme Design by
   Constraining the Catalytic Pocket in a Diffusion Model. Research    Zhang,  Y., and Fernie, A.R.  (2021). Metabolons, enzyme–enzyme
   7:0413. https://doi.org/10.34133/research.0413.                          assemblies that mediate substrate channeling, and their roles in plant
                                                                        metabolism. Plant Commun. 2:100081.
Wani, M.C., Taylor, H.L., Wall, M.E., Coggon, P., and McPhail, A.T.
   (1971). Plant antitumor agents. VI. Isolation and structure of taxol, a    Zhang, Y., and Fernie, A.R. (2022). Dynamically regulating metabolic
   novel antileukemic and antitumor agent from Taxus brevifolia. J. Am.        fluxes with synthetic metabolons. Trends Biotechnol. 40:1019–1020.
  Chem. Soc. 93:2325–2327.                                      Zhang,  L., and Wang, Q.  (2022).  Harnessing P450 Enzyme  for
Wildung, M.R., and Croteau, R. (1996). A cDNA Clone for Taxadiene       Biotechnology and Synthetic Biology. Chembiochem 23:e202100439.
   Synthase, the Diterpene Cyclase That Catalyzes the Committed Step    Zhang, K., Shafer, B.M., Demars, M.D., 2nd, Stern, H.A., and Fasan, R.
   of Taxol Biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 271:9201–9204.                         (2012). Controlled Oxidation of Remote sp3 C–H Bonds in Artemisinin
Williams, T.C.R., Sweetlove, L.J., and Ratcliffe, R.G. (2011). Capturing        via P450 Catalysts with Fine-Tuned Regio- and Stereoselectivity. J.
   Metabolite Channeling in Metabolic Flux Phenotypes. Plant Physiol.      Am. Chem. Soc. 134:18695–18704.
   157:981–984.                                                 Zhang, J., Hansen, L.G., Gudich, O., Viehrig, K., Lassen, L.M.M.,
                                                                             Schru¨ bbers, L., Adhikari, K.B., Rubaszka, P., Carrasquer-Alvarez,Winkel, B.S.J. (2004). Metabolic channeling in plants. Annu. Rev. Plant
                                                                                         E., Chen, L., et al. (2022). A microbial supply chain for production of   Biol. 55:85–107.
                                                                             the anti-cancer drug vinblastine. Nature 609:341–347.
Wu, F., and Minteer, S. (2015). Krebs Cycle Metabolon: Structural
                                                               Zhang, C., Chen, W., Dong, T., Wang, Y., Yao, M., Xiao, W., and Li, B.   Evidence of Substrate Channeling Revealed by Cross-Linking and
                                                                                 (2023a).  Elimination  of enzymes  catalysis  compartmentalization  Mass Spectrometry. Angew Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 54:1851–1854.
                                                                      enhancing taxadiene production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Front.
Wu, Q.-Y., Huang, Z.-Y., Wang, J.-Y., Yu, H.-L., and Xu, J.-H. (2022).       Bioeng. Biotechnol. 11:1141272.
   Construction  of an  Escherichia  coli  cell  factory  to  synthesize
                                                               Zhang, Y., Wiese, L., Fang, H., Alseekh, S., Perez de Souza, L.,
   taxadien-5α-ol, the key precursor of anti-cancer drug  paclitaxel.
                                                                   Scossa, F., Molloy, J., Christmann, M., and Fernie, A.R. (2023b).
   Bioresour. Bioprocess. 9:82.
                                                                             Synthetic  biology  identifies  the  minimal gene  set  required  for
Xiao,  H.,  Verdier-Pinard,  P., Fernandez-Fuentes,  N.,  Burd,  B.,        paclitaxel biosynthesis in a plant chassis. Mol. Plant 16:1951–1961.
   Angeletti, R., Fiser, A., Horwitz, S.B., and Orr, G.A. (2006). Insights
                                                                Zhao, Y., Liang, F., Xie, Y., Duan, Y.-T., Andeadelli, A., Pateraki, I.,
   into the mechanism of microtubule stabilization by Taxol. Proc. Natl.
                                                                       Makris, A.M., Pomorski, T.G., Staerk, D., and Kampranis, S.C.
   Acad. Sci. USA 103:10166–10173.
                                                                                   (2024). Oxetane Ring Formation in Taxol Biosynthesis Is Catalyzed
Xiong, X., Gou, J., Liao, Q., Li, Y., Zhou, Q., Bi, G., Li, C., Du, R., Wang,      by a Bifunctional Cytochrome P450 Enzyme. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
   X., Sun, T., et al. (2021). The Taxus genome provides insights into       146:801–810.
   paclitaxel biosynthesis. Nat. Plants 7:1026–1036.
                                                               Zheng, S., Zeng, T., Li, C., Chen, B., Coley, C.W., Yang, Y., and Wu, R.
Xu, M., Xie, W., Luo, Z., Li, C.-X., Hua, Q., and Xu, J. (2023). Improving        (2022). Deep learning driven biosynthetic pathways navigation for
    solubility and copy number of taxadiene synthase to enhance the titer        natural products with BioNavi-NP. Nat. Commun. 13:3342.
   of taxadiene in Yarrowia lipolytica. Synth. Syst. Biotechnol. 8:331–338.
                                                              Zhong, J., Wang, Y., Chen, Z., Yalikun, Y., He, L., Liu, T., and Ma, G.
Yang, C.P.H., and Horwitz, S.B. (2017). Taxol®: The First Microtubule        (2024). Engineering cyanobacteria as a new platform for producing
   Stabilizing Agent. Indian J. Manag. Sci. 18:1733.                              taxol  precursors   directly  from  carbon   dioxide.   Biotechnol.
                                                                                Biofuels 17:99.Yang, Y.L., Zhang, S., Ma, K., Xu, Y., Tao, Q., Chen, Y., Chen, J., Guo,
   S., Ren, J., Wang, W., et al. (2017). Discovery and Characterization of    Zhou, J., and Huang, M. (2024). Navigating the landscape of enzyme
   a New Family of Diterpene Cyclases in Bacteria and Fungi. Angew       design: from molecular simulations to machine learning. Chem. Soc.
  Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 56:4749–4752.                                     Rev. 53:8202–8239.





18    Plant Communications 6, 101460, October 13 2025