
[PDF physical page 1]
                                                        Bioresource Technology 459 (2026) 135232

                                                 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
                            Bioresource Technology


                                          journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biortech


Bioorthogonal chemistry-driven multi-enzyme strategy for efficient
terpenoid biosynthesis
Chaoyue Nie a, Mijun Li b, Xinxin Chen a, Jing Jiang a, Jiayi Pan a, Xiangxiang Zuo b,
Nannan Jiang a, Linmeng Du a, Xiang-Yang Ye b,*   , Anming Wang a,*
a College of Materials, Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 311121, China
b School of Pharmacy, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 311121, China


H I G H L I G H T S                   G R A P H I C A L A B S T R A C T

• Bioorthogonal  pairs assemble  six  en­
 zymes into ordered cascades.
• Ordered  cross-linking  boosts  cascade
  efficiency while preserving structure.
• Substrate channeling via spatial prox­
  imity doubles β-farnesene yield.
• Modular strategy enables easy redirec­
  tion to synthesize different terpenoids.
• Ordered  cross-linked  enzymes  retain
 62% activity after six reuse cycles.





A B S T R A C T

Conventional in vivo terpenoid biosynthesis is often limited by the complexity of the intracellular environment and inefficient pathway flux. To overcome these
challenges, an in vitro multi-enzyme cascade strategy was developed for the synthesis of high-value terpenoids. Using bioorthogonal protein pairing, six enzymes from
the shortened mevalonate (MVA) pathway were assembled into ordered cross-linked enzyme complexes (O-CLEs), enabling controlled spatial organization. Multi-
layer fluorescence labeling technology (MLFLT) confirmed the ordered arrangement of enzymes within the O-CLEs. For β-farnesene production, the assembled O-
CLEs yielded 49.08 ± 1.91 mg/L of product, representing a 1.39-fold increase compared with the WT free-enzyme mixture (35.33 ± 0.51 mg/L) and a 3.03-fold
increase compared with the (randomly cross-linked enzyme complexes) R-CLEs system 16.21 ± 1.68 mg/L), while retaining 62 ± 9% of initial activity after six
successive reuse cycles. Notably, replacing β-farnesene synthase (FS) with taxadiene synthase (TXS) readily extended the strategy to taxadiene biosynthesis,
demonstrating the modular design and general applicability of this approach. Thus, this bioorthogonal chemistry-driven, ordered multi-enzyme immobilization
strategy offers a robust, generalizable, and reusable platform for the sustainable in vitro production of high-value terpenoids, advancing the development of in vitro
synthetic biology.


1. Introduction                                                  from isoprene units (Meadows et al., 2016) and represent one of the
                                                                                largest classes of plant-derived metabolites (Wang et al., 2025b). Owing
   Terpenoids are structurally diverse natural products biosynthesized     to their broad biological activities, including anticancer, antimicrobial,


 * Corresponding authors.
    E-mail addresses: xyye@hznu.edu.cn (X.-Y. Ye), waming@hznu.edu.cn (A. Wang).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2026.135232
Received 27 April 2026; Received in revised form 21 June 2026; Accepted 22 June 2026
Available online 24 June 2026
0960-8524/© 2026 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.


[PDF physical page 2]
C. Nie et al.                                                                                                                                   Bioresource Technology 459 (2026) 135232

and neuroprotective effects, terpenoids have attracted considerable in­     step and highly complex reactions that are susceptible to interference
terest in pharmaceutical and industrial applications (Zhang et al., 2025).    from cellular metabolic networks and regulatory mechanisms,  ulti­
For example, taxadiene serves as a crucial precursor of the anticancer    mately resulting in unstable catalytic performance and limited yields
drug paclitaxel, highlighting the pharmaceutical importance of terpe­    (Münch et al., 2025; Schotte et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2025).
noids in pharmacy (Courdavault & Papon, 2025). In addition, terpenoids      Owing to their controllable and designed pathway, multi-enzyme
are widely used as flavors and fragrances (Meadows et  al., 2016).     cascade catalysis has emerged as a powerful strategy for synthesizing
β-Farnesene, for example, is a renewable substrate for vitamin E syn­     valuable pharmaceuticals and natural products (Bolivar et al., 2022). It
thesis and a high-quality fragrance ingredient (Ye et al., 2022).            provides an ideal platform for reconstructing both natural and artificial
   Conventional  terpenoid  production  strategies,  including  plant     biosynthetic pathways (Benitez-Mateos et al., 2022; Simic et al., 2022).
extraction and microbial fermentation, are often constrained by low     Biocatalytic cascade reactions can also be implemented through various
product content, limited yields, and long production times (Liang et al.,      strategies, including the co-expression of multiple enzymes in single or
2025). Plant extraction suffers from low yield and seasonal variability,     multiple host cells, one-pot reactions using free enzymes, and assembled
whereas microbial fermentation faces intrinsic bottlenecks such as    multi-enzyme catalytic systems (McIntosh et al., 2022; Qin et al., 2024).
competition  for acetyl-CoA  precursors and accumulation  of  toxic    The assembly and immobilization of multiple enzymes often enhance
pathway intermediates (Zheng et al., 2025). To address these challenges,     catalytic performance, largely by promoting substrate channeling—a
multivariate-modular strategies incorporating two (Ajikumar et  al.,     process that allows reactants to shuttle directly between active sites
2010) and three (Chen et al., 2026) functional modules have been     without diffusing into the bulk solution (Wheeldon et al., 2016; Yu et al.,
developed to engineer the metabolic pathways in Escherichia coli and     2025). Through  substrate  channeling,  reactive  intermediates  are
Yarrowia lipolytica, respectively, leading to improved terpenoid pro­     confined near catalytic  sites, minimizing competing side reactions
duction. However, the long metabolic pathway in microbial fermenta­    (Wang  et  al.,  2025a)  and  reducing  cellular  exposure  to  toxic
tion often generates numerous metabolic intermediates, complicating     intermediates.
downstream product purification (Ream & Prather, 2024). Moreover,       These multi-enzyme cascade systems exhibit high tolerance to
conventional in vivo catalytic pathways (Fig. 1a) generally involve multi-    extreme environments (Bilal et al., 2019), including non-physiological





Fig. 1. Schematic illustration of terpenoid biocatalytic synthesis and bioorthogonal cross-linking principles. (a) Terpenoid synthesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Abbreviations: G6P, glucose-6-phosphate; G3P, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; PDH, Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex; PDC, Pyruvate decarboxylase; ALD6, Acet­
aldehyde dehydrogenase; ACS, Acyl coenzyme A synthetase; ERG10: acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) acetyltransferase; ERG13, HMG-CoA synthase; HMGR, HMG-CoA
reductase; PT, Prenyl-transferase; TS, Terpene Synthases. (b) The in vitro multi-enzyme cascade system for terpenoid synthesis, assembled via biorthogonal chem­
istry. (c) SpyTag/SpyCatcher. (d) SnoopTag/SnoopCatcher. (e) DogTag/DogCatcher. (f) Jo/In. (g) KTag/QTag cross-linking catalyzed by microbial transglutaminase.

                                                                        2


[PDF physical page 3]
C. Nie et al.                                                                                                                                   Bioresource Technology 459 (2026) 135232

pH, temperatures, and organic solvents, which greatly enhances their     expression, cells were grown in 100 mL LB medium at 37◦C with shaking
reusability and facilitates continuous-flow catalysis (Fan et al., 2025).     at 220 rpm until the OD600 reached 0.6–0.8, after which protein
However, such systems may  suffer from  incompatibility between     expression was induced and the culture was continued at 18◦C for
different enzymes, leading to poor dispersion. Additionally, although    16–18 h. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 8,000 rpm for 5 min
conventional cell-free synthetic biology offers transformative potential     at 4◦C. The  cell  pellet was resuspended in 10 volumes (w/v) of
by decoupling biosynthesis from cellular constraints (Huffman et al.,     phosphate-buffered saline (50 mM PBS, pH 7.5) and homogenized to
2019; Kissman et al., 2024), it often faces rapid enzyme deactivation and     obtain a uniform suspension. Cell disruption was performed by soni­
inefficient substrate channeling, resulting in unsatisfactory catalytic     cation on ice (5 s pulses, 7 s intervals, 20 min total). The lysate was
performance—a limitation attributable to the absence of a stable,      clarified by centrifugation (10,000 rpm, 15 min, 4◦C) to remove cell
crowded environment in cell-free systems (Alfano et al., 2024).             debris. The resulting supernatant was subjected to purification using a
   To construct a uniform and  precisely organized multi-enzyme    Ni2+-NTA affinity column (Cytiva, USA) to capture the His-tagged pro­
cascade catalytic system, several bioorthogonal enzyme assembly plat­      teins. After washing, His-tagged proteins were eluted with a buffer
forms based on orthogonal conjugation pairs have been previously     containing 250–500 mM imidazole. The eluted protein was concen­
developed (Luo et al., 2024). Bioorthogonal conjugation systems enable     trated and buffer-exchanged into storage buffer (50 mM PBS, pH 7.5)
rapid and specific covalent linkage between Catcher proteins and their     using ultrafiltration devices (Merck Millipore Amicon Ultra-15, 10 kDa/
cognate Tag peptides through highly selective “click” reactions (Fan    5 kDa molecular weight, MA, USA), primarily to remove imidazole and
et al., 2023), thereby avoiding interference with native biological pro­    exchange the proteins into the storage buffer prior to subsequent ex­
cesses or in vitro synthetic systems (Hu et al., 2025). Owing to their     periments. Protein samples (lysate supernatant, insoluble fraction, and
excellent site specificity (Driscoll et al., 2024), strong covalent bonding     purified protein) were analyzed by SDS-PAGE.
(Keeble & Howarth, 2020; Schoene et al., 2014), and modularity, these
systems have shown great potential for constructing efficient and stable     2.3. Enzyme cross-linking
multi-enzyme cascade systems. More recently, a double-layer immobi­
lization strategy based on SpyTag/SpyCatcher (SpT/SpC) and azide-       Crude preparations of the six recombinant enzymes were obtained by
alkyne  cycloaddition was developed  for  the  precise assembly  of     concentrating the supernatants from whole-cell lysates. Protein con­
alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and aldo–keto reductase (AKR), which     centrations of each crude enzyme solution were determined using the
exhibited improved catalytic efficiency, selectivity, and operational     Bradford assay, and the molar concentration of each recombinant
stability during recycling (Luo et al., 2024).                         enzyme was calculated based on its theoretical molecular weight.
   Herein, an in vitro strategy inspired by metabolic engineering (Jiang       The six recombinant enzymes (Q-MK-SpC, SpT-PMK-SnC, SnT-PMD-
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025b) is presented to construct a shortened    DC, DT-IDI-In, Jo-ispA-K, and Q-FS) were mixed at an equimolar ratio
mevalonate (MVA) pathway comprising a limited set of enzymes and to     (1:1:1:1:1:1) in PBS buffer (50 mM, pH 7.5) to a final concentration of 5
assemble bioorthogonally ordered cross-linked enzyme complexes (O-   μM for each enzyme. The mixture was first incubated at 4◦C for 30 min
CLEs) as a multi-enzyme cascade for terpenoid synthesis. This recon­     with shaking at 200 rpm to allow initial recognition and binding be­
stituted pathway incorporates several key enzymes from the shortened    tween the bioorthogonal pairs (SpyTag/SpyCatcher, SnoopTag/Snoop­
MVA pathway, including mevalonate kinase (MK), phosphomevalonate     Catcher, DogTag/DogCatcher, KTag/QTag, and Jo/In). Subsequently,
kinase (PMK), mevalonate diphosphate decarboxylase (PMD),  iso­     microbial transglutaminase (MTG; gene sequence and purification de­
pentenyl diphosphate isomerase (IDI), farnesyl diphosphate synthase      tails are provided in the supplementary materials) was added to the
(ispA), β-farnesene synthase (FS), geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase     mixture at a molar ratio of Q-FS: MTG = 5:1, and incubation was
(GGPPS), and taxadiene synthase (TXS). This ordered biocatalytic     continued at 4◦C for an additional 3 h with shaking at 200 rpm to ca­
cascade is expected to establish substrate channels that promote effi­     talyse isopeptide bond formation. After the cross-linking reaction, the
cient intermediate transfer while reducing the toxicity associated with     resulting ordered cross-linked enzymes (O-CLEs) were collected by
reactive intermediates. This modular, bioorthogonality-driven strategy     centrifugation (10,000 rpm, 10 min, 4◦C) and washed twice with PBS
(Fig. 1b) is designed to enable the direct conversion of mevalonic acid     buffer to remove unbound proteins and excess MTG. For catalytic assays,
into high-value terpenoids through an in vitro reconstituted shortened     the centrifugation and washing steps were omitted, and mixture was
MVA pathway.                                                      used directly as the O-CLEs sample to maintain consistent enzyme
                                                                       loading across different systems for fair comparison.
2. Materials and methods                                         The preparation process of R-CLEs is shown in the supplementary
                                                                             materials.
2.1. Construction of plasmids and strains
                                                                                 2.4. Preparation of characterization samples
    Escherichia. coli (E. coli) DH5α and BL21(DE3) strains were obtained
from Novagen. The pET-28a (+) plasmid was purchased from Invitrogen       The preparation of samples for matrix-assisted laser desorption/
Corporation (USA). All heterologous genes were codon-optimized based     ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS, Bruker,
on the preference of E. coli before synthesis, and all the primers were     autoflex max, Germany), fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR,
synthesized by Generay Biotech (Shanghai, China). All plasmids and     Bruker, HYPERION II, Germany), scanning electron microscopy (SEM,
primers are listed in supplementary materials. PrimeStar Max Premix,     ZEISS, Sigma500, Germany), transmission electron microscopy (TEM,
T4 DNA Ligase, protein markers, alkaline Phosphatase (Calf intestine,     Hitachi, HT-7700, Japan) and confocal  laser scanning microscopy
CIAP), and restriction endonucleases were purchased from Takara    (CLSM, Olympus, FV3000RS, Japan) is described in the supplementary
Biomedical Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd. Plasmid construction and     materials.
target gene mutation were  verified by gene sequencing (Tsingke
Biotechnology, China).                                                        2.5. Enzymatic synthesis of β-farnesene and taxadiene

2.2. Protein expression and analysis                                         β-Farnesene and taxadiene were synthesized using mevalonic acid
                                                         (MVA) as the substrate. The reaction was carried out in PBS buffer (50
    E. coli cells harboring expression plasmids were cultivated in Luria-   mM, pH 7.5) containing 1 mM MVA, 4 mM ATP, 4 mM β-mercaptoe­
Bertani (LB) medium at 37◦C with appropriate antibiotics (e.g., kana­     thanol, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 10 mM DTT, and each enzyme was
mycin at 50 µg/mL, or chloramphenicol at 34 µg/mL). For protein    added as crude soluble lysates at a final concentration of 5 μM (either

                                                                        3


[PDF physical page 4]
C. Nie et al.                                                                                                                                   Bioresource Technology 459 (2026) 135232

wild-type enzymes or recombinant enzymes). The total reaction volume     weights of recombinant enzymes are as follows: Q-MK-SpC, 46.5 kDa;
is 5 mL, and the reaction was carried out with an n-hexane overlay (1    SpT-PMK-SnC, 56.3 kDa; SnT-PMD-DC, 55.8 kDa; DT-IDI-In, 41.4 kDa;
mL) at 30◦C and 200 rpm for 48 h (Single batch reaction).                 Jo-ispA-K, 45.1 kDa; and Q-FS, 71.8 kDa.
   For enzyme recycling experiments, each enzyme was used at a final       To verify the successful expression and purification of these recom­
concentration of 1 μM. Each 4 h catalytic cycle was carried out at 30◦C     binant enzymes, sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electro­
and 200 rpm with n-hexane overlay (1 mL). After cross-linking, the O-     phoresis (SDS-PAGE) analysis was performed. The SDS-PAGE results in
CLEs formed insoluble aggregates that could be readily sedimented by     Fig. 2a-f showed that each protein exhibited a clear target band at the
centrifugation. Following each catalytic cycle, the O-CLEs were recov­     expected molecular weight, indicating successful expression in the E. coli
ered by low-temperature centrifugation (10,000 rpm, 5 min, 4◦C) to    system and good purity. To further determine the exact molecular
separate them from the reaction mixture and the n-hexane layer. The    weight of the recombinant enzymes, MALDI-TOF-MS was employed for
recovered O-CLEs complexes were then reused by adding them to a fresh     precise measurement (Fig. 2a-f). The experimentally determined mo­
batch of substrate to initiate the next cycle. Relative activity was     lecular weights of each recombinant enzyme were highly consistent with
calculated by normalizing the yield of each cycle to that of Cycle 1     the theoretical predictions, and the error ranges met the requirements of
(defined as 100%).                                           MALDI-TOF-MS detection. These results demonstrate that all six re­
                                                                 combinant enzymes are successfully constructed and expressed in E. coli,
2.6. Analytical methods                                                 providing a reliable protein source for the subsequent ordered multi-
                                                            enzyme assembly and in vitro cascade studies.
   The upper n-hexane layer was collected by centrifugation at 10,000       To evaluate the structural retention of the recombinant enzymes, a
rpm for 5 min and analyzed by gas chromatography (GC). After    combined computational and experimental approach was used. First,
completion of the reaction, the n-hexane layer was dried over anhydrous     the three-dimensional structures of both wild-type (WT) and recombi­
sodium sulfate and filtered through an organic membrane filter. The     nant enzymes were predicted by using AlphaFold3 (https://alphafolds
products were analyzed by GC (Agilent 7890A, Santa Clara, CA, USA)     erver.com). PyMOL was used to compare the protein structures of the
and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC–MS, Agilent 8890-    recombinant enzymes with those of the wild-type enzymes, and low
7000E, Santa Clara, CA, USA) using an HP-5 column. The injection     root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) values were calculated (Fig. 2g-l).
volume is 1 µL.                                                     These results confirm that the overall folding and key catalytic residues
   For β-farnesene analysis, the GC oven temperature program was as     of recombinant enzymes remain highly conserved, with no major
follows: 60◦C, maintained for 1 min, then ramped to 200◦C at 20◦C/min     structural perturbations introduced during the engineering process.
(held for 1 min), and finally ramped to 250◦C at 20◦C/min (held for 1       To further validate these predictions at the secondary level, FT-IR
min).                                                        was conducted (Ruggeri et al., 2020). The amide I band (1600–1700
   Taxadiene was analyzed by GC–MS under the following conditions:    cm−1) primarily corresponds to the C––O stretching vibrations of the
initial temperature of 110◦C held for 1 min, followed by a ramp to 300◦C     protein backbone, and its position and shape are sensitive to secondary
at 30◦C/min held for 6 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in     structures such as α-helices and β-sheets. The amide II band (1500–1600
electron ionization (EI) mode at 70 eV, with the ion source at 230◦C, the    cm−1) is predominantly associated with deformation vibration of the
quadrupole at 150◦C, and a scan range of m/z 10–500.                    peptide backbone, involving a combination of N–H bending and C–N
                                                                             stretching modes (Ye  et  al., 2024), which also responds to local
3. Results and discussion                                            conformational changes. The results showed that the absorption peak
                                                                             positions of the recombinant enzymes (red curve, see supplementary
3.1. Construction, expression, and structure of recombinant enzymes          materials) and wild-type enzymes (black curve, see supplementary
                                                                            materials) in the amide I and amide II regions exhibited no significant
   Bioorthogonal chemistry provides an efficient enzyme immobiliza­      shifts, and both have strong absorbance. Collectively, the SDS-PAGE, FT-
tion strategy, with the key advantage of enabling precise control of the     IR, and AlphaFold analyses indicate that the overall folding of each re­
spatial arrangement and orientation of enzyme molecules through site-    combinant enzyme was retained after fusion with bioorthogonal tags.
specific covalent conjugation (Pei et al., 2022; Scinto et al., 2021). By    However, while these static measurements suggest that the overall fold
employing bioorthogonal pairs, multiple enzymes can self-assemble into      is retained, they do not exclude the possibility of local dynamic changes
O-CLEs. The SpyTag/SpyCatcher (SpT/SpC) pair (Fig. 1c), derived from     or partial occlusion of active sites. Therefore, further validation through
the CnaB2 domain of the Streptococcus pyogenes FbaB protein, sponta­     catalytic functional assays is necessary.
neously forms an isopeptide bond between SpyTag Asp117 and Spy­        Nevertheless, we measured the specific activities of MK, PMK, and
Catcher Lys31 (Keeble et al., 2017). The SnoopTag/SnoopCatcher (SnT/   PMD (the three ATP-consuming enzymes in the MVA pathway) as well
SnC, Fig. 1d) and DogTag/DogCatcher (DT/DC, Fig. 1e) systems origi­     as their corresponding recombinant enzymes by monitoring ATP con­
nate from domain 4 of the Streptococcus pneumoniae adhesin RrgA and    sumption using the ATP Content Assay Kit. The recombinant enzymes
differ in their split sites: SnT/SnC is a type N split, whereas DT/DC is a    (Q-MK-SpC, SpT-PMK-SnC, and SnT-PMD-DC) retained catalytic activ­
type C split (Fan et al., 2023). The Jo/In pair (Fig. 1f), derived from      ities comparable to those of the corresponding wild-type enzymes (MK,
domain 2 of RrgA, also mediates spontaneous isopeptide bond formation    PMK, and PMD), with specific activities of 0.86 ± 0.09 U/mg vs. 0.98 ±
(Artico et al., 2025). In addition, microbial transglutaminase (MTG)     0.03 U/mg for MK, 0.49 ± 0.07 U/mg vs. 0.50 ± 0.01 U/mg for PMK,
catalyzes covalent cross-linking between glutamine and lysine residues    and 0.14 ± 0.04 U/mg vs. 0.15 ± 0.04 U/mg for PMD, respectively (see
(Fig. 1g) (Chio et al., 2020). Accordingly, the QTag and KTag peptide    supplementary materials). These results indicate that the introduced
tags enable MTG-mediated protein ligation through isopeptide bond     tags did not significantly impair the catalytic function of these enzymes.
formation. Notably, all of the above bioorthogonal pairs mediate protein     For IDI, ispA, and FS, the lack of suitable substrates and direct detection
ligation with defined 1:1 stoichiometric specificity (Pei et al., 2022).      methods in our laboratory precluded accurate kinetic characterization.
   To assemble the six-enzyme O-CLEs, highly specific bioorthogonal     Future work will focus on establishing sensitive analytical methods for
pairs were selected to ensure controlled and accurate assembly (Schoene     these intermediates and performing detailed kinetic analysis of the full
et al., 2014). All wild-type enzymes were successfully expressed and     cascade.
purified (supplementary materials). The bioorthogonal pairs were pre­
cisely inserted into the N- and C-termini of the target enzymes via ge­     3.2. Characterization and order confirmation of six-enzyme assemblies
netic  engineering,  enabling  the  directional  assembly  of  the  six
recombinant enzymes (Xu et  al., 2025). The theoretical molecular         Verification of the assembly order in multi-enzyme systems  is

                                                                        4


[PDF physical page 5]
C. Nie et al.                                                                                                                                   Bioresource Technology 459 (2026) 135232





Fig. 2. Construction, expression and structural analysis of recombinant enzymes. (a–f) SDS-PAGE analysis (left) and MALDI-TOF-MS (right) of the six purified re­
combinant enzymes. (a) Q-MK-SpC (calculated molecular weight: 46.5 kDa; observed: 46.29 kDa). (b) SpT-PMK-SnC (calculated: 56.3 kDa; observed: 56.0 kDa). (c)
SnT-PMD-DC (calculated: 55.8 kDa; observed: 55.8 kDa). (d) DT-IDI-In (calculated: 41.4 kDa; observed: 41.8 kDa). (e) Jo-ispA-K (calculated: 45.1 kDa; observed:
45.1 kDa). (f) Q-FS (calculated: 71.8 kDa; observed: 71.2 kDa). (g–l) Structural overlay of predicted models of wild-type and recombinant enzymes. (g) MK vs. Q-MK-
SpC (purple vs light green). (h) PMK vs. SpT-PMK-SnC (blue vs green). (i) PMD vs. SnT-PMD-DC (red vs green). (j) IDI vs. DT-IDI-In (orange vs grey). (k) ispA vs. Jo-
ispA-K (orange vs blue). (l) FS vs. Q-FS (yellow vs deep Magenta).

critically important (Gao et al., 2014), as it directly determines whether     in Fig. 3e, evidenced by the formation of a dual-enzyme complex (boxed
substrate channelling is effectively established. To verify the in vitro     area, Lane 3) upon incubation of DT-IDI-In (Lane 1) and Jo-ispA-K (Lane
assembly capability of the bioorthogonal pairs and the order of assembly      2). Furthermore, MTG-catalyzed cross-linking between KTag and QTag
of O-CLEs, SDS-PAGE and CLSM were employed for analysis.            was confirmed in Fig. 3f, where incubation of Jo-ispA-K (Lane 1) and Q-
   As shown in Fig. 3a, the results of bioorthogonal pairing between    FS (Lane 2) at 4◦C for 2 h generated a dual-enzyme complex (boxed area,
recombinant enzymes are presented. Compared with single enzyme    Lane 3). Collectively, the appearance of these dual-enzyme complex
samples, the two-enzyme complex samples exhibited a clear shift in    bands demonstrates that the bioorthogonal pair system enables efficient
electrophoretic mobility, indicating the formation of higher molecular    assembly of the six enzymes.
weight complexes. Each bioorthogonal pair used in this study was       The SDS-PAGE analysis of the  fully assembled O-CLEs system
validated. In Fig. 3b, incubation of Q-MK-SpC (Lane 1) with SpT-PMK-    confirmed the formation of six-enzyme complexes, as evidenced by a
SnC (Lane 2) at 4◦C for 2 h resulted in the formation of a dual-enzyme     high-molecular-weight band above 250 kDa (Fig. 3g). As the cross­
complex (boxed area, Lane 3), confirming efficient covalent linkage     linking reaction progressed, the intensity of the individual enzyme
between SpyTag and SpyCatcher. Similarly, incubation of SpT-PMK-SnC    bands (monomers) gradually decreased, accompanied by the appear­
(Fig. 3c, Lane 1) and SnT-PMD-DC (Fig. 3c, Lane 2) produced a dual-    ance of intermediate bands corresponding to higher-order assemblies.
enzyme complex band (Fig. 3c, boxed area, Lane 3), verifying specific     Notably, a significant portion of the crosslinked product accumulated at
covalent binding between SnoopTag and SnoopCatcher. As shown in     the top of the gel consistent with the formation of a high-molecular-
Fig. 3d, mixing SnT-PMD-DC (Lane 1) with DT-IDI-In (Lane 2) yielded a    weight multi-enzyme complex that is too large to enter the resolving
clear dual-enzyme complex (Lane 3, boxed), demonstrating effective      gel. In addition to the complete six-enzyme assembly, we also verified
DogTag/DogCatcher-mediated conjugation between recombinant PMD     the stepwise crosslinking of a specific enzyme group (see supplementary
and IDI. The Jo/In pair also facilitated efficient cross-linking, as shown     materials).  Pairwise  and  ternary  crosslinking  experiments  were


                                                                        5


[PDF physical page 6]
C. Nie et al.                                                                                                                                   Bioresource Technology 459 (2026) 135232





Fig. 3. SDS-PAGE verification of recombinant enzyme cross-linking. (a) Schematic diagram of bioorthogonal pair cross-linking. (b) SDS-PAGE analysis of cross-
linking between purified Q-MK-SpC and SpT-PMK-SnC (M, marker; Lane 1, Q-MK-SpC; Lane 2, SpT-PMK-SnC; Lane 3, 2h cross-linking sample). (c) SDS-PAGE
analysis of cross-linking between purified SpT-PMK-SnC and SnC-PMD-DC (M, marker; Lane 1, SnT-PMK-SnC; Lane 2, SnC-PMD-DC; Lane 3, 2h cross-linking
sample). (d) SDS-PAGE analysis of cross-linking between purified SnC-PMD-DC and DT-IDI-In (M, marker; Lane 1, SnC-PMD-DC; Lane 2, DT-IDI-In; Lane 3, 2h
cross-linking sample). (e) SDS-PAGE analysis of cross-linking between purified DT-IDI-In and Jo-ispA-K (M, marker; Lane 1, DT-IDI-In; Lane 2, Jo-ispA-K; Lane 3, 2h
cross-linking sample). (f) SDS-PAGE analysis of cross-linking between purified Jo-ispA-K, Q-FS and MTG (M, marker; Lane 1, Jo-ispA-K; Lane 2, Q-FS; Lane 3, 2 h
cross-linking sample). (g) SDS-PAGE analysis of cross-linking between six enzymes (M, marker; Lane 1, Q-MK-SpC; Lane 2, SpT-PMK-SnC; Lane 3, SnC-PMD-DC; Lane
4, DT-IDI-In; Lane 5, Jo-ispA-K; Lane 6, Q-FS; Lane 7, MTG; Lane 8, 0h cross-linking sample; Lane 9, 0.25 h cross-linking sample; Lane 10, 0.5 h cross-linking sample;
Lane 11, 1 h cross-linking sample; Lane 12, 2 h cross-linking sample; Lane 13, 4 h cross-linking sample). (h) SDS-PAGE analysis of the supernatant samples before and
after the six-enzyme cross-linking (M, marker; Lane 1, Q-MK-SpC; Lane 2, SpT-PMK-SnC; Lane 3, SnC-PMD-DC; Lane 4, DT-IDI-In; Lane 5, Jo-ispA-K; Lane 6, Q-FS;
Lane 7, the supernatant sample before cross-linking; Lane 8, the supernatant sample after 4 h cross-linking).

performed for groups including Q-MK-SpC-SpT-PMK-SnC-SnT-PMD-DC,     revealed that all six enzyme bands were present before cross-linking,
SpT-PMK-SnC-SnT-PMD-DC-DT-IDI-In, SnT-PMD-DC-DT-IDI-In-Jo-ispA-    whereas after 4 h of cross-linking, only the MTG band and trace
K, and Jo-ispA-K-Q-FS. In each case, distinct bands corresponding to    amounts of a few proteins remained detectable (Fig. 3h). The disap­
dimeric and trimeric complexes were clearly observed, confirming the     pearance of the six target enzyme bands from the supernatant confirms
specific and efficient crosslinking of each bioorthogonal pair. These     their efficient incorporation into the O-CLEs complex.
dynamic observations strongly support the progressive assembly of the        Subsequently, CLSM was employed to further verify the stepwise
six enzymes into the O-CLEs complex. Importantly, the clear presence of     formation of the six-enzyme O-CLEs using multi-layer fluorescence la­
the complete complex, together with the enhanced catalytic perfor­     beling technology (MLFLT). Four different fluorescent proteins—red
mance of the assembled system compared to the free-enzyme mixture,     fluorescent protein mCherry (mc) (Subach et al., 2009), green fluores­
demonstrates that the majority of enzymes are successfully incorporated     cent protein GFP (Svendsen et al., 2017), blue fluorescent protein BFP
into functional O-CLEs.                                                   (Jablonski et al., 2013), and yellow fluorescent protein YFP (Lee et al.,
   The immobilization efficiency of the six-enzyme O-CLEs system    2025)—were genetically fused to Q-MK-SpC, SpT-PMK-SnC, SnT-PMD-
reached about 90% after 4 h of cross-linking (see supplementary    DC, DT-IDI-In, Jo-ispA-K, and Q-FS, respectively (detailed construction
materials), indicating that the majority of the target enzymes were     procedures for the fluorescent proteins are provided in supplementary
successfully co-immobilized. This high efficiency demonstrates the     materials).
effectiveness of the bioorthogonal conjugation pairs and MTG-mediated       As shown in the single-channel CLSM images, Q-MK-mc-SpC and DT-
cross-linking for one-step multi-enzyme immobilization. Further anal­     IDI-mc-In exhibited red fluorescence at 610–587 nm (Fig. 4a); SpT-GFP-
ysis of the supernatants before and after cross-linking by SDS-PAGE    PMK-SnC exhibited green fluorescence at 510–488 nm (Fig. 4b); SnT-

                                                                        6


[PDF physical page 7]
C. Nie et al.                                                                                                                                   Bioresource Technology 459 (2026) 135232





Fig. 4. Fluorescence characterization diagram of the cross-linked enzymes. (a–d) CLSM image of the O-CLEs in the wavelength range of 610–587 nm, 510–488 nm,
422–401 nm and 527–480 nm, respectively. (e) CLSM image of the O-CLEs in the wavelength range of 610–587 nm, 510–488 nm, and 422–401 nm. (f) CLSM image
of the O-CLEs in the wavelength range of 610–587 nm, 527–480 nm, and 422–401 nm. (g–j) single-label controls imaged in the wavelength range of 610–587 nm,
510–488 nm, 422–401 nm and 527–480 nm, respectively. (k) Schematic diagram of @Q-MK-mc-SpC, and CLSM image of resin in the wavelength range of 610–587
nm. (l) Schematic diagram of @Q-MK-mc-SpC-SpT-GFP-PMK-SnC, and CLSM image of resin in dual-wavelength channels (610–587 nm, and 510–488 nm). (m)
Schematic diagram of @Q-MK-mc-SpC-SpT-GFP-PMK-SnC-SnT-PMD-BFP-DC, and CLSM image in three wavelength channels (610–587 nm, 510–488 nm, and
422–401 nm). (n) Schematic diagram of @Q-MK-mc-SpC-SpT-GFP-PMK-SnC-SnT-PMD-BFP-DC-DT-IDI-mc-In, and CLSM image in three wavelength channels
(610–587 nm, 510–488 nm, and 422–401 nm). (o) Schematic diagram of @Q-MK-mc-SpC-SpT-GFP-PMK-SnC-SnT-PMD-BFP-DC-DT-IDI-mc-In-Jo-ispA-YFP-K, and
CLSM image in three wavelength channels (610–587 nm, 527–480 nm, and 422–401 nm). (p) Schematic diagram of @Q-MK-mc-SpC-SpT-GFP-PMK-SnC-SnT-PMD-
BFP-DC-DT-IDI-mc-In-Jo-ispA-YFP-K-Q-FS-BFP, and CLSM image in three wavelength channels (610–587 nm, 527–480 nm, and 422–401 nm). (q) Schematic diagram
of @Q-MK-SpC-SpT-PMK-SnC-SnT-PMD-DC-DT-IDI-mc-In and CLSM image in wavelength channels with wavelength ranges of 610–587 nm. (r) Schematic diagram of
@Q-MK-SpC-SpT-PMK-SnC-SnT-PMD-DC-DT-IDI-mc-In-Jo-ispA-YFP-K and CLSM image in two wavelength channels (610–587 nm and 527–480 nm). (s) Schematic
diagram of @Q-MK-SpC-SpT-PMK-SnC-SnT-PMD-DC-DT-IDI-mc-In-Jo-ispA-YFP-K-Q-FS-BFP and CLSM image in three wavelength channels (610–587 nm, 527–480
nm and 422–401 nm).

PMD-BFP-DC and Q-FS-BFP emitted blue fluorescence at 422–401 nm     simple mixing and incubation of the corresponding cell lysates.
(Fig. 4c); and Jo-ispA-YFP-K showed yellow fluorescence at 527–480 nm       Then, MLFLT was used to verify the ordered cross-linking of the six
(Fig. 4d). In the merged three-channel CLSM images (Fig. 4e and Fig. 4f),    recombinant enzymes, which were fused with distinct fluorescent pro­
clear spatial overlap of the corresponding fluorescence signals were     teins (mCherry, GFP, BFP, or YFP) to enable visualization. Layer-by-
observed, indicating the successful incorporation of all designed fluo­     layer assembly was carried out on amino-functionalized resins to
rescent fusion proteins within the same O-CLEs complex. The primary     reproduce the order of the six enzymes. However, the MLFLT data is only
objective of this CLSM analysis was to confirm that all fluorescent fusion     to visualize the layering order, rather than to directly prove the solution-
proteins were correctly expressed and co-localized within the O-CLEs,     state structure of O-CLEs. As shown in Fig. 4g-j, each fluorescent protein
demonstrating that the system can be efficiently constructed through    (mCherry, GFP, BFP, and YFP) was imaged individually under  all

                                                                        7


[PDF physical page 8]
C. Nie et al.                                                                                                                                   Bioresource Technology 459 (2026) 135232

excitation channels. As shown in Fig. 4k-p, when multiple excitation        In summary, the SEM and TEM analyses provide consistent evidence
channels were opened simultaneously, the edge color of the resin     that the bioorthogonal pairing strategy yields O-CLEs with the intended
consistently corresponded to the fluorescence of the outermost recom­     aggregate morphology. The resulting O-CLEs appeared as uniform,
binant enzyme layer. Specifically, when Q-MK-mc-SpC was the outer­     micron-scale polymeric structures in both SEM and TEM images. Such
most layer, red fluorescence was observed at the resin edge (Fig. 4k).    compact organization  is expected to facilitate cascade reactions by
After the sequential addition of SpT-GFP-PMK-SnC, the resin edge     locally enriching substrates and intermediates. Furthermore, the crow­
turned green (Fig. 4l), while the center appeared yellow (a mixed colour    ded microenvironment likely offers partial protection to the enzymes,
of red and green) when the red and green channels were opened     reducing their exposure to organic solvents, extreme pH, and high
simultaneously. When the red, green and blue channels were excited     temperatures.
together, the resin center exhibited white (a mixture of red, green, and
blue). When SnC-PMD-BFP-DC was the outermost layer, a blue edge was     3.4. Synthesis of terpenoids using six-enzyme ordered cross-linked enzyme
observed (Fig. 4m). Similarly, a red edge was observed when DT-IDI-mc-     complexes
In was the outermost layer (Fig. 4n). When the blue, red, and yellow
excitation  channels were opened  simultaneously,  a  yellow  edge        In this study, mevalonate was employed as the starting substrate for
appeared when Jo-ispA-YFP-K was the outermost layer (Fig. 4o), and a     the synthesis of terpenoids (including β-farnesene and taxadiene) via the
blue edge appears when Q-FS-BFP was the outermost layer (Fig. 4p).     O-CLEs, and the complete synthetic route is presented in (Fig. 5a). The
Given the close similarity in excitation wavelengths between GFP and     products were qualitatively and quantitatively analyzed by gas chro­
YFP, control experiments were performed by replacing the fluorescent    matography (GC) and mass spectrometry (MS). The GC results (Fig. 5b)
proteins in the first three layers of the resin with non-fluorescent re­    showed that the retention time of the reaction product coincided with
combinant proteins. As in Fig. 4q-s, when the yellow excitation light     that of the β-farnesene standard. The MS (Fig. 5c) of the reaction product
channel was opened, only the Jo-ispA-YFP-K in the fifth layer would     exhibited characteristic ion signals matching those of the β-farnesene
emit yellow fluorescence, thus eliminating the interference of green     standard, confirming product identity. To maximize the catalytic effi­
fluorescence. It can be seen from the CLSM image that when the red     ciency, the reaction conditions were systematically optimized (Fig. 5d).
fluorescent channel is opened alone, the resin appears red (Fig. 4q),    The optimal MVA concentration was 1 mM, as yields declined beyond
indicating that the DT-IDI-mc-In in the fourth layer has been successfully      this point. The optimization of Mg2+ concentration revealed that the
cross-linked. When the excitation light channel of the yellow fluorescent     highest β-farnesene yield was achieved at 10 mM MgCl2, while higher
protein is opened, it can be seen that the resin appears orange and has a     concentrations substantially reduced enzymatic activity. ATP concen­
yellow fluorescent ring around it (Fig. 4r), which proves that the fifth     tration gradient experiments indicated that 4 mM ATP was sufficient to
layer of Jo-ispA-YFP-K has also been successfully cross-linked onto the    meet the catalytic demand, and further increases did not improve yield.
resin. When the blue fluorescence channel is opened again, the center of    The optimal pH for the reaction was determined to be 7.5, as both acidic
the resin shows purple, and the periphery emits blue fluorescence    and alkaline conditions led to decreased enzyme activity. In summary,
(Fig. 4s). This experiment further confirmed that the cross-linking of the     the optimal reaction conditions were: pH 7.5, 1 mM MVA, 10 mM MgCl2,
cross-linking enzyme is completely ordered.                          and 4 mM ATP.
   In summary, the SDS-PAGE results confirmed the efficiency and        In the wild-type enzyme system (untagged enzymes), the farnesene
specificity of covalent  cross-linking, while CLSM imaging  directly     synthase (FS) produced two detectable products: β-farnesene (7.25 min)
revealed the ordered distribution of the complex at the microscale.    and  farnesol  (8.92 min)  (see supplementary  materials).  Previous
Together, these findings confirm that the bioorthogonal multi-enzyme     mechanistic studies (Wang et al., 2024) identified that residues such as
assembly achieves precise and controllable organization. Such assem­   W299 and Y402 govern substrate binding, and that the M433I mutation
bly order is critical for facilitating substrate channelling and minimizing    enhances active-site hydrophobicity to promote β-farnesene formation.
diffusion losses. Compared with conventional random immobilization     Accordingly, the same M433I mutation was introduced into the farne­
approaches,  this level of spatial organization represents a distinct     sene synthase (FS-M433I, see supplementary materials). GC analysis
advantage of bioorthogonal assembly strategies. While MLFLT on resin    confirmed  that FS-M433I  preferentially produced β-farnesene  (see
beads confirmed the feasibility of ordered layer-by-layer assembly, the    supplementary materials) compared to the wild-type enzyme. There­
solution-state structure of O-CLEs may differ due to the absence of a      fore, FS-M433I and Q-FS-M433I were employed in subsequent cascade
solid surface. Therefore, further validation  is required by directly     reactions for β-farnesene production.
comparing the catalytic performance of O-CLEs with that of R-CLEs.         The concentration of β-farnesene was quantified by GC using a
                                                                      standard curve (see supplementary materials). Under identical condi­
3.3. Microstructure of six-enzyme ordered cross-linked enzyme complexes       tions (Fig. 5e), the O-CLEs system efficiently converted mevalonate into
                                                                          β-farnesene with a yield as high as 49.08 ± 1.91 mg/L, compared to
   The  six recombinant enzymes were cross-linked in a designed    35.33 ± 0.51 mg/L for the WT enzyme mixture (untagged enzymes) and
manner through bioorthogonal pairs to generate O-CLEs. To charac­    16.21 ± 1.68 mg/L for the R-CLEs system, representing a 1.39-fold and
terize the microstructure of the O-CLEs, samples subjected to ultrasonic     3.03-fold increase, respectively. Highlighting that the enhanced cata­
dispersion were examined using SEM and TEM (Wu et al., 2024).            lytic efficiency of O-CLEs specifically arises from ordered assembly
  SEM images (see supplementary materials) show that the O-CLEs     rather than from general immobilization or molecular crowding effects.
form densely packed, granular aggregates, a morphology consistent with    While the comparison between O-CLEs and R-CLEs suggests that ordered
the spatial distribution observed in the CLSM images (Fig. 4a-f). The    assembly enhances cascade efficiency, direct mechanistic evidence of
aggregates exhibit relatively uniform size, with particle diameters in the     substrate channeling (e.g., time-resolved intermediate analysis, diffu­
range of approximately 2–3 μm. Notably, higher-magnification SEM     sion measurements) remains to be established. Future studies will focus
images (see supplementary materials) reveal a characteristic structural    on providing such evidence. Additionally, when the washed O-CLEs
feature in which the assemblies appear thicker at the center and grad­    were used (after removing unbound enzymes), the yield remained
ually taper toward the edges. TEM images (see supplementary materials)    comparable to that of the unwashed O-CLEs relative to the total input
further confirm the presence of particle structures with comparable     activity (43.03 ± 1.09 mg/L), indicating that the observed enhancement
morphology. The TEM observations are in strong agreement with the      is primarily attributed to the immobilized ordered assembly rather than
SEM characterization, collectively demonstrating the formation of as­     residual  free  enzymes.  Furthermore,  the  non-equimolar   ratio
semblies through the ordered, bioorthogonal cross-linking of the six     (5:5:2:5:2:2) (Zhu et al., 2014) resulted in a yield of 53.64 ± 3.66 mg/L,
recombinant enzymes.                                                   suggesting that enzyme stoichiometry also plays a  critical role in

                                                                        8


[PDF physical page 9]
C. Nie et al.                                                                                                                                   Bioresource Technology 459 (2026) 135232





Fig. 5. Synthesis of β-farnesene. (a) Scheme of β-farnesene catalytic route. (b) GC analysis of β-farnesene standards and reaction products. (c) MS analysis of
β-farnesene standards and reaction products. (d) Optimization results diagram of reaction conditions (MVA concentration, pH, temperature, Mg2+ concentration, ATP
concentration). (e) Comparison chart of β-farnesene production in different systems. (f) Cyclic catalysis of the O-CLEs cascade system, relative activity was calculated
by normalizing the yield of each cycle to that of Cycle 1 (defined as 100%). (n = 3).

optimizing cascade efficiency. In future work, enhancing the intrinsic    much higher titers, such as 1.1 g/L (11.46 mg⋅L−1⋅h−1) of α-farnesene in
activity of individual enzymes via engineering to better match their    shake flasks using engineered E. coli (Zhu et al., 2014), and 8.74 g/L
disparate turnover rates, followed by incorporating tandem orthogonal     (91.04 mg⋅L−1⋅h−1) of β-farnesene in a lab-scale bioreactor using a
tag repeats to fine-tune their relative stoichiometry within the complex,     constructed E. coli strain with a relatively balanced mevalonate pathway
is proposed. This combined strategy would enable precise control over    (You et  al., 2017). However, these high-titer fermentations require
enzyme spatial distribution and molar ratios, allowing further optimi­    extended cultivation times, large amounts of biomass, and rely on
zation of metabolic flux and substrate channeling.                      complex living cell systems with intricate metabolic regulation. Impor­
   To further elucidate the catalytic pathway, the formation of key in­     tantly, despite its lower absolute titer, the O-CLEs system consumes
termediates was monitored during the reaction. This enzyme hydrolyzes     substantially less enzyme (due to reusability), operates over a shorter
IPP and FPP to isopentenol (IOH) and farnesol (FOH), respectively, both     reaction time (48 h), and maintains 62 ± 9% activity after six cycles,
of which are readily detectable by GC (see supplementary materials).     highlighting its potential for rapid, recyclable, and operationally simple
Comparative GC analysis with standards (see supplementary materials)     terpenoid production. Despite these advantages, the current O-CLEs
confirmed the presence of these intermediates in all reaction systems.      system exhibits relatively low absolute productivity (49.08 ± 1.91 mg/L
   To further investigate the stability and reusability of the O-CLEs     β-farnesene), which limits its immediate industrial application. Several
system, cyclic catalytic experiments were performed. Notably, the yield     factors may contribute to this limitation. First, activity loss during
of β-farnesene remained stable during the first three cycles, indicating     immobilization  cannot  be  fully  excluded.  Although  FT-IR  (see
that the cross-linked enzymes maintained excellent catalytic efficiency    supplementary materials) and AlphaFold analyses (Fig. 2g-l) confirmed
under the reaction conditions without significant activity loss. This     that the overall fold was retained after tag fusion, the cross-linking re­
sustained performance can be attributed to the structural robustness     action itself (4 h incubation at 4◦C) may cause minor activity loss; the
conferred by covalent cross-linking, which preserves enzyme confor­     specific activities of the recombinant enzymes were comparable to their
mation and facilitates substrate channeling during repeated use. After     wild-type counterparts (see supplementary materials), suggesting that
six cycles, the catalytic activity of the O-CLEs retained approximately 62     tag fusion does not severely impair activity, but the immobilization step
± 9% of its initial activity (Fig. 5f), demonstrating the reusability of the     warrants further optimization. Second, to verify whether ATP became a
O-CLEs system. The gradual activity loss over repeated cycles can be     limiting factor, the residual ATP concentration at the reaction endpoint
attributed to enzyme leaching during recovery steps (centrifugation,    was measured. Under the optimized conditions, the residual ATP con­
washing, and redispersion), as well as gradual damage to the enzyme     centration was determined to be 0.82 ± 0.04 mM (see supplementary
structures during prolonged operation. In summary, the O-CLEs provide     materials),  indicating  that  approximately  3.18 mM  ATP  was
robust reusability, highlighting their potential for repeated batch or    consumed. Given that the final β-farnesene titer was 0.24 mM (49.08 ±
semi-continuous applications. This reusability reduces enzyme con­     1.91 mg/L), the theoretical ATP requirement would be 2.16 mM. The
sumption, lowers process  costs, and  simplifies  operation, thereby     actual ATP consumption slightly exceeds this theoretical value, which
improving the economic feasibility of β-farnesene production.          may be attributed to the accumulation of phosphorylated intermediates
   To benchmark the catalytic performance of the O-CLEs system, we     or  non-productive ATP  hydrolysis  by  endogenous  phosphatases.
compared its productivity with previously reported in vivo systems for     Importantly, the residual ATP of 0.82 mM confirms that ATP was not
terpenoid production from glycerol. The O-CLEs system achieved a     depleted during the reaction, ruling out ATP insufficiency as a yield-
β-farnesene titer of 49.08 ± 1.91 mg/L with a space–time yield of 1.02     limiting factor. This is consistent with the observation that increasing
mg⋅L−1⋅h−1 at a 5 mL reaction scale using mevalonate as the substrate. In    ATP beyond 4 mM did not improve yield (Fig. 5d). Instead, the yield
comparison, engineered microbial fermentation systems have achieved     limitation is more likely attributable to downstream enzymatic steps or

                                                                        9


[PDF physical page 10]
C. Nie et al.                                                                                                                                   Bioresource Technology 459 (2026) 135232

intermediate accumulation. Third, enzyme stoichiometry in the current     detected at a retention time of 5.358 min. The corresponding MS char­
O-CLEs system is limited to equimolar assembly (1:1:1:1:1:1) due to the      acteristic ions at m/z 272.2, 257.2, 229.1, 133.1, 122.1, and 107.1
single-copy orthogonal tags on each enzyme. However, free-enzyme      (Fig. 6c, red MS spectrum) were consistent with the characteristic ions of
optimization suggested that a non-equimolar ratio (5:5:2:5:2:2) could     taxadiene (m/z 272, 257, 229, 122, 107) reported in the literature
further improve yield (Fig. 5d). Future engineering of multi-copy tag    (Ajikumar et al., 2010), confirming that the product was taxadiene. In
fusions will be required to achieve optimal stoichiometry within cova­     the wild-type system products (Fig. 6b, black GC curve), no obvious GC
lently assembled complexes. Finally, for industrial-scale production,    peak was observed at 5.358 min, and no such key characteristic frag­
several challenges remain, including the cost of enzyme production    ment ions were detected in the MS spectrum (Fig. 6b, black MS results).
(crude lysates are inexpensive but require standardization), long-term     Additionally, GGPP was detected in the taxadiene reaction mixture (see
operational stability (62 ± 9% activity retained after 6 cycles), and    supplementary materials), further supporting the reliability of the sys­
reactor design for large-scale O-CLEs recycling. Nevertheless, the robust     tem. These results provide preliminary qualitative evidence that the O-
reusability and simplified operation of the O-CLEs system represent    CLEs system has the potential to be modular. By replacing the down­
significant steps toward cost-effective terpenoid biomanufacturing.        stream enzymes, the system could be adapted to synthesize different
   To explore the modular applicability of the O-CLEs strategy, the     terpenoid products, although quantitative validation of taxadiene pro­
downstream enzymes of the system were redesigned. In the redesigned     duction will require further optimization and more sensitive analytical
pathway, geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase (GGPPS) and taxadiene    methods. Nevertheless, the taxadiene production results were repro­
synthase (TXS) were introduced to replace ispA and FS, respectively.     ducible: in repeated experiments (n = 3), taxadiene was consistently
Based on this redesign, a new catalytic system was established for the     detected  by  GC–MS  with  matching   characteristic  ions   (see
biosynthesis of taxadiene (Fig. 6a). SDS-PAGE, MALDI-TOF-MS, and FT-    supplementary materials). This reproducibility further confirms the
IR analysis of K-GGPPS-Jo and Q-TXS demonstrated that the recombi­      reliability of the modular assembly strategy. Furthermore, the reus­
nant enzymes were successfully reconstructed and expressed in soluble      ability of the taxadiene-producing O-CLEs system was evaluated, and
form, with no significant structural differences compared to the wild-     the system retained approximately 42 ± 2% of its initial activity after
type enzymes  (see supplementary  materials). The  taxadiene was     four consecutive  cycles  (see supplementary  materials). Similar  to
analyzed by GC–MS. In Fig. 6b, a distinct GC peak (red curve) was     β-farnesene biosynthesis, this O-CLEs system also exhibited a loss of





Fig. 6. Synthesis of taxadiene. (a) Schematic diagram of assembly and catalysis of the O-CLEs. (b) GC analysis of catalytic results from the WT free-enzyme mixture
and O-CLEs systems. (c) MS analysis of catalytic results from the WT free-enzyme mixture and O-CLEs system (n = 3).

                                                                        10


[PDF physical page 11]
C. Nie et al.                                                                                                                                   Bioresource Technology 459 (2026) 135232

activity due to possible leaching and structure damage. This result    2025B20700923).
demonstrates that the modular replacement of downstream enzymes
does not compromise the stability conferred by the bioorthogonal as­    Appendix A. Supplementary data
sembly, further supporting the general applicability of this O-CLEs
strategy for terpenoid biosynthesis.                                      Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
                                                                      org/10.1016/j.biortech.2026.135232.
4. Conclusions
                                                             Data availability
   In summary, this work developed an in vitro modular multi-enzyme
cascade system based on bioorthogonal assembly of six enzymes from       Data will be made available on request.
the shortened mevalonate pathway for efficient terpenoid biosynthesis.
Through site-specific covalent assembly, the strategy achieved precise    References
spatial organization of enzymes, enhancing substrate channeling while
reducing intermediate diffusion loss. Using this system, β-farnesene and      Ajikumar, P.K., Xiao, W., Tyo, K.E.J., et al., 2010. Isoprenoid pathway optimization for                                                                                                    taxol precursor overproduction in Escherichia coli. Science 330 (6000), 70–74.
taxadiene were successfully synthesized, demonstrating improved cat­      Alfano, C., Fichou, Y., Huber, K., et al., 2024. Molecular crowding: the history and
alytic efficiency, enhanced operational stability, and superior overall         development of a scientific paradigm. Chem. Rev. 124 (6), 3186–3219.
cascade performance.                                                                       Artico, M., Formosa-Dague, C., Kamak, D., et al., 2025. One-point covalent
   Compared with the free-enzyme system,  this strategy provides          immobilizationactivity. Appl. Surf.of a xylanaseSci. 706,on163554.elastomer: effects of surface stretching on enzymatic
several advantages. First, cascade enzymes can be directly immobilized      Benitez-Mateos, A., Padrosa, D.R., Paradisi, F., 2022. Multistep enzyme cascades as a
from cell lysates without individual purification, simplifying the prep­          route towards green and sustainable pharmaceutical syntheses. Nat. Chem. 14 (5),
aration process. Second, the ordered assembly promotes metabolic         489–499.                                                                                                              Bilal, M., Cui, J., Iqbal, H.M.N., 2019. Tailoring enzyme microenvironment: State-of-the-
channeling and enzyme synergy, resulting in higher product yields and           art strategy to fulfill the quest for efficient bio-catalysis. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 130,
fewer side reactions. Third, the modular design enables flexible adap­         186–196.
tation  to  different  terpenoid  products by  replacing downstream      Bolivar, J.M., Woodley, J.M., Fernandez-Lafuente, R., 2022. Is enzyme immobilization a                                                                                    mature discipline? Some critical considerations to capitalize on the benefits of
enzymes.                                                                                   immobilization. Chem. Soc. Rev. 51 (15), 6251–6290.
   Moreover, the ordered cross-linked enzyme complexes exhibited      Chen, H., Su, L., Yao, Z., et al., 2026. Combinatorial engineering of enzyme and pathway
good reusability, retaining 62 ± 9% of initial activity after six cycles,           for efficient β-farnesene bioproduction in Yarrowia lipolytica. Synth. Syst. Biotechnol.                                                                                              12, 32–41.
while  the compact microenvironment provided  partial  protection      Chio, T.I., Demestichas, B.R., Brems, B.M., et al., 2020. Expanding the versatility of
against harsh conditions. Future studies may focus on industrial-scale          microbial transglutaminase using α-effect nucleophiles as noncanonical substrates.
production, optimization of enzyme spatial arrangement and stoichi­        Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 59 (33), 13814–13820.                                                                                        Courdavault, V., Papon, N., 2025. Toward a taxol-producing microbial cell factory. Nat.
ometry, and expansion to other natural-product biosynthetic pathways.          Synth. 4 (10), 1175–1177.
   Overall, this bioorthogonal chemistry-driven strategy provides a       Driscoll, C.L., Keeble, A.H., Howarth, M.R., 2024. SpyMask enables combinatorial
versatile platform for constructing immobilized multi-enzyme cascade         assembly of bispecific binders. Nat. Commun. 15, 2403.
systems with promising applications in synthetic biology and green      Fan,minimalR., Hakanp¨a¨a,pH-activatedJ., Elfving,catcher/tagK., et al.,pair2023.for producingBiomolecularnative-sizedclick reactionsspider-silkusing a
biomanufacturing.                                                                               proteins. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 62 (11), e202216371.
                                                                                         Fan, W., Yu, Z., Appadoo, D., et al., 2025. Enhancing multi-enzyme cascade activity in
Declaration of generative AI use                                                     metal-organic frameworks via controlled enzyme encapsulation. Small 21 (22),                                                                                    2503059.
                                                                                   Gao, X., Yang, S., Zhao, C., et al., 2014. Artificial multienzyme supramolecular device:
   During the preparation of this work, the authors used AlphaFold to          highly ordered self-assembly of oligomeric enzymes In vitro and In vivo. Angew.
predict the protein structures. After using this tool, the authors reviewed        Chem. Int. Ed. 53 (51), 14027–14030.                                                                                Hu, M., Bao, T., Qin, Z., et al., 2025. Programmable scaffold-mediated assembly
and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the          regulation tool for dynamic control of a multienzyme biocatalyst. ACS Catal. 15 (3),
content of the published article.                                                  2236–2249.
                                                                                 Huffman, M.A., Fryszkowska, A., Alvizo, O., et al., 2019. Design of an in vitro biocatalytic
                                                                                           cascade for the manufacture of islatravir. Science 366 (6470), 1255–1259.
CRediT authorship contribution statement                                      Jablonski, A.E., Vegh, R.B., Hsiang, J.-C., et al., 2013. Optically Modulatable Blue
                                                                                               Fluorescent Proteins. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135 (44), 16410–16417.
   Chaoyue Nie: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation,      Jiang, B., Gao, L., Wang, H., et al., 2024. Characterization and heterologous                                                                                                    reconstitution of Taxus biosynthetic enzymes leading to baccatin III. Science 383
Formal analysis. Mijun Li: Validation, Formal analysis. Xinxin Chen:          (6683), 622–629.
Writing – review & editing. Jing Jiang: Writing – review & editing.      Keeble, A.H., Banerjee, A., Ferla, M.P., et al., 2017. Evolving accelerated amidation by
Jiayi Pan: Validation. Xiangxiang Zuo: Visualization. Nannan Jiang:         SpyTag/SpyCatcher to analyze membrane dynamics. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 56 (52),
Validation. Linmeng Du: Validation. Xiang-Yang Ye: Writing – review      Keeble,16521–16525.A.H., Howarth, M., 2020. Power to the protein: Enhancing and combining
& editing. Anming Wang: Writing – review & editing, Supervision,            activities using the spy toolbox. Chem. Sci. 11 (28), 7281–7291.
Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.                                         Kissman, E.N., Sosa, M.B., Millar, D.C., et al., 2024. Expanding chemistry through in vitro
                                                                                 and in vivo biocatalysis. Nature 631 (8019), 37–48.
                                                                                              Lee, J., Lai, S., Yang, S., et al., 2025. Bright and photostable yellow fluorescent proteins
Declaration of competing interest                                                         for extended imaging. Nat. Commun. 16 (1), 3241.
                                                                                             Liang, F., Xie, Y., Zhang, C., et al., 2025. Elucidation of the final steps in taxol
   The authors declare that they have no known competing financial          biosynthesis and its biotechnological production. Nat. Synth. 4 (10), 1212–1222.                                                                                        Luo, Z., Qiao, L., Chen, H., et al., 2024. Precision engineering of the co-immobilization of
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence         enzymes for cascade biocatalysis. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 63 (22), e202403539.
the work reported in this paper.                                                  McIntosh, J.A., Liu, Z., Andresen, B.M., et al., 2022. A kinase-cGAS cascade to synthesize
                                                                                       a therapeutic STING activator. Nature 603 (7901), 439–444.
                                                                            Meadows, A.L., Hawkins, K.M., Tsegaye, Y., et al., 2016. Rewriting yeast central carbon
Acknowledgements                                                               metabolism for industrial isoprenoid production. Nature 537 (7622), 694–697.
                                                                            Münch, J., Soler, J., Gildor-Cristal, O., et al., 2025. Computationally designed
   This study was supported by the National Natural Science Founda­          peroxygenases that exhibit diverse and selective terpene oxyfunctionalization. ACS                                                                                                       Catal. 15 (15), 12741–12755.
tion of China (22378091, 22078079), the Zhejiang Provincial Natural       Pei, X., Luo, Z., Qiao, L., et al., 2022. Putting precision and elegance in enzyme
Science Foundation of China (LY18B060009), the University Students’          immobilisation with bio-orthogonal chemistry. Chem. Soc. Rev. 51 (16), 7281–7304.
Science and Technology Innovation Activity Program and New Seedling
Talent   Program    of   Zhejiang   Province   (2025B20700984,

                                                                        11


[PDF physical page 12]
C. Nie et al.                                                                                                                                   Bioresource Technology 459 (2026) 135232

Qin, Z., Zhou, Y., Li, Z., et al., 2024. Production of biobased ethylbenzene by cascade       Wang, S., Zhou, J., Zhan, C., et al., 2024. Fine-tuning the function of farnesene synthases
    biocatalysis with an engineered photodecarboxylase. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 63 (8),            for selective synthesis of farnesene stereoisomers. J. Agric. Food Chem. 72 (49),
    e202314566.                                                                    27355–27364.
Ream, M., Prather, K.L.J., 2024. Engineered autonomous dynamic regulation of            Wheeldon, I., Minteer, S.D., Banta, S., et al., 2016. Substrate channelling as an approach
    metabolic flux. Nat. Rev. Bioeng. 2 (3), 233–243.                                             to cascade reactions. Nat. Chem. 8 (4), 299–309.
Ruggeri, F.S., Mannini, B., Schmid, R., et al., 2020. Single molecule secondary structure     Wu, S., Luo, L., Luo, H., et al., 2024. Combining protein phase separation and bio-
    determination of proteins through infrared absorption nanospectroscopy. Nat.               orthogonal linking to coimmobilize enzymes for cascade biocatalysis. Small 20 (51),
   Commun. 11, 2945.                                                               2404018.
Schoene, C., Fierer, J.O., Bennett, S.P., et al., 2014. SpyTag/SpyCatcher cyclization          Xu, S., Wang, S., Lou, L., et al., 2025. Modular multi-enzyme cascades enable green and
    confers resilience to boiling on a mesophilic enzyme. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 53 (24),           sustainable synthesis of non-canonical amino acids from glycerol. Nat. Commun. 16,
    6101–6104.                                                                         8079.
Schotte, C., Li, L., Wibberg, D., et al., 2020. Synthetic biology driven biosynthesis of         Ye, S., Zhong, K., Huang, Y., et al., 2024. Artificial intelligence-based amide-II infrared
    unnatural tropolone sesquiterpenoids. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 59 (52), 23870–23878.           spectroscopy simulation for monitoring protein hydrogen bonding dynamics. J. Am.
Scinto, S.L., Bilodeau, D.A., Hincapie, R., et al., 2021. Bioorthogonal chemistry. Nat. Rev.         Chem. Soc. 146 (4), 2663–2672.
   Methods Primers 1, 30.                                                                Ye, Z., Shi, B., Huang, Y., et al., 2022. Revolution of vitamin E production by starting
Simic, S., Zukic, E., Schmermund, L., et al., 2022. Shortening synthetic routes to small          from microbial fermented farnesene to isophytol. The Innovation 3 (3), 100228.
    molecule active pharmaceutical ingredients employing biocatalytic methods. Chem.      You, S., Yin, Q., Zhang, J., et al., 2017. Utilization of biodiesel by-product as substrate for
    Rev. 122 (1), 1052–1126.                                                                high-production of β-farnesene via relatively balanced mevalonate pathway in
Subach, F.V., Patterson, G.H., Manley, S., et al., 2009. Photoactivatable mCherry for               Escherichia coli. Bioresour. Technol. 243, 228–236.
    high-resolution two-color fluorescence microscopy. Nat. Methods 6 (2), 153–159.        Yu, Z., Xu, Z., Zeng, R., et al., 2025. Tailored metal-organic framework-based nanozymes
Svendsen, A., Kiefer, H.V., Pedersen, H.B., et al., 2017. Origin of the intrinsic                      for enhanced enzyme-like catalysis. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 64 (7), e202420200.
    fluorescence of the green fluorescent protein. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139 (25),              Zhang, Y., Zhang, Y., Li, C., 2025. Radical retrosynthesis: a powerful strategy for modern
    8766–8771.                                                                         assembly of terpenoid natural products. Chem. Soc. Rev. 54 (22), 10427–10486.
Wang, J., Ouyang, X., Meng, S., et al., 2025a. Rational multienzyme architecture design      Zheng, L., Du, Y., Steinchen, W., et al., 2025. Regulation of acetyl-CoA biosynthesis via
    with iMARS. Cell 188 (5), 1349–1362.e17.                                           an intertwined acetyl-CoA synthetase/acetyltransferase complex. Nat. Commun. 16,
Wang, J., Yin, Y., Zhang, Q., et al., 2025b. Artificial farnesol epoxidase enables a concise          2557.
    synthesis of meroterpenoids. Science 389 (6761), 732–735.                            Zhu, F., Zhong, X., Hu, M., et al., 2014. In vitro reconstitution of mevalonate pathway and
                                                                                                 targeted engineering of farnesene overproduction in Escherichia coli. Biotechnol.
                                                                                             Bioeng. 111 (7), 1396–1405.





                                                                        12