G.R. Galindo-Rodriguez et al.                                                                                                       Journal of Chromatography A 1721 (2024) 464815

porogen concentration from 30 to 60 % (v/v) produced an increase of     structures. Sudan 1 and paclitaxel were used as proxy molecules for
the average pore size from 26 nm to 123 nm. This result is in agreement     taxadiene due to ethical and financial restrictions on commercial tax­
with other reports in which pore size increases with porogen concen­     adiene. Sudan 1 was selected as model molecule thanks to its hydro­
tration [32,34]. The porous structure of a polymer results from phase    phobic nature and a similar molecular weight as taxadiene, while
separation which occurs when the molecular size of the growing poly­     paclitaxel is the result of the enzymatic conversion of taxadiene. Com­
mer exceeds its solubility limit in the reaction medium [35]. Phase     mercial Diaion HP-20 beads were employed as benchmark adsorbent to
separation results in the formation of nuclei which continue growing to     assess the 3D printed adsorbents. Diaion HP-20 was selected as it is the
form globules, followed by the aggregation of globules to form clusters     material of preference for routine extraction of non-polar taxanes [13,
[35]. Typically, low concentrations of porogens drive nucleation and the     36], taxadiene [12] and paclitaxel [37]. Fig. 4 shows the adsorption
formation of micro-globules, eventually resulting in a closely packed     kinetic data of Sudan 1 and paclitaxel onto the 3D printed materials and
material [34]. This mechanism is consistent with the results observed,     the commercial resin Diaion HP-20. The adsorption kinetics of BEMA60
with BEMA30, BEMA40 and BEMA60 progressively characterised by    and BEMAP2 reached apparent equilibrium after 26 h. This was not the
larger average pore sizes and larger polymeric globules, corresponding     case with BEMA30 and BEMA40 which displayed slower uptake
to progressively lower surface areas as the amount of porogen increased.     continuing after 26 h, attributed to diffusion resistance due to smaller
   Porogen type also had an important influence on the resulting porous     pores in these materials. Diffusion resistance is usually associated with
network of the 3D printed adsorbers. Despite both BEMA40 and      steric restrictions and interactions of the solute with the pore walls [31].
BEMAP2 having been prepared with 40 % (v/v) porogen concentration,   On the other hand, the adsorption of Sudan 1 and paclitaxel onto Diaion
the latter had almost double average pore size than the former (149 nm    HP-20 reached equilibrium in approximately 2 h, indicative that pore
vs 80 nm). This result is in accordance with Danquah and Forde who     diameter is not the only parameter influencing adsorption kinetics. It is
observed an increase in the average pore size of methacrylate monoliths    worth noting that Diaion HP-20 beads have significantly smaller path
from 395 to 2924 nm after increasing the concentration of DoOH in the     length for solute diffusion (75–175 µm radius) compared to the 3D
co-porogen mixture from 10 to 50 % (v/v) [32]. Similarly, Dong et al.     printed SG cubes (500 µm). Overall path length combined with surface
observed an increase in average pore size of 3D printed materials due to     area and the morphology of the porous network directly influence the
the gradual increment of 1-decanol concentration in the porogen     adsorption process as this  is usually controlled by diffusion in the
mixture [28]. Porogens and co-porogens are traditionally classified as     stagnant liquid phase in the pores of the adsorbent [38,39]. In this re­
“good” or “bad” solvents, depending on their miscibility with the     gard, 3D printing enables the custom-made fabrication of hierarchical
monomers and the growing polymeric chains [33]. The so-called bad    porous materials at the micro and nanoscale through CAD design and
solvents induce early phase separation, resulting in higher aggregation     chemical composition to obtain tailored adsorbents with optimised
of globules and subsequent formation of larger clusters, ultimately     performances[40].
producing a material with larger pores and lower surface area. The       The adsorption kinetics were preliminarily described with the PFO
opposite effect occurs with good solvents,  i.e. phase separation  is    and PSO kinetic models and the obtained parameters are shown in
delayed, leading to lower globule aggregation and formation of smaller     Table 3. The PFO and PSO models lump all mass transfer and kinetic
clusters, characterised by smaller pores and higher surface area. These    phenomena in a simple single term, the apparent rate constant, so they
findings indicate that the porogen mixture with higher DoOH content    must be treated as qualitative indicators of the overall adsorption per­
(CP-2) has lower miscibility with the monomers in the resin composition    formance observed. The apparent rate constant in Diaion HP-20 was
(BEMA, BUMA and SR399) and phase separation occurred earlier during    about one order of magnitude higher compared to the 3D printed ad­
photopolymerisation, resulting in the formation of larger globules and     sorbers, further confirming the relevance of diffusion resistance in these
with larger pores and smaller surface area [33].                             materials.
                                                              To better understand mass transfer and take into consideration the
                                                                                different path lengths in the Diaion HP-20 beads and in the 3D printed3.2. Mass transfer study in 3D printed adsorbents, kinetic pore diffusion                                                                           adsorbers, the kinetic data were modelled with a more physicallymodels                                                                   meaningful model which assumes pore diffusion as the limiting kinetic
                                                                mechanism.   Adsorption kinetic experiments were carried out to study the per­                                                                        Table 3 summarises the pore diffusivity values normalized with theformance of the 3D printed adsorbers to capture hydrophobic molecules,                                                                           calculated free diffusivity in solution of Sudan 1 (2.3 × 10−6 cm2/s) andand to investigate mass  transfer  in materials with  different pore





Fig. 4. Adsorption kinetics on the different 3D materials and on Diaion HP-20 for (a) Sudan 1 and (b) paclitaxel. All adsorption kinetics experiments were carried out
with an initial concentration of Sudan 1 and paclitaxel of 100 ppm. The experimental data was fitted with the PFO (dashed lines), PSO (continuous line) and pore
diffusion (dotted lines) models. Error bars represent mean standard deviation (n = 3).

                                                                        6