G.R. Galindo-Rodriguez et al.                                                                                                       Journal of Chromatography A 1721 (2024) 464815

the cells which inhibits cell growth. Moreover, the beads degrade during     2. Materials and methods
operation since the impeller changes their surface and adsorption ca­
pacity [14–16].                                                                2.1. Materials
   In recent years, the use of monolithic structured adsorbents has
attracted attention to substitute particle-shaped adsorbents [17–19].        Benzyl methacrylate (BEMA), butyl methacrylate (BUMA), (R)-
Compared to beads, structured adsorbents have  little effect on cell     (+)-limonene,  paclitaxel  (≥99.5  %), Sudan  1,  phenyl  bis(2,4,6-
growth kinetics and are significantly more stable. At the state-of-the-art,     trimethylbenzoyl)-phosphine oxide (Omnirad 819), isopropanol, cyclo­
3D-printing technologies such as digital light processing (DLP) can be     hexanol (CyOH), dodecanol (DoOH), peptone from casein, glucose and
used to fabricate monoliths with varying physicochemical properties     galactose were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Yeast
and adapt these materials for different bioreactor types and configura­     extract, Diaion HP-20, acetone and dodecane were obtained from Fisher
tions. In DLP printing, structures are built in layers by projecting images     Scientific  (Loughborough,  UK).  Di-pentaerythritol  pentaacrylate
of a computer aided design (CAD) model onto a photosensitive resin [20,    (SR399) was kindly donated by Arkema-Sartomer (Colombes, France).
21]. The photopolymerisable resin is highly customisable and can be     Tinuvin 326 was kindly provided by BASF (Ludwigshafen, Germany).
formulated with monomers (either mono or multi-functional), cross­     All chemicals were used as received.
linkers, porogens, a photoinitiator and a photoabsorber [22].
   Methacrylate- and acrylate-based monomers are widely used in     2.2. Yeast strain
photopolymerisation since they contain double bonds which readily
react with each other in the presence of radicals [23]. Methacrylates       The S. cerevisiae strain used in this study was LRS5 {mGTy116;
have excellent biocompatibility and are  less toxic than  acrylates,    ARS1014::GAL1p-TASY-GFP;    ARS1622b::GAL1p-MBP-TASY-ERG20;
therefore more suitable for bioprocessing applications [24]. In addition,    ARS1114a::TDH3p-MBP-TASY-ERG20} as previously described in [7].
methacrylate polymers are endowed with excellent chemical resistance     This strain was originally derived from the CEN.PK2–1C laboratory
and mechanical properties, which makes them a material of choice in a    (EUROSCARF, Oberursel, Germany). The strain was maintained and
range of biological applications, from biomedical [25] to bioprocessing     stored in glycerol at −80 ◦C.
[18,26,27].
   In this study, 3D printed adsorbents were developed and applied in     2.3. Resin formulations
an integrated process to simultaneously produce and recover taxadiene
in S. cerevisiae cultivations. For our 3D-printable monoliths we selected        Resin compositions containing 30, 40 and 60 % (v/v) porogen were
benzyl methacrylate (BEMA) as viable monomer for use in DLP printing     formulated to fabricate 3D adsorbent materials with varying pore
to fabricate adsorbent materials displaying benzene rings in its structure     structure. In these resins, only the monomer/porogen ratio was adjusted
to resemble styrene-DVB resins (Fig. 1). Furthermore, butyl‑methacry­     to achieve the desired porogen concentration, while the relative ratio
late (BUMA) was included in the resin formulation to impart more hy­    between monomers and cross-linkers was kept constant at 45:15:40 for
drophobic behaviour to the materials. Pore size was modulated by: (1)    BEMA, BUMA and SR399, respectively. Similarly, the co-porogen used
adjusting the porogen concentration to 30, 40 and 60 % (v/v) in the     in these resins (CP-1) was a mixture of CyOH and DoOH at a relative
resin composition and (2) using alternative co-porogen mixtures. Batch     ratio of 80:20, respectively. Additionally, a resin with 40 % porogen
adsorption equilibrium and kinetic experiments were carried out to     concentration was prepared with an alternative co-porogen (CP-2) made
determine the material with the highest adsorption performance. The     of CyOH and DoOH at a ratio of 20:80, respectively. The photoinitiator
optimal material was then used in S. cerevisiae cultivations to recover    and photoadsorber in all resins were Omnirad 819 and Tinuvin 326 at a
taxadiene and compared to the commercial bead-based alternative.        concentration of 1 % (w/v) and 0.1 % (w/v), respectively. All resin
                                                                      compositions are summarized in Table 1.





Fig. 1. Comparison of monomers used in the resin composition to fabricate 3D printed adsorbents, BEMA (a) and BUMA (b) with the monomers utilized to prepared
Diaion HP-20, copolymer of styrene (c) and divinylbenzene (d). In red are highlighted the vinyl double bonds that react in the presence of radicals during radical
polymerisation.

                                                                        2