                                                    Journal of Chromatography A 1721 (2024) 464815

                                                 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
                         Journal of Chromatography A


                                          journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/chroma


Development, characterization and application of 3D printed adsorbents for
in situ recovery of taxadiene from microbial cultivations
Giuseppe Rafael Galindo-Rodriguez a, M. Sulaiman Sarwar a, Leonardo Rios-Solis a,b,1,
Simone Dimartino a,*
a Institute for Bioengineering, School of Engineering, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom
b Centre for Engineering Biology, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom


A R T I C L E  I N F O                  A B S T R A C T

Keywords:                                        Microbial cell factories are an attractive alternative to produce high-value natural products using sustainable
3D printing                                          processes. However, product recovery is one of the main challenges to reduce production cost and make these
Taxadiene                                         technologies economically interesting. In this work, new resins were formulated to 3D print hydrophobic ad­In situ product recovery                                                  sorbents for the recovery of biologics from microbial cultivations. Benzyl methacrylate (BEMA) and butylSolid adsorption                                                methacrylate (BUMA) were selected as functional monomers suitable for the adsorption of hydrophobic com­Downstream processing
Saccharomyces cerevisiae                           pounds. Pore morphology was tailored through the inclusion of pore forming agents (porogens) in the resin.
                                                     Different porogens and porogen concentrations were evaluated resulting in materials with different porous
                                                networks. Sudan 1 and the anticancer drug paclitaxel were employed as model compounds to test the adsorption
                                             performance of hydrophobic and terpene molecules onto the developed 3D printed materials. The material with
                                                     greatest adsorption capacity was obtained using BEMA monomer with 40 % (v/v) porogen (BEMA40). The
                                             performance of BEMA40 to recover taxadiene from small-scale (5 mL) Saccharomyces cerevisiae cultivations was
                                                    tested and compared with commercial Diaion HP-20 beads. Taxadiene titres on BEMA40 (46 ± 2 mg/L) and
                                               Diaion HP-20 (54 ± 4 mg/L) were comparable, with no taxadiene detected in the cells and cell-free media,
                                                 suggesting near 100 % taxadiene partition on the adsorbents. Compared to commercial beads, 3D printed ad­
                                                  sorbents can be customized with adjustments in the resin formulation, are well adaptable to diverse bioreactor
                                                     types, do not clog sampling ports and columns and are easier to handle during post processing. The results of this
                                         work demonstrate the potential of 3D printing to fabricate hydrophobic interaction adsorbent materials and their
                                                   application in the recovery of biological products.


1. Introduction                                                                    cell factories has mainly focused on upstream strategies to produce high
                                                                                 levels of the desired product, such as developing or improving microbial
   Plant derived natural products have numerous applications and      strains, as well as optimization of culture media and process parameters
commercial value in the food and pharmaceutical industries [1]. Un­     [2,7–9]. However, less attention has been paid to the downstream
fortunately, plant extraction of high-value products like paclitaxel and     portion concerning product recovery which accounts for up to 80 % of
other compounds is unsustainable due to the low yield, e.g. an entire     the total production cost [8].
tree is typically required to obtain a few grams of product [2]. Ulti­      A common method employed for recovery in downstream processing
mately  over  15,000  medicinal  plants  are  endangered  through     involves dispersing beads inside the fermenter which adsorb the product
over-exploitation due to their high demand and rarity [3].                  of interest [10]. Typically, taxadiene has been recovered from culture
   Microbial  cell  factories  present  a  sustainable  alternative  for    media using commercial adsorbent beads like Diaion HP-20 beads, a
manufacturing natural products since they offer a relatively high yield    macroporous polymeric resin made of poly(styrene-co-divinylbenzene)
without damaging the local environment [4–6]. Research on microbial     [11–13]. However, during agitation these beads induce shear stress on


 * Corresponding author.
    E-mail address: simone.dimartino@ed.ac.uk (S. Dimartino).
  1 Current address: Department of Biochemical Engineering, The Advanced Centre for Biochemical Engineering, University College London, London, WC1E 6 EB
United Kingdom
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chroma.2024.464815
Received 25 January 2024; Received in revised form 6 March 2024; Accepted 11 March 2024
Available online 19 March 2024
0021-9673/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc/4.0/).