G.R. Galindo-Rodriguez et al.                                                                                                       Journal of Chromatography A 1721 (2024) 464815





Fig. 7. Biomass (a) and taxadiene (b) concentration obtained in cultivations with BEMA40, Diaion HP-20 and no adsorbent control at small-scale (5 mL). Error bars
represent mean standard deviation (n = 3) (**p < 0.01; Tukey´s honest significant difference).

Further testing for in situ recovery of taxadiene in small-scale (5 mL)     considerations suggest the opportunities of 3D printed adsorbents to
S. cerevisiae cultivations were carried out using 3 % (v/v) concentration    overcome  the  limited  performances  of  traditional  bead-based
of the 3D printed BEMA40 fabricated in the form of schoen gyroid cubes.     adsorbents.
Taxadiene and biomass concentrations obtained from the cultivation        Future opportunities for 3D printed adsorbents mostly relate to
with the 3D-printed material were compared with cultivations using 3 %    development of new materials and 3D printing methods. The first one
(v/v) Diaion HP-20 and the cultivation with no adsorbent. Negative     highlights the need to provide for materials fully compatible with ad­
controls consisted of incubating BEMA40 and Diaion HP-20 in no     ditive manufacturing technologies and with specific properties for ap­
inoculated culture media to verify aseptic conditions. Adsorbent con­     plications in adsorption, separation and purification processes [26]. On
centration was set to 3 % (v/v) to maximize cell growth and taxadiene     the other hand, it is expected that improvement of 3D printers and resins
titres as observed by Santoyo-Garcia et al. [12]. The results of biomass     formulations will reduce printing times, scalability and ease the fabri­
and taxadiene concentrations on BEMA40, Diaion HP-20 and no     cation of structures with finely controlled features at high resolution (<1
adsorbent cultivations are presented in Fig. 7.                       μm) [19].
   The addition of BEMA40 and Diaion HP-20 had no effect on cell
growth compared to a cultivation with no adsorbent (Fig. 7a), as also     4. Conclusions
confirmed by one-way ANOVA (p = 0.72). Therefore, the presence of the
adsorbers in the cultivations did not affect cell growth, in agreement     We successfully 3D-printed materials with controllable pore struc­
with previous results using the same microorganism [12]. Biocompati­     ture by tailoring porogen composition and concentration, and demon­
bility can be defined as the ability of a material to perform properly     strated that pore size in 3D printed materials can be modulated with the
without affecting the biological host [46]. By this definition, we can    porogen concentration in the resin mixture. This approach expands the
conclude that BEMA40 is a biocompatible adsorbent to recover tax­      possibilities to control the pore structure in 3D printing with photo­
adiene in S. cerevisiae cultivations.                                   polymer resins.
   Taxadiene titres at the end of the cultivations were 46 ± 2, 54 ± 4       The analysis of SEM photographs revealed that decreasing the
and 31 ± 2 mg/L for BEMA40, Diaion HP-20 and no adsorbent,    porogen content from 60 % to 30 % (v/v) reduced the average pore
respectively. One-way ANOVA analysis indicated significant difference     diameter from 123 nm to 26 nm. The material with the smaller average
between the three groups with a confidence level of 99 % (p = 0.001).     pore diameter (BEMA30) showed lower adsorption rate and capacity,
Tukey´s test was used to determine the difference between groups. Tukey     suggesting that a fraction of its pores was not accessible for adsorption.
criterion (T = 14) with a confidence level of 99 % indicated that tax­   On the other hand, the material prepared with 40 % porogen (BEMA40)
adiene concentration in the no adsorbent culture was significantly     displayed the highest adsorption capacity for Sudan 1 and paclitaxel.
different from cultures with Diaion HP-20 and BEMA40.                BEMA40 was tested and compared with commercial Diaion HP-20
   Taxadiene loadings on the adsorbent materials were 1.0 ± 0.1 and    beads for the in situ recovery of taxadiene in small-scale (5 mL) culti­
1.2 ± 0.1 on BEMA40 and Diaion HP-20 respectively, indicating no     vations. Taxadiene concentration on BEMA40 and Diaion HP-20 were 46
significant difference in the recovery of taxadiene between the two ad­   ± 2 and 55 ± 4 mg/L, respectively. Biomass concentration obtained in
sorbents. In other words, the 3D printed material performed as good as     the culture with BEMA40 and the control with no adsorbent were 4.4
the commercial material despite the different association constants ob­    and 4.6 g/L, respectively. These results indicated that the presence of the
tained in the characterization experiments with Sudan 1 and paclitaxel.    3D material did not affect cell growth in these conditions and demon­
It is worth noting that the 3D printed adsorbent material here presented     strated for the first time the potential of 3D printed materials to recover
is a first-of-its-kind, with reasonable improvements in adsorption per­     biological products. Furthermore, the relative ease to fabricate 3D
formances achievable through optimisation of the formulation and of     printed materials and the design freedom open the possibility to explore
the 3D printing settings [19]. In addition, the design freedom of 3D     their implementation in different bioreactor types and to explore more
printing enables fabrication of adsorbents that can be adapted to diverse     applications in bioprocesses. Future advances in 3D printing technolo­
bioreactor types such as rotating bed reactor, external recirculation     gies coupled with optimisation of 3D printable formulations hold a
columns, etc. Such 3D printed adsorbents can be designed to minimise     further promise for adsorption materials and adsorption processes with
shear stress on the adherent cells, improve flow distribution within the    improved performances.
bioreactor and have customized chemistry and pore structure to fit the
requirements of bespoke operations in biotechnology. All of these


                                                                        9