
[PDF physical page 1]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .


  FoTO1 orchestrates Taxol biosynthesis through catalytic and non-
   catalytic mechanisms

   Chloe Wick1, Anish Somani2, Jack Chun-Ting Liu2, Sumudu S Karunadasa3, Shou-Ling
   Xu3, Polly M. Fordyce4,5, Conor James McClune1,6* & Elizabeth S. Sattely1,6*
    1Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, California 94305,
    2Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, California 94305,
    3Department of Plant Biology and Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility, Carnegie Institution for Science,
    Stanford, California 94305
    4Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, California 94305,
    5Department of Genetics, Stanford University, California 94305,
   6Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305
    *Corresponding author: Elizabeth S. Sattely (sattely@stanford.edu), Conor J. McClune
    (mcclune@stanford.edu)



   Abstract

          Taxol is a blockbuster chemotherapeutic derived from the Pacific Yew tree. Recent work
    in our group has identified a complete pathway to baccatin III, a key intermediate, that hinges on
   a novel accessory protein, Facilitator of Taxane Oxidation (FoTO1). This protein dramatically
   improves yield and alters enzyme product profiles when reconstituting the Taxol pathway in N.
   benthamiana. FoTO1 has been shown to act early in the biosynthetic pathway improving the
    yields of product generated by the combination of a plastidial diterpene synthase (taxadiene
   synthase) and an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) localized cytochrome P450 (T5-alpha-
    hydroxylase). Here, we show that FoTO1 is an enzyme capable of converting taxadiene-(4),5-
    epoxide, the likely product of T5αH oxidation, into taxadien-5α-ol. FoTO1 is also functional in
    yeast, resolving a key bottleneck for development of a bioproduction route to Taxol in this host.
   Targeted mutagenesis of key catalytic residues in FoTO1 abrogates function in vitro but not in
    planta, suggesting non-catalytic contributions of FoTO1 to the taxane pathway. A combination of
    proximity labelling, bimolecular fluorescence complementation assays, and co-
    immunoprecipitation studies revealed that FoTO1 interacts with and organizes various P450s in
    the Taxol pathway. These approaches highlight the importance of both FoTO1’s catalytic and
    non-catalytic functions in improving yields in the early Taxol pathway. Beyond Taxol
    biosynthesis, FoTO1 boosts yields for diverse diterpene pathways from across phylogeny,
   suggesting a general role of this protein class in mediating metabolism across the plastid and
  ER in plants.


[PDF physical page 2]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .




   Introduction
       Diterpenes produced in plants are a key source of many medicinal compounds1,2. A lead
   example is paclitaxel (trade name Taxol), a chemotherapeutic used in the treatment of breast,
    ovarian, and lung cancer, that is produced by the yew tree (Taxus spp.)3,4. Taxol production is
    challenging due to its chemical complexity and low natural abundance in the yew tree5–7.
   Notable efforts have led to synthetic routes for production of Taxol; however these have not
   been scaled for manufacture to date8–11. Currently, Taxol manufacture is still dependent on the
    extraction of metabolites from yew tissue12. Thus, the elucidation of the biosynthetic route to this
   molecule has been a major focus for the development of a bioproduction process13–15. Recent
    efforts in our lab and others have culminated in the discovery of a complete set of genes that
   enable reconstitution of late stage intermediates in Taxol biosynthesis, including baccatin III16–
     18.
      From Taxol to gibberellin, diterpene biosynthesis pathways consistently follow the same
    general architecture. Pathways begin with diterpene synthases that usually localize to the
     plastid19,20. These enzymes catalyze the formation of the core diterpene scaffold, representing
    the first committed steps in most known diterpene pathways. The resulting scaffolds are
   subsequently modified by tailoring enzymes, including cytochromes P450 enzymes anchored in
    the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), as well as 2-ODDs and acetyltransferases21. This
    compartmentalization of the pathway between the chloroplast and the ER suggests a need to
    coordinate biosynthesis across these organelles.
        In the case of the Taxol pathway, taxadiene synthase (TDS) produces the diterpene scaffold
    taxadiene, which is then thought to be a substrate for oxidation by the cytochrome P450
   taxadiene-5α-hydroxylase (T5αH)22. However, in attempts to reconstitute this pathway, T5αH
    catalysis primarily results in the formation of multiple undesired side products in vitro and in
   heterologous hosts, especially 5(12)-oxa-3(11)-cyclotaxane (OCT, 2a) and/or 5(11)-oxa-3(11)-
   cyclotaxane (iso-OCT, 2b), which has been the source of a long-standing bottleneck in the
    reconstitution of Taxol biosynthesis13,23,24. Interestingly, these byproducts are observed only in
    reconstitution systems but not in the native Taxus tree, suggesting a missing relevant protein or
   mechanism that enables specificity by T5αH catalysis17. In previous work, we discovered that a
    previously uncharacterized protein, FoTO1, improves product yields by an order of magnitude
   and reduces side product formation, although it is not essential for pathway reconstitution in the
   heterologous host N. benthamiana17. FoTO1 is a member of the NTF2-like superfamily of
    proteins which contains over 450,000 members (InterPro). This versatile family contains
    proteins found across bacteria, fungi, and plants with diverse functions, including enzymatic,
    transport, and scaffolding roles25,26. In plants, NTF2-like proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana have
   been shown to be involved in the nuclear transport of GTPase Ran and NTF2 proteins in
   Medicago sativa and Glycine max are involved in drought tolerance27–29. However, to our
   knowledge, no NTF2-like superfamily members have previously been shown to play a role in
    metabolic pathways in plants.
     FoTO1 appears to influence early pathway flux by modulating the product profile of pathway
   enzymes. Specifically, inclusion of FoTO1 in reconstitution experiments with T5αH leads to the
    selective formation of the desired, productive intermediate taxadien-5α-ol and elimination of side
   products OCT and related compounds17. However, the role of FoTO1 in the Taxol pathway has


[PDF physical page 3]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



   remained unclear. Here, we characterize the mechanisms by which FoTO1 improves both yield
   and selectivity in the early Taxol pathway, resolving a critical bottleneck for Taxol bioproduction.
  We find that FoTO1 not only acts as an enzyme, converting a previously unverified epoxide
    intermediate into the correct product, but also performs additional non-catalytic roles relevant to
    diverse diterpene pathways. We employ a multifaceted approach that integrates in vitro and
   heterologous pathway reconstitution, and interaction studies in planta and with purified protein
    to establish that FoTO1 enhances yield improvement through two distinct mechanisms: (1)
    catalyzing the conversion of taxadiene epoxide to taxadien-5α-ol, (2) organizing pathway
   enzymes through transient protein-protein interactions. Lastly, we show that Taxus x media
   FoTO1 can be used to enhance the yields of plant diterpene pathways from diverse species.
    This model is supported by protein mutagenesis that decouples FoTO1's two distinct functions;
    specifically, a catalytically inactive mutant still provides a substantial yield improvement.
   Together these data shed light on the long-standing bottleneck in Taxol biosynthesis and
   suggest a new role for the NTF2-like protein superfamily in coordinating multistep metabolic
   pathways across organelles in plants.


   Results
   FoTO1 improves selectivity and yield of taxadien-5α-ol in yeast
           Previously, we demonstrated that FoTO1 leads to a robust improvement in the yield of
    taxadien-5α-ol and elimination of side products when TDS and T5αH are expressed using
   Agrobacterium-mediated transient DNA delivery into Nicotiana benthamiana (tobacco) leaves17.
    This yield improvement propagates to the final products (e.g. baccatin III) of an engineered
   taxane pathway and resolves a major outstanding bottleneck to Taxol bioproduction. However,
   two key questions remain unresolved: how does FoTO1 function, and is it broadly useful for
    metabolic engineering of diterpene pathways? To address whether FoTO1-mediated
   enhancement of pathway yield requires plant specific components or simply a eukaryotic cell
    context, we turned to yeast as a host. Specifically, we sought to investigate whether FoTO1 is
    sufficient to improve yields of taxane products in this host. We transformed a FoTO1-expressing
   plasmid into a Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast strain that harbors integrated TDS and T5αH30.
    In the absence of FoTO1, the yeast strain harboring TDS and T5αH produced taxane
   rearrangement products, including 2d (a minor product in tobacco known to be prevalent in
    yeast), OCT, and trace amounts of iso-OCT and taxadien-5α-ol24. However, when gene
   expression of FoTO1 was induced in this strain, a significant increase in the yield and selectivity
    for taxadien-5α-ol was observed (Figure 1a). These data show that the effects of FoTO1 do not
    require a plant-cell specific environment to increase taxadien-5α-ol production and selectivity.
   Furthermore, these results pave the way for Taxol biomanufacture in industrial yeast strains.


   FoTO1 catalyzes the conversion of an epoxide intermediate to the desired product
   taxadien-5α-ol
          Considerable effort has been devoted to understanding the production of OCT and iso-
  OCT – unintended side products generated during the initial T5αH-catalyzed oxidation of the


[PDF physical page 4]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



   taxadiene scaffold – across multiple reconstitution systems. Previously, we structurally
    characterized several of these side products and found that many represent rearranged isomers
   and overoxidation products31. Several different mechanisms for this apparent catalytic
    promiscuity of T5αH have been proposed. Initial papers suggested that the formation of multiple
   products was inherent to the enzyme, though other proposals instead suggest that a taxadiene-
    4(5)-epoxide intermediate is formed first, and then degrades to the side products in solution24,32.
   Since inclusion of FoTO1 greatly reduces off-pathway products in yeast and plants, we
   hypothesized that this protein might be able to enzymatically convert a potential epoxide
    intermediate into taxadien-5α-ol. Although FoTO1 homologs are not known to contribute to
   metabolism in plants, enzymes with a similar fold have been characterized in polyketide
    biosynthesis and epoxide catabolism pathways from bacteria33,34. To test whether FoTO1 has a
    catalytic role in resolving an unstable taxane pathway intermediate, we chemically synthesized
    taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide using dimethyldioxirane (DMDO), as previously reported35. We
   observed no instability when this molecule is stored in pyridine-d5 at room temperature over 3
   days prior to analysis using NMR (Supplementary Fig 1-2). However, our analysis by gas
   chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS) of the same taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide sample
   immediately following synthesis revealed multiple peaks that appear to correspond to taxadien-
    5α-ol (2), the undesired intermediates OCT (2a) and iso-OCT (2b), as well as a fourth peak
   which we proposed to be taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide (2c) (Figure 1b).
         Given the purity of the epoxide as indicated by NMR, we surmised that the multiple
   peaks observed upon GC-MS analysis likely result from thermal degradation of the epoxide
    during injection. Strikingly, addition of purified FoTO1 (obtained through heterologous
   expression and purification from E. coli) to the synthetic taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide in vitro yielded
   a single taxadien-5α-ol peak with no observable degradation products present upon GC-MS
    analysis (Figure 1b, line 5). These results suggest a catalytic role for FoTO1, with taxadiene-
    4(5)-epoxide serving as its direct, enzymatic substrate. Kinetic analysis of purified FoTO1
    protein incubated with taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide in reconstituted liposomes revealed that FoTO1
    turns over its epoxide substrate with a kcat of 69 ± 5 sec-1 and a Km of 30 ± 7 µM (Figure 1c;
   Supplementary Fig 3). To investigate whether FoTO1 is specific toward taxadiene-4(5)-
   epoxide or is also able to isomerize other side-products like OCT and iso-OCT, we converted
    taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide to iso-OCT using 1M HCl following a previously reported method and
   subjected it to FoTO1 in vitro35. We found that incubation with FoTO1 does not result in the
   consumption of iso-OCT or formation of new isomerized products, suggesting that FoTO1
    activity is specific to taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide (Figure 1b, line 6). Together, these data provide
   evidence that OCT-related metabolites are indeed derailed pathway intermediates unlikely to be
    relevant to taxane biosynthesis in the Pacific Yew. Furthermore, FoTO1 acts as a catalyst to
   enable productive resolution of pathway intermediates towards elaborated taxanes.
       We next sought to determine a possible biosynthetic origin for the taxadiene-4(5)-
    epoxide. When we incubated taxadiene with T5αH-expressing microsomes from yeast and
   compared the GC-MS spectra to those of the NMR-verified epoxide in organic solvent, we
   observed similar results. Both spectra had matching ratios of OCT, iso-OCT, taxadien-5α-ol and
   a small but detectable hallmark epoxide peak (Figure 1b, line 4 vs line 2). These findings align
    with previous reports showing that the GC-MS spectra of taxadiene oxidized by T5αH and
   taxadiene oxidized by DMDO are remarkably similar24. Consequently, we found that adding
   FoTO1 to taxadiene incubations containing T5αH-expressing microsomes also substantially


[PDF physical page 5]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



   boosted taxadien-5α-ol production (Figure 1b; Supplementary Fig 4-5).These data supports a
   model where the taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide is the direct product of T5αH, with the apparent
    promiscuity arising from the formation of multiple degradation products during analysis (either
   by incubation in acidic extracts or thermal injection on GC-MS). To see whether we could
   observe this epoxide product in planta, we infiltrated a low titer of A. tumerificans (OD of 0.04)
   encoding T5αH alongside Agrobacterium strains encoding taxadiene synthase and genes
    boosting diterpene metabolic flux in N. benthamiana leaves. On close analysis, we are able to
    identify the hallmark epoxide peak concurrently with high amounts of rearrangement products
   (Supplementary Fig 6-7). The high levels of iso-OCT and OCT in planta suggest that the
   epoxide undergoes some decomposition in planta prior to degradation on the GCMS. Thus,
   these in vitro and in planta data together indicate that the direct product of T5αH oxidation of
   taxadiene is taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide, and suggest FoTO1 then captures and resolves this
    intermediate to taxadien-5α-ol prior to degradation.


   Residues D149, D68, and Y60 are critical for FoTO1 enzymatic activity
        To further characterize the catalytic activity of FoTO1, we sought to identify active-site
    residues and generate catalytically inactive FoTO1 mutants, through comparison with
    structurally homologous enzymes. Several bacterial and fungal enzymes share a similar NTF2
    fold with FoTO1, including two epoxide hydrolases, two polyether synthases, and the TerC
   dehydratase which all have epoxide substrates or intermediates33,34,36–38. Although the primary
   sequences of these proteins vary considerably (19% amino acid identity between LEH and
   FoTO1), their folds are conserved and similar to the AlphaFold-predicted structure of FoTO1.
          Pairwise comparison between the selected NTF2 enzymes and FoTO1 provided insight
    into FoTO1’s catalytic mechanisms. The two epoxide hydrolases and TerC act on cis-epoxides
   fused to 6-membered rings, substrates with similar geometries to taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide. To
     facilitate cis-epoxide ring-opening, the active sites of these three enzymes all contain a spatially
   conserved aspartate annotated to function as a general acid catalyst. Structural alignment of
   these three structures with the predicted structure of FoTO1 revealed that these catalytic
    aspartates overlap with D149 in FoTO1 (Figure 2a; Supplementary Fig 8). The NTF2-like
    polyether synthases Lsd19 and MonBI act on epoxides with different geometries to FoTO1,
   however they both conduct similar base-catalyzed intramolecular rearrangement to open the
    epoxide. A key conserved aspartate functions as a catalytic base, which overlaps with D68 in
    the predicted FoTO1 structure (Figure 2a, Supplementary Figure 8).

          Computational docking also independently suggested key catalytic roles for the two
    aspartates. Docking of either the epoxide substrate or the taxadien-5α-ol product into the
    predicted FoTO1 structure placed the ligands in the binding pocket proximal to the two
    aspartates (Figure 2a, Supplementary Fig 9). Upon docking of taxadien-5α-ol, the two
    aspartates were observed to be within 3 Å of the protons transferred during epoxide opening
   and allylic alcohol formation, with D149 appearing to function as a catalytic acid and D68 as a
    catalytic base, agreeing with predictions from homologous enzymes (Supplementary Fig 9).
       We tested the importance of these amino acids in FoTO1 catalysis through site-directed
   mutagenesis and found that mutation of either D149 or D68 to alanine completely abrogated the
     ability of FoTO1 to transform taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide into taxadien-5α-ol in vitro (Figure 2b). To


[PDF physical page 6]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



    identify other residues important in catalysis, an additional 14 residues in the predicted inner
   pocket of FoTO1 were screened. Only mutation of Y60 had a significant effect on the amount of
    taxadien-5α-ol produced (Figure 2-b, Supplementary Fig 10-11). These data suggest that the
    residues D149, D68, and Y60 in FoTO1 are directly involved in promoting isomerization (or
    binding) of the taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide to generate the productive pathway intermediate
    taxadien-5α-ol.
        To further probe the role of acidic residues in the active site, we also examined a set of
   FoTO1 mutants with conservative substitutions, replacing aspartate with asparagine or
    glutamate. When tested in N. benthamiana, plants expressing FoTO1 mutants D68N and
   D149N had significant accumulation of iso-OCT and OCT rearrangement products, similar to
   what was observed with D68A and D149A. However, mutation to D68E and D149E resulted in
    the partial recovery of catalytic activity and a reduction in the observed rearrangement products
   (Figure 2d). We also generated a Y60F mutant with retained aromaticity. Y60A abolished
    catalytic function but Y60F did not, suggesting a potential structural role for this residue (Figure
    2b,d, Supplementary Fig 11). Taken together, these point mutants of FoTO1 allowed for the
    specific analysis of the catalytic functions of FoTO1 while still maintaining the general structural
    features of the protein.


   FoTO1 has additional non-catalytic properties in planta
           Previously, we showed that T5αH and FoTO1 directly interact using co-
    immunoprecipitation and in vitro microscale thermophoresis binding experiments, suggesting
    that FoTO1 may have additional functions in a plant cell beyond catalysis17. To examine the
    contributions of these possible non-catalytic roles to the enhanced yields of taxane pathway
    intermediates (e.g. through scaffolding or protein-protein interactions), we leveraged our
    catalytically inactive FoTO1 mutants (D149A, D68A, Y60A) for experiments in planta. These
   mutants were tested in the context of other pathway enzymes, cellular components, and intact
    organelles for a role in pathway flux. As described above, these catalytically inactive mutants
   showed no yield enhancement when tested with our in vitro assay system (Figure 2b). To test
    the effect of FoTO1 on the early Taxol pathway in planta, we used Agrobacterium-mediated
    transient DNA delivery to express, in Nicotiana benthamiana, boost enzymes (HMGR, GGPPS)
    that increase the pool of taxadiene precursors alongside the Taxol pathway enzymes taxadiene
   synthase (TDS) and T5αH39–41. Unlike the complete lack of function observed in our in vitro
   assays, expression of the FoTO1 catalytic mutants D149 or Y60A in combination with T5αH,
   TDS, and boost enzymes in planta resulted in a reproducible 3-fold increase in taxadien-5α-ol
   and a slight, but non-significant increase in relevant side products (iso-OCT, OCT) – relative to
    control experiments without FoTO1 (Figure 2c, Supplementary Fig 10). These data suggest
    that FoTO1 could have additional roles in planta beyond catalysis, observable even in a
   heterologous plant host.


   FoTO1 interacts with multiple Taxus P450s
         Given the significant increase in taxadien-5α-ol production by FoTO1 mutants in planta
    but not in vitro, we wanted to further investigate potential non-catalytic contributions of FoTO1.
    Non-catalytic contributions of biosynthetic enzymes have recently been emphasized in the


[PDF physical page 7]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



    reconstitution of a select few plant specialized metabolic pathways. Lead examples include the
    formation of metabolons in cyanogenic glucoside dhurrin biosynthesis and steroidal
    glycoalkaloid biosynthesis42–46. Additional examples have also emerged in phenylpropanoid
   metabolism in plants and glycosylation in mammalian systems. Central to these examples is the
    role protein-protein interactions play in guiding metabolic flux through enzymatic steps. Here, we
   were curious about FoTO1’s ability to interact with other enzymes besides T5αH in the Taxol
    biosynthetic pathway to orchestrate a potential metabolon that could channel products and
   improve yields. First, we leveraged the proximity labeling system TurboID which allowed us to
    simultaneously investigate infiltrated Taxus enzymes and native N. benthamiana proteins47,48.
   TurboID is an engineered, promiscuous biotin ligase that biotinylates proteins within a ~10 nm
    radius (Figure 3a)48. To investigate which proteins localize near FoTO1, select Taxol-
   associated enzymes, including enzymes that act directly upstream and downstream of FoTO1
   (T5αH, TAT, T10βH, DBAT, T13αH) as well as later pathway enzymes (T2αH, PCL, PAM) were
   co-expressed in N. benthamiana along with either a TurboID-FoTO1 fusion or a TurboID-only
    control (Figure 3b, Supplementary Table 1). Plastidial TDS and an enzyme to boost the
    production of taxadiene precursors (chlGGPPS) were also included as well as cytochromes
   P450 from unrelated terpene pathways in three other species. Tandem mass spectrometry
    analysis revealed significant enrichment of all Taxol pathway P450 enzymes—including T5αH,
   T10βH, T13αH, and T2αH—in the TurboID-FoTO1 samples as compared to the TurboID control
   (Figure 3b-c). These data suggest FoTO1 is proximal to these proteins in planta, albeit in the
    context of a heterologous expression host. Two additional non-Taxus P450s from Citrus and
   Coleus were also enriched to similar levels as T5αH, T13αH, and T2αH (Figure 3b-c). In
    contrast, Taxol pathway enzymes not associated with the ER (e.g., TDS1, TDS2, DBAT, T9dA,
   DBTNBT) and control proteins such as GFP were not significantly enriched in our dataset
   (Figure 3b-c). While this approach does not provide direct evidence for FoTO1-protein
   complexes, it reveals that FoTO1 is generally in close proximity to many transmembrane ER
    proteins, including cytochromes P450 from Taxus and the endogenous N. benthamiana CPR
   (cytochrome-P450 reductase) (Figure 3c-d, Supplementary Fig 12). It is notable that FoTO1
   does not appear to contain an obvious ER targeting sequence, despite the enrichment of ER-
    localized proteins in this dataset, with thirty-six out of the top hundred enriched proteins
    localizing to the ER (Figure 3d). In contrast, only four of the top hundred proteins labelled by
    the TurboID control were ER-localized (Supplementary Fig 12). Further analysis also revealed
    that sixteen of the top one hundred significantly enriched TurboID-FoTO1 hits were localized to
    the surface of the plastid and not found in the Turbo-only control, suggesting that FoTO1, while
   proximate to the ER, might also be co-localized with this organelle (Fig 3d; Supplementary Fig
    12). Thus, our untargeted proximity labelling approach suggests a possible role for FoTO1 in
    coordinating interactions between organelles and enzymes in the Taxol biosynthetic pathway.


   FoTO1 participates in an enzyme complex with early P450 enzymes
          While TurboID is useful for capturing transient and co-localization interactions, co-
    immunoprecipitation can provide direct evidence for sustained binding events. To further
    investigate the specificity of the interactions between FoTO1 and Taxus cytochromes P450, we
   performed a series of co-immunoprecipitation experiments using Agrobacterium-mediated
    transient DNA delivery of tagged FoTO1 and interaction partners together into N. benthamiana
    leaves. Consistent with the TurboID data, co-immunoprecipitation reproduced interactions


[PDF physical page 8]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



   between: FoTO1 and T5αH, FoTO1 and T13aH, and FoTO1 and T2αH. No pulldown of Taxus
   T10βH or the Citrus cytochromes P450 CsCYP71CD1 was observed, suggesting that although
   these proteins are in proximity in planta, they may not engage in a stable interaction (Figure 3e-
      j, Supplementary Fig 13). Interestingly, addition of taxadiene during co-immunoprecipitation
    results in a T10βH-FoTO1 interaction, which is consistent with our previous findings in which
   taxadiene enhanced the co-immunoprecipitation of T5αH by FoTO117. However, addition of
   taxadiene does not allow FoTO1 to pull down CsCYP71CD1 (Supplementary Fig 13). Given
    the interaction patterns between FoTO1 and these Taxol cytochromes P450, we next asked
   whether Taxus cytochromes P450 directly associate with one another to establish organized
    ER-localized complexes
        To probe the ability of P450s to organize themselves, we conducted co-
    immunoprecipitation assays where we analyzed the ability of T10βH (the next proposed
   downstream pathway cytochrome P450) to pull down both T5αH and FoTO1 when all three
    proteins were co-expressed together in an N. benthamiana leaf. Pulldown of T10βH led to the
    statistically significant co-pulldown of T5αH (7%) and FoTO1 (15%) (Figure 3k-l), indicating a
    relatively weak but measurable interaction. Interestingly, T10βH-T5αH interaction occurs even
    in the absence of FoTO1 (Supplementary Fig 13). However, when T5αH was substituted for a
   cytochrome P450 from Citrus, T10βH was no longer able to pull down FoTO1 nor the Citrus
   cytochrome P450, suggesting that T5αH specifically stabilizes or mediates the association of
   T10βH and FoTO1 in planta (Figure 3m, Supplementary Fig 11). The observed interactions
   between FoTO1 and multiple Taxus cytochromes P450s suggests the possibility that Taxol
   enzymes, including FoTO1, participate in transient associations, ultimately implying a multi-
    protein complex for taxane biosynthesis.


   FoTO1 is proximate to the ER and requires plastidial TDS for its non-catalytic functions
         Given the proposed interactions between FoTO1 and various Taxol cytochromes P450,
   we sought to analyze FoTO1 subcellular localization and potential proximity to the cytoplasmic
    face of the ER in planta. We conducted bi-molecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC)
   assays where we fused FoTO1 to the N-terminal half of YFP (FoTO1-YFPn) and resident ER
    proteins to the C-terminal half of YFP (T5αH-YFPc) and both constructs were co-expressed in N.
   benthamiana leaves. This revealed FoTO1-YFPn to be in close proximity to the cytoplasmic
    facing C-termini of CPR-YFPc and calnexin-YFPc, transmembrane ER proteins49. Co-expression
    of these proteins yielded a significant increase in YFP signal compared to control experiments
    with YFPc which exhibited no fluorescence. When we co-expressed FoTO1-YFPn and YFPc-
   FoTO1, we also observed significant YFP signal, which is in line with the other epoxide-
    resolving NTF2s that are known to function as homodimers (Figure 4a)50. Together with the
   TurboID localization data, these findings suggest that FoTO1 frequently resides near
    cytoplasmic domains of ER membrane-bound proteins.
      Given FoTO1’s localization near the surface of the ER and the enrichment of plastidial and
  ER proteins by TurboID-FoTO1, we wondered whether FoTO1’s non-catalytic boost to pathway
    yield could depend on the subcellular localization of the typically plastidial TDS. When a
    truncated, cytoplasmic TDS (cytTDS), indicated boost enzymes, and the wildtype ER-localized
   T5αH were co-infiltrated with the catalytically inactive mutant FoTO1-D149A, no significant
   change in taxadien-5α-ol levels was observed. This was in stark contrast to the significant 3-fold


[PDF physical page 9]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



    increase in taxadien-5α-ol observed when the native chloroplast-localized TDS (chlTDS) was
   used (Figure 4b). The yields of the rearrangement products OCT and iso-OCT followed a
    similar trend, with a significant reduction in the yield boost provided by non-catalytic FoTO1
   when TDS was truncated and localized to the cytosol instead of the chloroplast
   (Supplementary Fig 14). Given the enrichment of ER and plastidial proteins observed in the
   TurboID dataset as well as the major role NTF2 family members play in transport, it is possible
    that FoTO1, in addition to its catalytic properties, may also facilitate transport of diterpenes from
    the plastid to the ER.
            In addition to a potential role in transport, our co-immunoprecipitation data above led us
    to hypothesize that FoTO1 may have a role in the physical organization of enzymes in the Taxol
   pathway, possibly scaffolding a metabolon. Because a metabolon is important when flux is low,
   we wondered whether we would only see a need for organization under low-flux conditions. To
    investigate how pathway flux may affect FoTO1, we used reconstitution experiments with lower
   and higher yields of pathway enzymes by adjusting the OD of agrobacterium infiltration. Here,
   we assumed that every cell was infiltrated and altering the OD affected the amount of expressed
    protein in a cell for our given range (Carlson, Rajniak and Sattely, 2023) (Supplementary Fig
    15). Interestingly, addition of FoTO1-D149A increased yields of taxadien-5α-ol when a high
   amount of cytoplasmic TDS (and associated boost enzymes HMGR/GGPPS) was used. This
   was not the case (ie. no yield increase upon addition of FoTO1-D149A) when a standard
   amount of cytoplasmic TDS and boost enzymes was used (Figure 4b, Supplementary Fig 14).
   The heightened contribution of FoTO1-D149A when tested at higher ODs of cytoplasmic TDS
    highlights the importance of the relative stoichiometry of pathway enzymes.
           Serendipitously, when analyzing the amounts of proteins produced in each case by
   immunoblot, we noticed that the addition of TDS seemed to influence FoTO1 protein levels.
   When the OD of the FoTO1-Agrobacterium strain infiltrated was held constant, but the OD of
   TDS-Agrobacterium strain was increased, we observed a marked increase in the amount of
   FoTO1 but not GFP as measured by immunoblot and fluorescence readout of mTurq-tagged
   FoTO1 (Fig 4c, Supplementary Fig 16). These results indicate that higher ODs of TDS strains
    substantially elevate FoTO1 protein levels (FoTO1 strain OD is held constant), which may
    explain why FoTO1-D149A exhibits divergent effects depending on the amount and localization
    of TDS. We hypothesize that FoTO1 has roles in transport and organization, accounting for the
   prominence of FoTO1’s non-catalytic contributions when TDS is plastid-localized but not
    cytosolic. When cytoplasmic TDS is abundant, FoTO1’s enhanced contribution may instead
    reflect increased FoTO1 protein levels (perhaps through increased stability of FoTO1 through
    interaction with taxadiene or TDS), which may be required at higher local concentrations in the
   cytoplasm to execute its organizational effects. These findings suggest that FoTO1’s non-
    catalytic functions manifest under two distinct conditions, characterized by high cytosolic or low
    plastidial production of its metabolic intermediate. Together, this observation hints at potential
    additional mechanisms by which Taxus proteins might interact and influence protein stability.


   FoTO1 acts on diverse diterpene pathways
      Our data reveal that FoTO1 has both catalytic and organizational functions that contribute to
   Taxol biosynthesis. Interestingly, FoTO1 seems to co-localize with many P450s, and its impact
     is influenced by the localization of TDS, suggesting a possible role in the transport of diterpene


[PDF physical page 10]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



    intermediates from the chloroplast or the organization of pathway enzymes. To investigate
   whether these organizational roles of FoTO1 are applicable to other pathways, we included
   FoTO1 in the reconstitution of diterpene pathways from plants unrelated to Taxus. Forskolin, a
    diterpene produced in Coleus forskohlii, is a potent adenylate cyclase activator that may have
    efficacy against HIV51,52. The biosynthetic route to forskolin is similar to that of Taxol, with two
    diterpene synthases (CfTPS2, CfTPS3) in the plastid and a host of subsequent modifying
   enzymes in the ER53. Infiltration of N. benthamiana with the early forskolin pathway enzymes
   CfTPS2, CfTPS3, and CfCYP76AH15 results in the production of the forskolin intermediate 11-
   oxo-13R-manoyl oxide. Interestingly, when FoTO1 is co-infiltrated with these three forskolin
   enzymes, there is a 3-fold increase in the production of the forskolin intermediate 11-oxo-13R-
   manoyl oxide. Addition of the catalytically inactive FoTO1-D149A leads to the same 3-fold
    increase but addition of a FoTO1 homolog from A. thaliana does not (Figure 5a,
   Supplementary Fig 15).
    We next performed the same experiment on the early steps of the momilactone pathway
    (from rice) and gibberellin diterpene pathway (from Arabidopsis but ubiquitous across all land
    plants). Neither of these pathways involves resolution of an epoxide. When we included FoTO1
    or FoTO1-D149A with the early momilactone and gibberellin pathways enzymes OsKSL4,
   OsCPS4, and OsCYP76M8 or AtCS, AtKS, AtKO, and AtKAO respectively, we saw a similar 2
    to 3-fold increase in yield (Figure 5b)41,54. Here, we again saw no significant increase in yield
   when using a homolog of FoTO1 from A. thaliana. Addition of FoTO1 to a triterpene limonoid
   pathway, however, did not lead to an observed yield increase (Figure 5c-d)55. This suggests
    that FoTO1's non-catalytic functions are relevant to many plastidial diterpene pathways but not
    cytoplasmic triterpene pathways.
    We were also interested in evaluating whether this yield improvement in diterpene pathways
   was dependent on the localization of the relevant terpene synthases, so we repeated these
   experiments with truncated terpene synthases that were cytoplasmic and not localized to the
    plastid. Here, FoTO1 only led to a 1.5-fold yield increase in the cytoplasmic forskolin and
   momilactone pathways (Supplementary Fig 17). This is consistent with our earlier results – in
     all three diterpene pathways tested, catalytically inactive FoTO1 leads to a 3-fold yield increase
   which is reduced to a 1.5-fold yield increase when the terpene synthases are rendered
    cytoplasmic (Figure 4b, Supplementary Fig 17). We suspect this may indicate a general role
    for FoTO1 transporting metabolites between the chloroplast and the ER, perhaps through direct
    organelle-organelle contacts. In conclusion, these results suggest the non-catalytic roles of
   FoTO1 to be generally applicable to diterpene biosynthesis in plants.

   Discussion
          Here, we discover how the recently discovered lynchpin protein FoTO1, which is critical
    for engineering taxane production in yeast and plant heterologous hosts, streamlines Taxol
    biosynthesis. Notably, this involves two critical roles, including: (1) catalysis and (2) protein
    scaffolding, which likely anchors a metabolon for Taxol production. We demonstrate that FoTO1
    specifically catalyzes the conversion of the T5αH product taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide to taxadien-
    5α-ol, resolving a long-standing bottleneck for developing a Taxol bioproduction route.
   Mutations of the catalytic residues in FoTO1 eliminate its ability to increase the yield of
    taxadien-5α-ol in vitro but only partially reduce this effect in planta. FoTO1 increases the yield of
    taxadien-5α-ol three-fold through non-catalytic mechanisms in planta by orchestrating weak


[PDF physical page 11]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



    protein-protein interactions and increasing proximity between pathway enzymes. These data
    indicate that enzymatic and scaffolding functions can be decoupled in FoTO1, allowing FoTO1
    to enable efficient production of the Taxol intermediate taxadien-5α-ol in heterologous hosts and
    diverse diterpene pathways.
        FoTO1 is a founding member of a small, but increasingly appreciated group of proteins
    that have clear roles in orchestrating biosynthetic pathways through non-catalytic mechanisms.
   Two primary types of multifunctionality within this group include enzymes that can act as
    transporters (such as lipocalin-type prostaglandin D synthase) and those that form
    metabolons56–58. While enzyme complexes have been extensively characterized in primary
   metabolism (ex. TCA cycle enzymes59,60), they are less understood in secondary metabolism in
    plants. Three lead examples of metabolons in secondary plant metabolism include: GAME15 in
    steroidal glycoalkaloid biosynthesis, the dhurrin metabolon in cyanogenic glucoside
    biosynthesis, and complexes in the phenylpropanoid pathway42,45,46,61. However, the transient
    nature of these assemblies makes them challenging to identify and study, making it plausible
    that metabolons exist in many other biosynthetic pathways and have thus far remained
    uncharacterized. Consequently, FoTO1 may represent a broader phenomenon in plant
    biosynthesis that is difficult to observe because of the weak and transient nature of the protein-
    protein interactions governing this phenomenon, despite their clear importance in driving
    efficient production in metabolic pathways62,63. It is notable that the epoxide intermediate has a
    relatively short half-life in planta compared to other secondary metabolic intermediates. The
   same is true in the metabolon-containing dhurrin pathway - one of the key intermediates in this
   pathway is also labile42. Thus, close handoff from one protein to the next may facilitate
    productive metabolism by limiting spontaneous chemistry. These non-catalytic contributions to
    biosynthesis result in significant increases in the efficiency of these pathways, highlighting the
   importance of understanding the mechanism of FoTO1.
          Unexpectedly, the non-catalytic role of FoTO1 can be used to support other diterpene
   pathways from outside Taxus sp. A similar 3-fold increase in the forskolin, gibberellin, and
   momilactone pathways is observed upon addition of FoTO1 when these pathways are
    reconstituted in N. benthamiana. This broad functionality suggests that FoTO1 may act as a
    versatile facilitator of diterpene biosynthesis through non-catalytic mechanisms, potentially by
   modulating pathway flux, organelle contacts, intermediate transport, or promoting productive
    protein-protein interactions. These results highlight the importance of the non-catalytic roles of
   FoTO1 and suggest interactions with conserved proteins (perhaps also present in N.
   benthamiana) or universal features of FoTO1 are critical for its organizational roles in
    biosynthesis. Understanding the precise mechanisms by which FoTO1 influences diterpene
    biosynthesis will be critical for enhancing the production of diterpenes in heterologous hosts at
    scale. Our findings raise questions about the role of FoTO1 homologs across plant species.
   Nearly every land plant with a sequenced genome has a FoTO1 homolog, and some have
    several. For instance, the sequenced Taxus genome contains three FoTO1 paralogs and 23
   NTF2-like proteins, while the A. thaliana genome contains 1 FoTO1 paralog and 203 NTF2-like
    proteins. Despite the prevalence of these FoTO1 paralogs, none outside of Taxus have been
    functionally characterized.
        FoTO1 and its homologs belong to the NTF2-superfamily of proteins, a diverse group of
    proteins that share a conserved NTF2 fold. While FoTO1 and its homologs have not been
    characterized, various NTF2-like family members have been extensively characterized and the


[PDF physical page 12]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



     first NTF2 proteins were originally identified for their role in the transport of Ran to the nucleus,
   which is conserved among its orthologs in plants25,27,64. Other plant NTF2-like superfamily
   members have been shown to mediate response to abiotic stress but none have yet been
    implicated in biosynthesis28,65. A key feature among NTF2-like superfamily proteins is their
    exceptionally versatile fold which grants them the ability to bind small molecules tightly25. The
    versatility of this fold and its ability to bind small molecules have been exploited by evolution to
   generate NTF2 superfamily members with roles in both transport and catalysis50,64,66–68. More
    recently, the structural adaptability of this fold has been leveraged in computational approaches
    to protein design to create novel small-molecule binding proteins, sensors, and enzymes69–72.
   Given the extreme versatility of this fold and its ability to bind small molecules with high affinity,
       it is likely that many other uncharacterized NTF2-like proteins exist in plants with important roles
    in specialized metabolism and biosynthesis.
                  It is notable that some taxadien-5α-ol product is produced spontaneously even in the
   absence of FoTO1 catalysis. This represents a unique opportunity to decouple scaffolding and
    catalytic roles in a biosynthetic enzyme. We suspect that other proteins in the pathway are also
    involved in protein-protein interactions and contribute at some level to pathway organization but
    the transient nature of the observed protein-protein interactions and the difficulty detecting non-
    catalytic contributions of biosynthetic enzymes may have limited our understanding of the full
    extent to which structural and organizational roles contribute to pathway efficiency. Expanding
    the use of proximity labeling and interaction-based assays may reveal that multifunctionality is a
   more common feature of plant biosynthetic enzymes than previously recognized. More
    importantly, these assays may reveal how the spatial arrangement of enzymes is critical for their
    function. Metabolons and other assemblies of proteins offer cells the opportunity to exploit low
    or high concentrations of intermediates and to reduce the entropic cost for metabolite
    channeling. Understanding and harnessing these biosynthetic strategies could provide valuable
   advantages for further pathway engineering in both plant and non-plant heterologous hosts,
    allowing for streamlined biomanufacture of clinically relevant biotherapeutics including Taxol.


[PDF physical page 13]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .





   Figure 1: Biochemical characterization of FoTO1 and identification of early epoxide
   intermediate as a substrate

    (a) GCMS total ion chromatogram (TIC) of S. cerevisiae strains integrated with the early Taxol
    biosynthetic pathway enzymes TDS; TDS and T5αH; or TDS and T5αH transformed with
   FoTO1-carrying plasmids. TICs representative of three independent experiments.

    (b) GCMS TIC of in vitro reactions pairing taxadiene with enzymatic (T5αH from yeast
   microsomes) and chemical (Dimethyldioxirane (DMDO)) oxidants, with or without purified
   FoTO1 added after conversion of oxidative reaction. Enzymatic activity of purified FoTO1 was
    also tested after DMDO oxidation followed by acid isomerization into degradation products. The
    scale of the y-axis is consistent across reactions, representing the products. TICs representative
    of three independent experiments.

    (c) Proposed chemical scheme of the catalysis from taxadiene to taxadien-5α-ol by reactions
    with T5αH and FoTO1.

    (d) kcat and Km values of FoTO1 for the reaction of the taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide substrate,
    calculated using 7 different concentrations of epoxide substrate (4μM - 200μM) in liposomes.
    Catalytic activity was estimated through GCMS quantification of substrates and products at
    multiple timepoints, with extractions normalized to internal standard. The graph shown here is
    representative of three independent experiments.


[PDF physical page 14]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .





   Figure 2: Point mutants of FoTO1 that abrogate activity in vitro still retain some activity
   when tested in planta

    (a) Proposed active site of FoTO1 (generated by AlphaFold3) aligned with the limonene-1,2-
   epoxide hydrolase (LEH; R. erythropolis) and MonBI (S. virginiae) crystal structures. Proposed
    catalytic residues in FoTO1 and their counterparts in LEH and MonBI are highlighted. Structures
    of LEH and MonBI with highlighted residues D132 and D37, respectively, are displayed below
    the alignment of all three structures and the AlphaFold predicted structure of FoTO1 with the
   proposed epoxide substrate docked using DiffDock is shown in grey at the bottom. The three
    residues hypothesized to be essential for catalysis are highlighted in purple.

    (b) Quantification of the log2 fold change of taxadien-5α-ol when point mutants of FoTO1
    purified from E. coli are incubated with taxadiene in vitro. Values ± SD of three independent
   experiments (∗p ≤ 0.05, ∗∗p ≤ 0.01, ∗∗∗p ≤ 0.001, ∗∗∗∗p ≤ 0.0001 by ordinary one-way ANOVA
   and not shown if insignificant (p > 0.05)).

    (c) Quantification of the log2 fold change of taxadien-5α-ol when point mutants of FoTO1 are
    transiently expressed in N. benthamiana leaves along with boost and early pathway enzymes
   (HMGR, GGPPS, chlTDS, T5αH). mCherry (ctrl) is used instead of FoTO1 as a negative control
   and wild-type FoTO1 is used as a positive control. Fold change is calculated as the ratio of the


[PDF physical page 15]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



   measured peak area of taxadien-5α-ol in a sample divided by the average measured peak area
    of taxadien-5α-ol in the absence of FoTO1 (control) of that run. Values ± SD of nine
   independent experiments (∗p ≤ 0.05, ∗∗p ≤ 0.01, ∗∗∗p ≤ 0.001, ∗∗∗∗p ≤ 0.0001 by ordinary one-
   way ANOVA and not shown if insignificant (p > 0.05)).

    (d) Quantification of OCT and taxadien-5α-ol when point mutants of FoTO1 are transiently
   expressed in N. benthamiana leaves along with boost and early pathway enzymes (HMGR,
   GGPPS, cytTDS, T5αH). Values ± SD of three independent experiments (∗p ≤ 0.05, ∗∗p ≤ 0.01,
   ∗∗∗p ≤ 0.001, ∗∗∗∗p ≤ 0.0001 by ordinary one-way ANOVA and not shown if insignificant (p >
    0.05)).

    (e) Proposed enzymatic mechanism for FoTO1 catalytic activity involving two catalytic aspartate
    residues, Asp68 and Asp149, which are indispensable for catalysis.


[PDF physical page 16]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .





   Figure 3: TurboID and immunoprecipitation reveals FoTO1 interacts with multiple P450s

    (a) Proteins near a TurboID-FoTO1 chimera are labelled with biotin by the TurboID. These
    biotinylated proximal proteins are then enriched using streptavidin coated beads and identified
    via tandem MS/MS.

    (b) A volcano-scatter plot of all proteins enriched after labelling with TurboID-FoTO1. Non-
    significant N. benthamiana proteins are shown in grey while transiently expressed Taxus and
    control proteins are highlighted in blue and significantly enriched and non-enriched N.
   benthamiana proteins are shown in red.


[PDF physical page 17]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



    (c) Table of the infiltrated Taxus and control proteins displaying the localization of each protein
   and the fold enrichment of each protein in the TurboID-FoTO1 samples vs. TurboID control
   samples. Samples that are significantly enriched (p-value <0.05) are denoted in the second
   column.

    (d) Dot plot displaying the localization of the top 100 most enriched endogenous N.
   benthamiana proteins in the TurboID-FoTO1 screen. The majority of proteins localized to the
  ER (36), with an additional portion of the hits residing in the plastid (16) and nucleus (12).

     (e-i) Representative immunoblot analysis of the co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) of (d) T5αH-HA,
    (e) T10βH-HA, (f) T13αH-HA, (g) T2αH-HA, (h) citrus CYP71CD1-HA by pulldown with V5-
   FoTO1 in co-infiltrated N. benthamiana leaves. αGFP lanes indicate internal negative control
   pulldowns where a GFP antibody was used for pulldown instead of a V5 antibody.
   Representative images of four independent experiments. Extended immunoblot of (f) is shown
    in Supplementary Fig 13a.

     (j) Quantification of the immunoblot analysis of the co-IP of T5αH-HA, T10βH-HA, T13αH-HA,
   and T2αH-HA by V5-FoTO. V5-FoTO1 was co-infiltrated into N. benthamiana with the indicated
    proteins. Fold pulldown indicates the fold difference in co-IP by the V5 antibody as compared to
   a control GFP antibody. Values ± SD of four independent experiments (∗p ≤ 0.05, ∗∗p ≤ 0.01,
   ∗∗∗p ≤ 0.001, ∗∗∗∗p ≤ 0.0001 by one-sample t test and not shown if insignificant (p > 0.05)).

    (k) Representative immunoblot analysis of the co-IP of T5αH-HA and V5-FoTo1 by pulldown
    with T10βH-Myc in co-infiltrated N. benthamiana leaves. αGFP lanes indicate internal negative
    control pulldowns where a GFP antibody was used for pulldown instead of a Myc antibody.
   Representative images of three independent experiments.

    (l-m) Quantification of the percent pulldown via co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) of (l) T5αH-HA
   and V5-FoTO1 or (m) CsCYP71CD1 and V5-FoTO1 by T10βH-Myc. The indicated proteins
   were co-infiltrated into N. benthamiana. Values ± SD of three and two independent experiments,
    respectively (∗p ≤ 0.05 by Student’s t test and not shown if insignificant).


[PDF physical page 18]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .





   Figure 4: Bimolecular fluorescence complementation to analyze localization of FoTO1 in
   planta

    (a) Confocal microscopy images of N. benthamiana leaves co-infiltrated with FoTO1-YFPn and
    either YFPc, YFPc-FoTO1, CPR-YFPc, or calnexin-YFPc. Split-YFP signal is pseudocolored in
   green and chloroplast autofluorescence is shown in red; merge is the overlay of the chloroplast
   autofluorescence (the scale bar represents 85 μm). Representative images of 3 independent
   experiments.

    (b) Quantification of the log2 fold change in taxadien-5α-ol when mCherry (ctrl) or FoTO1-
   D149A are transiently expressed in N. benthamiana leaves along with the indicated TDS and


[PDF physical page 19]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



   boost enzymes. mCherry (ctrl) is used as a negative control. Values ± SD of three independent
   experiments (∗p ≤ 0.05, ∗∗p ≤ 0.01, ∗∗∗p ≤ 0.001, ∗∗∗∗p ≤ 0.0001 by Student’s t test and not
   shown if insignificant (p > 0.05)).

    (c) Immunoblot analysis of FoTO1, TDS, mCherry, and GFP co-expressed in N. benthamiana
   under differing ODs. FoTO1 and GFP are expressed at a constant OD in all samples. The OD of
   TDS Agrobacterium increases across the samples as indicated while the OD of mCherry
   Agrobacterium decreases concomitantly. The blue shapes represent the OD infiltrated of the
    indicated proteins and No-StainTM is used as a loading control. Representative image of 3
   independent experiments.


[PDF physical page 20]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .





   Figure 5: Effect of FoTO1 on diverse terpene pathways from across plant phylogeny

    (a) Quantification of the log2 fold change in 11-oxo-13R-manoyl oxide when forskolin early
   pathway enzymes (HMGR, chlGGPPS, FsTPS2, FsTPS3, FsCYP71AH15) are transiently
   expressed in N. benthamiana leaves with either ctrl (mCherry), FoTO1, FoTO1-D149A, or
   AtFoTO.

    (b) Quantification of the log2 fold change in syn-paramidine-6-ol when momilactone early
   pathway enzymes (HMGR, chlGGPPS, OsKSL4, OsCPS4, OsCYP76M8) are transiently
   expressed in N. benthamiana leaves with either ctrl (mCherry), FoTO1, FoTO1-D149A, or
   AtFoTO.

    (c) Quantification of the log2 fold change in gibberellin A12 when gibberellin early pathway
   enzymes (HMGR, chlGGPPS, AtCS, AtKS, AtKO, AtKAO) are transiently expressed in N.
   benthamiana leaves with either ctrl (mCherry), FoTO1, FoTO1-D149A, or AtFoTO.

    (d) Quantification of the log2 fold change in dihydroniloticin when limonin early pathway
   enzymes (HMGR, cytGGPPS, CsOSC1, CsCYP71CD1) are transiently expressed in N.
   benthamiana leaves either ctrl (mCherry) or FoTO1.

   mCherry (ctrl) is used instead of FoTO1 as a negative control. Values ± SD of nine independent
   experiments (∗p ≤ 0.05, ∗∗p ≤ 0.01, ∗∗∗p ≤ 0.001, ∗∗∗∗p ≤ 0.0001 by ordinary one-way ANOVA
   and not shown if insignificant (p > 0.05)).


[PDF physical page 21]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .





   Figure 6: A working model for taxane biosynthesis illustrating multiple independent
   functions by FoTO1

   A working model of biosynthetic protein organization for Taxol biosynthesis. Protein-protein
    interactions for which there is experimental data are indicated as shown in the legend. Red dots
    represent the pathway taxanes as they are modified through the pathway.


[PDF physical page 22]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .


[PDF physical page 23]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .


  Methods

   Cloning:

    Proteins were tagged for Co-IP, immunoblot, TurboID, and BiFC by amplifying genes from
   plasmids or Agrobacterium glycerol stocks using PCR (PrimeStar, Takara Bio R045B, primers in
   Supplementary Table 3). The indicated PCR products were then purified using Zymo DNA
   Clean & Concentrator (Zymo #D4004) and, using HiFi DNA assembly mix (New England
    Biolabs), ligated into pEAQ-HT vector linearized with AgeI and XhoI (New England Biolabs).
   The ligation mixture was then transformed into 10-beta competent E. coli cells (New England
    Biolabs). Following overnight incubation of the competent cells on plates, single colonies were
   picked and grown in liquid media overnight. Plasmid DNA was then purified using a ZymoPURE
   plasmid miniprep kit (Zymo #D4212) and subjected to whole-plasmid sequencing
    (Plasmidsaurus). FoTO1 mutant plasmids were created using the same protocol. PCR
   fragments used to create E. coli and yeast expression vectors were ligated into vectors
    specified in Supplementary Table 3.

   Expression of FoTO1 in yeast:

   Yeast cultures were grown to saturation in 4 mL YPD medium supplemented with 400 µg mL⁻¹
   G418 in glass culture tubes for 2 days. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 1,000 × g for 5
    min, resuspended in YPG induction medium (10 g L⁻¹ yeast extract, 20 g L⁻¹ peptone, 20 g L⁻¹
    galactose), and incubated overnight. Cells were subsequently lysed by the addition of 0.5 mm
    glass beads and 100 µL ethyl acetate, followed by vigorous vortexing. The resultant culture was
   spun down for 2 minutes at 18000xg, and 50uL of the organic layer was loaded onto the GCMS.

    Purification of FoTO1 from E. Coli:

   FoTO1 was cloned into the pET28a expression vector and transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3)
    Star competent cells as described previously. Transformants were selected on LB agar plates
   supplemented with kanamycin (50 µg mL⁻¹). Single colonies were used to inoculate 2 mL LB
    starter cultures containing kanamycin (50 µg mL⁻¹) and grown overnight, which were then used
    to seed 200 mL LB cultures supplemented with kanamycin. Cultures were grown at 37 °C to an
    optical density at 600 nm (OD₆₀₀) of ~0.6, after which protein expression was induced with 0.2
  mM IPTG and cultures were shifted to 18 °C. Cells were harvested after an additional 18 h by
    centrifugation and pellets were either processed immediately or stored at −80 °C.

    Cell pellets of FoTO1 or point mutants were resuspended in 15 mL lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES,
   300 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, 1.5% Igepal, pH 8.0) and lysed by three passes through an
    air-driven high-pressure homogenizer (EmulsiFlex B15, Avestin). Lysates were clarified by
    centrifugation at 21,000 × g for 25 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was loaded onto Ni–NTA
   agarose resin (QIAGEN), washed sequentially with 50 mL wash buffer 1 (20 mM HEPES, 300
  mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, pH 8.0) followed by 15 mL wash buffer 2 (20 mM HEPES, 300 mM
   NaCl, 50 mM imidazole, pH 8.0), and eluted with elution buffer containing 500 mM imidazole.


[PDF physical page 24]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



    Eluted fractions were analyzed by SDS–PAGE, pooled as appropriate, and dialyzed overnight.
    Protein was concentrated using 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff centrifugal filters (Amicon,
   Sigma) and buffer-exchanged into storage buffer (10 mM HEPES–KOH, 50 mM KCl, 1 mM
   DTT, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, pH 8.0). Protein concentration was determined using a
   Bradford assay and corrected for co-eluting impurities. Purified FoTO1 was snap-frozen in liquid
    nitrogen and stored at −80 °C.

   pYYeD60 plasmids containing T5αH or T13αΗ were transformed into WAT11 yeast strains
   expressing Arabidopsis CPR11 using lithium acetate, and selected using synthetic-dropout
   medium plates lacking uracil via growth at 30C for 2 days. Colonies were selected and grown to
    saturation in a starter culture for 1-2 days at 28C. The starter culture was used to inoculate a
   250ml culture, and grown to an OD of 3.0 in synthetic-dropout medium lacking uracil.
   Subsequently, expression was induced by pelleting cells at 1000xg and then altering the
   medium to yeast peptone extract containing 2% galactose (10mg/L yeast extract, 20mg/L
   peptone, 20mg/L galactose) for another 16 hours after which this culture was immediately used
    for microsomal protein isolation, performed as previously described. Microsomal protein was
    stored in TEG buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 20% [v/v] glycerol, pH 7.4), aliquoted into
    1.5 mL microfuge tubes, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C. Typical yields were
   around 20-30mg/ml of crude protein, as estimated via the Bradford assay.

    Purification and chemical synthesis of taxadiene and taxadiene epoxide:

   Taxadiene was purified as we previously described, from the JBEI-18127 strain17.
    Glycerol stocks were used to inoculate 20 mL starter cultures in yeast peptone dextrose
   (YPD) medium and grown at 30 °C for 48 h. Starter cultures were subsequently used to
    inoculate 2 L YPD cultures, which were grown at 30 °C until reaching an optical density
   (OD₆₀₀) of approximately 1. At this point, the incubation temperature was reduced to 20
   °C to minimize non-enzymatic hydrolysis of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate, and cultures
   were grown for an additional 4 days. Taxadiene production was monitored by small-scale
    liquid–liquid extraction of culture media followed by GC–MS analysis.

    Cultures were harvested by centrifugation at 3,000 × g to separate cells from media, and
   each fraction was extracted independently. Cell pellets were frozen at −80 °C for 1 h to
     facilitate lysis, then incubated overnight with three volumes of ethyl acetate. Culture
   supernatants were subjected to three successive liquid–liquid extractions with ethyl
    acetate. Organic extracts from both fractions were combined and concentrated by rotary
    evaporation. The resulting crude extract was weighed, redissolved in a minimal volume of
   hexane, and loaded onto a silica gel column at a 1:40 (w/w) product-to-silica ratio for flash
   chromatography. Isocratic elution was conducted using hexane as the mobile phase,
    collected in 5ml fractions, which were analyzed by GC–MS to identify taxadiene-
    containing fractions. Fractions were subsequently concentrated via rotary evaporation,
    with purity confirmed via NMR. Typical production yields were approximately 10–15 mg
    L⁻¹, with isotaxadiene present at an approximate 1:10 ratio relative to taxadiene, as
   monitored via NMR.


[PDF physical page 25]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



   The chemical synthesis of taxadiene 4(5)-epoxide from taxadiene was performed as
    previously described by Barton et al. Dimethyldioxirane was generated in situ by addition
    of oxone (5 g) to a chilled solution containing H₂O (4 mL), acetone (6 mL), and NaHCO₃
    (4.8 g), followed by stirring at 4 °C for 20 min35. DMDO was subsequently isolated by
    collection in a bump trap during rotary evaporation of the reaction mixture at 155 mmHg,
    with the bath temperature ramped from room temperature to 40 °C over 15 min. The
    concentration of DMDO was determined by 3 iodometric titrations using the method
   described by Ahmat, et al, to be 13.25mM. Taxadiene (2.44 mg, 8.95 μmol) was dissolved
    in dichloromethane (150 μL) and stirred at 4 °C for 5 min. 0.7 molar equivalents of DMDO
     ( 50 μL, 6.27 μmol) was added dropwise, after which the reaction mixture was allowed to
   warm to ambient temperature and stirred for 30 min73. Reaction progress and conversion
    of the starting material were monitored by GC–MS analysis. Reaction products were
    isolated by rotary evaporation and were not subjected to further purification due to the
    previously reported instability of the epoxide on silica gel.

    In-vitro enzymatic assays:

   Enzymatic oxidation assays of taxadiene were performed in 100 µL reaction volumes in 1.5 mL
    microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf). Each reaction contained 36 µg purified cytochrome P450
   enzyme, 50 µM taxadiene, and 20 mM HEPES buffer supplemented with 10 mM NaCl (pH 7.5).
   Reactions were incubated for 3 h at 30 °C with shaking at 250 rpm in a thermal shaker.
    Following incubation, reactions were extracted with 120 µL ethyl acetate. For reactions involving
   FoTO1, 2.8nM FoTO1 was added after completion of the 3 h P450 reaction and incubated for
   an additional 2 h. Samples were vortexed vigorously and centrifuged at 18,000 × g to separate
    the organic and aqueous phases. A 50 µL aliquot of the organic phase was analyzed by GC–
   MS.

   Enzymatic assays examining the direct reaction of FoTO1 with taxadiene 4(5)-epoxide were
   conducted in liposome preparations due to substantially higher rate of FoTO1 catalysis
   (Supplementary Fig 3). Liposomes were prepared from phosphatidylcholine (soy; Cayman) at
   a final concentration of 2 mg L⁻¹ in 10 mM HEPES buffer containing 20 mM sodium cholate. The
    mixture was sonicated for 8 min using a probe-tip sonicator with 2 s on/off cycles at an
   amplitude of 20. Liposome stocks were allotted and stored at −20 °C until use. Reactions were
   performed with 1.4 nM FoTO1 and 25 µM substrate in 20 mM HEPES buffer containing 10 mM
   NaCl (pH 7.5).

   For kinetic analysis and determination of Km values, reactions were conducted in duplicate using
    varying concentrations of taxadiene 4(5)-epoxide (4–200 µM) and 10 µM linalool as an internal
    standard. Multiple 50 µL reaction aliquots were prepared and quenched at short time points (30
    s, 1 min, 2 min, and 3 min) corresponding to the linear phase of product formation. Reactions
   were quenched by flash freezing in liquid nitrogen and extracted three times with 100 µL ethyl
    acetate. Organic extracts were combined and concentrated under a gentle stream of air and
    redissolved in 50 µL ethyl acetate. Conversion of substrate to product was quantified by GC–MS
   by summing all degradation peaks corresponding to the starting material and calculating the


[PDF physical page 26]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



   apparent increase in the taxadien-5α-ol product peak, normalized to linalool recovery, whose
   average was used to plot the rate of reaction.

   Transient expression in Nicotiana Benthamiana via infiltration with agrobacterium:

   The pEAQ-HT plasmids harboring the relevant genes were introduced into Agrobacterium
   tumefaciens (strain GV3101) cells via the freeze–thaw transformation method. The transformed
    cells were plated on 523-agar (Phytotech Labs) medium supplemented with kanamycin (50
    μg/ml) and gentamicin (30 μg/ml) and incubated at 30°C for 2 days. Single colonies were then
   picked and cultured overnight at 30°C in liquid 523 medium containing both antibiotics. The
    overnight cultures were used to prepare 25% glycerol stocks, which were stored at −80°C for
    long-term preservation.

   For subsequent Nicotiana benthamiana infiltration experiments, Agrobacterium glycerol stocks
   were streaked onto 523-agar plates with kanamycin and gentamicin and incubated for 1–2 days
    at 30°C. Cells were scraped off using a 10-μl inoculation loop and resuspended in 1 ml of
   Agrobacterium induction buffer (10 mM MES, pH 5.6; 10 mM MgCl₂; 150 μM acetosyringone;
   Acros Organics) in 2-ml safe-lock tubes (Eppendorf). The suspensions were vortexed briefly to
   ensure homogeneity, followed by a 2-hour incubation at room temperature. OD600 readings
   were taken for each suspension, and the final infiltration solution was prepared by adjusting the
   OD600 to 0.2 for each strain (unless otherwise noted) by diluting with the induction buffer. For
     infiltration, four-week-old N. benthamiana leaves were targeted, using needleless 1-ml syringes
    to infiltrate the abaxial side. Three to nine biological replicates were performed (as indicated),
   each corresponding to one leaf per plant.


   Extraction of metabolites in Nicotiana Benthamiana:

   Four days post-Agrobacterium infiltration, N. benthamiana leaf samples were harvested using a
   1 cm diameter leaf disc cutter. Each biological replicate comprised six discs (approx. 60 mg)
    collected from a single leaf and stored in a 2-ml safe-lock tube (Eppendorf). Samples were
   immediately flash-frozen and lyophilized overnight. Analyses of the early taxanes taxadiene,
    taxadien-5α-ol, relevant rearrangements products (iso-OCT, OCT, 2d), 11-oxo-13R-manoyl
    oxide, syn-paramidien-6-ol, and dihydronilocticin were done by GC–MS, and analyses of GA12
   were done using liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS). For metabolite
    extraction, one 5-mm stainless steel bead and an appropriate solvent - either 750 uL ethyl
    acetate (ACS reagent grade; J.T. Baker) for GC-MS or 30 uL/mg 80% methanol (high-
   performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) grade; Fisher Chemical) / 20% water (for LC-MS
    analysis) - was added to each tube. The tissues were homogenized using a ball mill (Retsch
  MM 400) at 25 Hz for 2 min and centrifuged at 18,200g for 10 min. GC-MS bound supernatants
   were transferred to 50-μl glass inserts and placed in 2 ml vials before analysis by the GC-MS
    instrument. LC–MS samples were filtered using 96-well hydrophilic PTFE filters with a pore size
    of 0.45 μm (Millipore) and analysed by the LC–MS instrument.


[PDF physical page 27]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .




   GC-MS analysis:

  GC–MS analysis was performed using an Agilent 7820A GC system coupled to an Agilent
   5977B single quadrupole mass spectrometer. Data acquisition and processing were conducted
    via Agilent Enhanced MassHunter and MassHunter Qualitative Analysis (B.07.00), respectively.
   Compounds were separated on an Agilent VF-5HT column (30 m × 0.25 mm × 0.1 μm) using
   helium as the carrier gas at a constant flow of 1 ml/min. A 1-μl sample was injected in split mode
    (10:1 ratio) with an inlet temperature of 280°C. The oven program began at 130°C (2-min hold),
   increased to 250°C at 8°C/min, and finally reached 310°C at 60°C/min, followed by a 1-min
    post-run at 320°C. MS detection was initiated after a 4-min solvent delay, covering a mass
   range of 50–550 m/z at a scan speed of 1,562 u/s. Interface temperatures were maintained at
   250°C (transfer line), 230°C (source), and 150°C (quadrupole). Dihydroniloticin analysis
    followed the protocol established by Hodgson et al 55.


   LC-MS analysis of metabolites:

   Samples of GA12 were analyzed using an Agilent 1260 HPLC system coupled to an Agilent
   6520 Q-TOF mass spectrometer, with data acquisition and processing performed via
   MassHunter Workstation and Qualitative Analysis 10.0, respectively. Chromatographic
    separation was achieved on a Gemini 5-μm NX-C18 110-Å column (2 x 100 mm; Phenomenex)
    at a flow rate of 400 μl/min under ambient temperature. The mobile phase consisted of 0.1%
    formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B). Following a 2 μl injection, the
    gradient profile was as follows: an initial 3-min hold at 30% B, a linear ramp to 97% B from 3 to
   8 min, a 3-min hold at 97% B, and a final return to 30% B between 11 and 14 min. Mass spectra
   were acquired in negative electrospray ionization (ESI) mode over a range of 50–1,200 m/z at a
   scan rate of one spectrum per second. For the 6520 system, source parameters were set to a
   gas temperature of 325 °C, drying gas flow of 10 l/min, nebulizer pressure of 35 psi, VCap of
   3,500 V, fragmentor at 150 V, skimmer at 65 V, and octupole 1 RF Vpp at 750 V. MS/MS
    fragmentation was conducted using the [M+Na]+ adduct as the precursor ion with a collision
   energy of 30 eV, unless otherwise specified.


   Co-immunoprecipitation:

   Four days post-infiltration, Nicotiana benthamiana leaves were harvested and homogenized in
    liquid nitrogen. The resulting powder was resuspended in extraction buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5,
   150 mM NaCl, 0.6% NP-40, 0.6% CHAPS, and 1 mM β-mercaptoethanol). Lysates were
   incubated on ice and clarified by centrifugation at 20,000g (10 min, 4°C), with total protein
    concentration determined via Bradford assay (Abcam). For immunoprecipitation, 15 μl of
    protein-G-coated magnetic beads (Invitrogen) were pre-washed in binding buffer (50 mM
   Na2HPO4, 25 mM citric acid, pH 5.0) and incubated with 1 μl of anti-V5 antibody (Invitrogen


[PDF physical page 28]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



   #MA1-34099), 1 μl of anti-GFP antibody (ProteinTech #66002-1-Ig), or 1 μl of anti-Myc antibody
   (ProteinTech #16286-1-AP) for 1 h at room temperature under agitation. Following two washes
    in extraction buffer, the antibody-bound beads were incubated with 100 μg of total protein lysate
   (~40 μl) for 15 min at room temperature. Finally, the bead complexes were washed three times
    in extraction buffer and prepared for immunoblotting using 4x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer
    (Invitrogen).

   Immunoblotting:

    Protein lysates were resolved on a NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) at 100V for 1.5 h. Proteins were
   then transferred onto a PVDF membrane using a Bio-Rad Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer System.
   Membranes were blocked and incubated with primary antibodies (anti-V5 at 1:1,000 (Invitrogen
   #MA1-34099)), anti-HA-HRP at 1:2,500 (R&D Systems #HAM0601), anti-myc at 1:2000
   (ProteinTech #16286-1-AP), anti-His at 1:1000 (Cell Signaling #9991S), anti-GFP at 1:2000
   (ProteinTech #66002-1-Ig)) for either 3 h at room temperature or overnight with constant
    agitation. After washing, the blots were incubated with HRP-conjugated protein G (Genscript;
    1:5,000) for 1 h. Protein bands were visualized using an iBright FL1500 Imaging System.

   Bi-molecular fluorescence complementation: Leaves were co-infiltrated with Agrobacterium
    strains at an OD of 0.2 as described above. Four days post infiltration, leaf discs 3/16” in
   diameter were cut out using leaf disc cutters and wet-mounted onto glass slides by placing them
    into water-filled wells created using Carolina observation gel (Carolina #132700). Slides were
   then imaged using a Leica Stellaris 5 microscope. Z-stack images were acquired using the LasX
    software with a thickness of 10 uM over 30 steps and a maximum intensity projection was
   created using Fiji (ImageJ).

   Proximity labeling of proteins by TurboID: Leaves were infiltrated with TurboID constructs
   and indicated proteins at an OD of 0.2. Three days post infiltration, leaves were collected and
     infiltrated with 30 uM biotin (Thermo Fisher #A14207.03) for 1 hour at room temperature. Leaves
   were then homogenized for 2 minutes at 25 Hz in liquid nitrogen with steel balls using a ball mill
   (Retsch MM 400). Following homogenization, leaves were resuspended in 2 mL extraction
    buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton-X-100, 0.5% Na-deoxycholate,
   1 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1x protease inhibitor (Roche #11697498001)), and
   incubated under agitation for 10 minutes and 4 °C. Lysates were then sonicated on ice (20%
    amplitude, 10 seconds on / 10 seconds off for 2 minutes (QSonica #Q700)) before
    centrifugation at 2500 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C. Lysates were desalted using a PD-10 column
    (Cytiva) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The lysates were subjected to a Bradford
   assay and equivalent amounts of total protein were mixed with Streptavidin coated magnetic
   beads and incubated at 4 °C overnight. The following methods are as previously described but
    briefly summarized below 47.

         Beads were centrifuged for 2 minutes at 1500 rpm at 4 °C. The streptavidin beads were
   then washed for 8 minutes twice with 1 mL of cold extraction buffer, twice with cold equilibration
    buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton-X-100, 0.5% Na-deoxycholate,
   1 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT), once with cold 1 M KCl, and twice with cold extraction buffer. Beads


[PDF physical page 29]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



   were transferred to a new tube following the first wash and the KCl wash. Beads were then
   washed six times for 8 minutes with room temperature MS grade PBS, with transfer to a new
   tube after the first and sixth wash. The supernatant was removed and beads were stored at -80
    °C. The follow up on beads digestion and peptide desalting were described as 74.

   LC-MS/MS analysis of proteomic samples

   LC-MS/MS was carried out on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher),
   equipped with an Easy LC 1200 UPLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher). Peptides
   were first trapped using a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 HPLC, 75 μm particle
    size, 2 cm bed length), then separated using analytical column AUR3-25075C18, 25CM Aurora
    Series Emitter Column (25 cm x 75 µm, 1.7 µm C18) (IonOpticks). The flow rate was 300
    nL/min. Peptides were eluted by a gradient from 3 to 28 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 %
    formic acid) over 106 min and from 28 to 44 % solvent B over 15 min, followed by a short wash
   (15 min) at 90 % solvent B. Precursor scan was from mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 375 to 1600
    (resolution 120,000; AGC 200,000, maximum injection time 50ms, Normalized AGC target 50%,
   RF lens(%) 30) and the most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for
    fragmentation (resolution 15,000, AGC 5E4, maximum injection time 22ms, isolation window 1.4
    m/z, normalized AGC target 100%, include charge state=2-8, cycle time 3 s). Peptides were
   fragmented with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy
   (NCE) 27. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30s.

  MS data analysis and Label-free quantification

   MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprotkb_proteome_UP000084051 database
   (73,700 entries) supplemented with 24 Taxus protein sequences using the MSFragger 2.3.0
    software with default parameters. Label free quantitative (LFQ) intensities were obtained from
    the search results. Downstream statistics were analyzed in Perseus (version 2.0.10.0). MaxLFQ
    intensities were log2 transformed prior to statistical analysis. Proteins were retained if they
   contained at least two valid values in at least one experimental group (FoTO-TurboID or
    TurboID). Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width=0.3, downshift=1.8)
    applied column wise. Differential abundance was assessed using a two-sample t-test with
   permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) control (250 permutations, FDR = 0.1) and an S0
   parameter of 1.


[PDF physical page 30]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .


  Acknowledgements

  We thank all E.S.S. laboratory members for constructive feedback on this project; D. Wengier
    for discussions and comments on the manuscript, and C. Liou and S. Niehs for discussions, and
   M. Brockley for the ER-GFP plasmid. We also thank the Brophy Lab (Stanford University) for
    the use of their Leica Stellaris 5 microscope, and the Keasling lab (University of California,
    Berkeley) for the TDS and TDS/T5αH engineered yeast strains used in this study. This work is
   supported by NIH R01 AT010593 (E.S.S.), a Doerr Accelerator grant (E.S.S.), National Science
   Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-2146755 (C.W.), NIH
   Biotechnology Training Grant 5T32GM141819 (C.W.), NIH K99 1K99AT012787 (C.J.M.), the
   Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation (DRG-2421-21; C.J.M.), NIH S10OD030441 to
    S.-L.X. and by the Carnegie Endowment Fund to the Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility.

      .


   Contributions

   C.W., C.J.M., J.C.T.L., and E.S.S. contributed to conceptualization. C.W., A.S., S.K., and
    S.X. developed the methodology and performed the formal analysis. C.W., A.S., J.C.T.L.,
   and C.J.M. carried out the experiments. C.W. and A.S. wrote the original draft of the
   manuscript with edits from C.J.M., J.C.T.L., and E.S.S. C.J.M., P.M.F., E.S.S. supervised
    the project.


[PDF physical page 31]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



   References

    1.  Newman, D. J. & Cragg, G. M. Natural Products as Sources of New Drugs from 1981 to

       2014. J. Nat. Prod. 79, 629–661 (2016).

    2.  Bergman, M. E., Davis, B. & Phillips, M. A. Medically Useful Plant Terpenoids: Biosynthesis,

       Occurrence, and Mechanism of Action. Molecules 24, 3961 (2019).

    3.  Rowinsky, E. K. & Donehower, R. C. Paclitaxel (Taxol). (1995).

    4.  Gallego-Jara, J., Lozano-Terol, G., Sola-Martínez, R. A., Cánovas-Díaz, M. & De Diego

       Puente, T. A Compressive Review about Taxol®: History and Future Challenges. Molecules

       25, 5986 (2020).

    5.  Malik, S. et al. Production of the anticancer drug taxol in Taxus baccata suspension

        cultures: A review. Process Biochem. 46, 23–34 (2011).

    6.  Howat, S. et al. Paclitaxel: biosynthesis, production and future prospects. New Biotechnol.

       31, 242–245 (2014).

    7.  Min, L. et al. Strategies and Lessons Learned from Total Synthesis of Taxol. Chem. Rev.

       123, 4934–4971 (2023).

    8.  Holton, R. A. et al. First total synthesis of taxol. 2. Completion of the C and D rings. J. Am.

      Chem. Soc. 116, 1599–1600 (1994).

    9.  Nicolaou, K. C. et al. Total synthesis of taxol. Nature 367, 630–634 (1994).

    10. Danishefsky, S. J. et al. Total Synthesis of Baccatin III and Taxol. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 118,

      2843–2859 (1996).


[PDF physical page 32]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



    11. Wender, P. A. et al. The Pinene Path to Taxanes. 6. A Concise Stereocontrolled Synthesis

        of Taxol. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 119, 2757–2758 (1997).

    12. Gibson, F. S. Synthesis of paclitaxel from baccatin III by protection of the 7-hydroxyl of

       baccatin III using a strong base and an electrophile. (2001).

    13. Li, C. et al. A Cytochrome P450 Enzyme Catalyses Oxetane Ring Formation in Paclitaxel

        Biosynthesis. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 63, e202407070 (2024).

    14. Yang, C. et al. Biosynthesis of the highly oxygenated tetracyclic core skeleton of Taxol. Nat.

      Commun. 15, 2339 (2024).

    15. Zhao, Y. et al. Oxetane Ring Formation in Taxol Biosynthesis Is Catalyzed by a Bifunctional

      Cytochrome P450 Enzyme. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 146, 801–810 (2024).

    16. Jiang, B. et al. Characterization and heterologous reconstitution of Taxus biosynthetic

      enzymes leading to baccatin III. Science 383, 622–629 (2024).

    17. McClune, C. J. et al. Discovery of FoTO1 and Taxol genes enables biosynthesis of baccatin

            III. Nature 643, 582–592 (2025).

    18. Zhang, Y. et al. Synthetic biology identifies the minimal gene set required for paclitaxel

       biosynthesis in a plant chassis. Mol. Plant 16, 1951–1961 (2023).

    19. Zi, J., Mafu, S. & Peters, R. J. To Gibberellins and Beyond! Surveying the Evolution of

       (Di)Terpenoid Metabolism. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 65, 259–286 (2014).

    20. Zerbe, P. & Bohlmann, J. Plant diterpene synthases: exploring modularity and metabolic

        diversity for bioengineering. Trends Biotechnol. 33, 419–428 (2015).


[PDF physical page 33]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



    21. Peters, R. J. Two rings in them all: The labdane-related diterpenoids. Nat. Prod. Rep. 27,

      1521 (2010).

    22. Jennewein, S., Long, R. M., Williams, R. M. & Croteau, R. Cytochrome p450 taxadiene

       5alpha-hydroxylase, a mechanistically unusual monooxygenase catalyzing the first

       oxygenation step of taxol biosynthesis. Chem. Biol. 11, 379–387 (2004).

    23. Ajikumar, P. K. et al. Isoprenoid Pathway Optimization for Taxol Precursor Overproduction

         in Escherichia coli. Science 330, 70–74 (2010).

    24. Edgar, S. et al. Mechanistic Insights into Taxadiene Epoxidation by Taxadiene-5α-

       Hydroxylase. ACS Chem. Biol. 11, 460–469 (2016).

    25. Eberhardt, R. Y. et al. Filling out the structural map of the NTF2-like superfamily. BMC

        Bioinformatics 14, 327 (2013).

    26. Li, Y., Wang, J. & Yan, Y. NTF2-Like Enzymes as Versatile Biocatalysts in Fungal Natural

       Product Biosynthesis. ChemCatChem 17, e202401495 (2025).

    27. Zhao, Q., Leung, S., Corbett, A. H. & Meier, I. Identification and Characterization of the

       Arabidopsis Orthologs of Nuclear Transport Factor 2, the Nuclear Import Factor of Ran.

       Plant Physiol. 140, 869–878 (2006).

    28. Chen, K. et al. Nuclear transport factor GmNTF2B-1 enhances soybean drought tolerance

      by interacting with oxidoreductase GmOXR17 to reduce reactive oxygen species content.

       Plant J. 107, 740–759 (2021).

    29. Luo, D. et al. NUCLEAR TRANSPORT FACTOR 2-LIKE improves drought tolerance by

       modulating leaf water loss in alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.). Plant J. 112, 429–450 (2022).


[PDF physical page 34]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



    30. Reider Apel, A. et al. A Cas9-based toolkit to program gene expression in Saccharomyces

        cerevisiae. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, 496–508 (2017).

    31. Liu, J. C.-T., De La Peña, R., Tocol, C. & Sattely, E. S. Reconstitution of early paclitaxel

        biosynthetic network. Nat. Commun. 15, 1419 (2024).

    32. Zhang, Z., Huang, L., Zhang, Z.-J., Xu, J.-H. & Yu, H.-L. Rational Design of Taxadiene

       Hydroxylase by Ancestral Enzyme Construction and the Elucidation of Key Amino Acids.

       Biochemistry 62, 3214–3221 (2023).

    33. Arand, M. et al. Structure of Rhodococcus erythropolis limonene‐1,2‐epoxide hydrolase

       reveals a novel active site. EMBO J. 22, 2583–2592 (2003).

    34. Hotta, K. et al. Enzymatic catalysis of anti-Baldwin ring closure in polyether biosynthesis.

       Nature 483, 355–358 (2012).

    35. Barton, N. A. et al. Accessing low-oxidation state taxanes: is taxadiene-4(5)-epoxide on the

        taxol biosynthetic pathway? Chem. Sci. 7, 3102–3107 (2016).

    36. Johansson, P. et al. Structure of an Atypical Epoxide Hydrolase from Mycobacterium

        tuberculosis Gives Insights into its Function. J. Mol. Biol. 351, 1048–1056 (2005).

    37. Clinger, J. A. et al. Structure and Function of a Dual Reductase–Dehydratase Enzyme

      System Involved in p -Terphenyl Biosynthesis. ACS Chem. Biol. 16, 2816–2824 (2021).

    38. Minami, A. et al. Allosteric regulation of epoxide opening cascades by a pair of epoxide

       hydrolases in monensin biosynthesis. ACS Chem. Biol. 9, 562–569 (2014).

    39. Brückner, K. & Tissier, A. High-level diterpene production by transient expression in

       Nicotiana benthamiana. Plant Methods 9, 46 (2013).


[PDF physical page 35]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



    40. Henry, L. K. et al. Contribution of isopentenyl phosphate to plant terpenoid metabolism. Nat.

       Plants 4, 721–729 (2018).

    41. De La Peña, R. & Sattely, E. S. Rerouting plant terpene biosynthesis enables momilactone

      pathway elucidation. Nat. Chem. Biol. 17, 205–212 (2021).

    42. Laursen, T. et al. Characterization of a dynamic metabolon producing the defense

      compound dhurrin in sorghum. Science 354, 890–893 (2016).

    43. Gou, M., Ran, X., Martin, D. W. & Liu, C.-J. The scaffold proteins of lignin biosynthetic

       cytochrome P450 enzymes. Nat. Plants 4, 299–310 (2018).

    44. Levine, Z. G. et al. Mammalian cell proliferation requires noncatalytic functions of O-GlcNAc

        transferase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 118, e2016778118 (2021).

    45. Boccia, M. et al. A scaffold protein manages the biosynthesis of steroidal defense

       metabolites in plants. Science 386, 1366–1372 (2024).

    46. Jozwiak, A. et al. A cellulose synthase–like protein governs the biosynthesis of Solanum

        alkaloids. Science 386, eadq5721 (2024).

    47. Mair, A., Xu, S.-L., Branon, T. C., Ting, A. Y. & Bergmann, D. C. Proximity labeling of

        protein complexes and cell-type-specific organellar proteomes in Arabidopsis enabled by

       TurboID. eLife 8, e47864 (2019).

    48. Branon, T. C. et al. Efficient proximity labeling in living cells and organisms with TurboID.

       Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 880–887 (2018).

    49. Bracha‐Drori, K. et al. Detection of protein–protein interactions in plants using bimolecular

       fluorescence complementation. Plant J. 40, 419–427 (2004).


[PDF physical page 36]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



    50. Arand, M. Structure of Rhodococcus erythropolis limonene-1,2-epoxide hydrolase reveals a

       novel active site. EMBO J. 22, 2583–2592 (2003).

    51. Seamon, K. B., Padgett, W. & Daly, J. W. Forskolin: unique diterpene activator of adenylate

       cyclase in membranes and in intact cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 78, 3363–3367 (1981).

    52. Bodiwala, H. S., Sabde, S., Mitra, D., Bhutani, K. K. & Singh, I. P. Anti-HIV Diterpenes from

       Coleus forskohlii¶. Nat. Prod. Commun. 4, 1934578X0900400902 (2009).

    53. Pateraki, I. et al. Total biosynthesis of the cyclic AMP booster forskolin from Coleus

         forskohlii. eLife 6, e23001 (2017).

    54. Helliwell, C. A., Chandler, P. M., Poole, A., Dennis, E. S. & Peacock, W. J. The CYP88A

       cytochrome P450, ent-kaurenoic acid oxidase, catalyzes three steps of the gibberellin

       biosynthesis pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98, 2065–2070 (2001).

    55. Hodgson, H. et al. Identification of key enzymes responsible for protolimonoid biosynthesis

         in plants: Opening the door to azadirachtin production. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116, 17096–

      17104 (2019).

    56. Tanaka, T. et al. Lipocalin-type Prostaglandin D Synthase (β-Trace) Is a Newly Recognized

      Type of Retinoid Transporter. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 15789–15795 (1997).

    57. Mohri, I. et al. Lipocalin-type prostaglandin D synthase is up-regulated in oligodendrocytes

         in lysosomal storage diseases and binds gangliosides. J. Neurochem. 97, 641–651 (2006).

    58. Beuckmann, C. T. et al. Binding of biliverdin, bilirubin, and thyroid hormones to lipocalin-

       type prostaglandin D synthase. Biochemistry 38, 8006–8013 (1999).


[PDF physical page 37]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



    59. Bulutoglu, B., Garcia, K. E., Wu, F., Minteer, S. D. & Banta, S. Direct Evidence for

       Metabolon Formation and Substrate Channeling in Recombinant TCA Cycle Enzymes. ACS

      Chem. Biol. 11, 2847–2853 (2016).

    60. Vélot, C., Mixon, M. B., Teige, M. & Srere, P. A. Model of a quinary structure between Krebs

     TCA cycle enzymes: a model for the metabolon. Biochemistry 36, 14271–14276 (1997).

    61. Winkel‐Shirley, B. Evidence for enzyme complexes in the phenylpropanoid and flavonoid

       pathways. Physiol. Plant. 107, 142–149 (1999).

    62. Obata, T. Metabolons in plant primary and secondary metabolism. Phytochem. Rev. 18,

      1483–1507 (2019).

    63. Zhang, Y. & Fernie, A. R. Metabolons, enzyme–enzyme assemblies that mediate substrate

       channeling, and their roles in plant metabolism. Plant Commun. 2, (2021).

    64. Smith, A., Brownawell, A. & Macara, I. G. Nuclear import of Ran is mediated by the

        transport factor NTF2. Curr. Biol. 8, 1403-S1 (1998).

    65. Shahriari, A. G., Soltani, Z., Tahmasebi, A. & Poczai, P. Integrative System Biology Analysis

        of Transcriptomic Responses to Drought Stress in Soybean (Glycine max L.). Genes 13,

        (2022).

    66. Kim, S. W. et al. High-Resolution Crystal Structures of Δ5-3-Ketosteroid Isomerase with and

        without a Reaction Intermediate Analogue. Biochemistry 36, 14030–14036 (1997).

    67. Wong, L. H., Čopič, A. & Levine, T. P. Advances on the Transfer of Lipids by Lipid Transfer

        Proteins. Trends Biochem. Sci. 42, 516–530 (2017).


[PDF physical page 38]
 bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.21.713420; this version posted March 24, 2026. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                              available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



    68. Kuatsjah, E. et al. Biochemical and structural characterization of a sphingomonad

       diarylpropane lyase for cofactorless deformylation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 120, e2212246120

        (2023).

    69. Tinberg, C. E. et al. Computational design of ligand-binding proteins with high affinity and

         selectivity. Nature 501, 212–216 (2013).

    70. Feng, J. et al. A general strategy to construct small molecule biosensors in eukaryotes.

        eLife 4, e10606 (2015).

    71. Yeh, A. H.-W. et al. De novo design of luciferases using deep learning. Nature 614, 774–

      780 (2023).

    72. Nadal, M. et al. Buttressing ligand‐binding pockets in de novo designed NTF2 ‐like domains.

        Protein Sci. 34, e70323 (2025).

    73. Mahamat Ahmat, Y. & Kaliaguine, S. Stepwise and Microemulsions Epoxidation of

      Limonene by Dimethyldioxirane: A Comparative Study. ACS Omega 7, 31789–31800

        (2022).

    74. Karunadasa, S. S., Grismer, T. S., Zhai, W., Reyes, A. V. & Xu, S.-L. Detection and

        Quantification of Biotinylated Proteins for TurboID-Based Proximity Labeling Mass

       Spectrometry in Arabidopsis. Methods Mol. Biol. Clifton NJ 2953, 115–126 (2025).