
[PDF physical page 1]
Actifensin Evolution in the Human Oral Cavity over the Past 100,000
Years
Rosa Herbst,○Anan Ibrahim,○Alexander Hübner, Uwe Knüpfer, Lars Regestein,
Christoph Wiedemann, Ute A. Hellmich, Christina Warinner,* and Pierre Stallforth*
Cite This: J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 48060−48071
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Bacterially produced antimicrobial peptides
(AMPs), or bacteriocins, play key roles in shaping microbial
communities via interspecies competition. Unlike the more
temporally dynamic gut microbiome, the oral microbiome exhibits
long-term stability and is preserved into deep time in dental
calculus, enabling evolutionary analysis across time. Here, we
combine metagenomics, structural modeling, and experimental
validation to investigate AMP diversity in ancient and modern
dental biofilms from humans, Neanderthals, and nonhuman
primates spanning 100,000 years. Using our newly developed
platform, AMPcombi, we uncover evolutionary trajectories of
bacteriocins and elucidate their ecological functions. Among these,
we identify a conserved family of Actinomyces-derived defensin-like peptides, termed actifensins, present across all time periods.
Phylogenetic, structural, and functional analyses revealed shared ancestry and adaptive diversification between ancient (paleo-) and
modern actifensins, with evidence of positive selection and maintained antimicrobial activity. Our findings position the oral
microbiome as a valuable reservoir for natural product discovery. In the face of rising antimicrobial resistance, evolutionary insights
into AMP function open a door to next-generation therapeutics. AMPcombi streamlines this process, linking ancient biomolecules
with biotechnology.
■INTRODUCTION
Microbial natural products constitute the basis for the majority
of all commercially available antibiotics, as well as a large
number of anticancer drugs, immunomodulators, and choles-
terol-lowering drugs.1,2 Recent advances in the field of
archaeogenetics and paleobiotechnology have enabled the
reconstruction of biosynthetic enzymes from the past, thus
opening the door to microbial natural product discovery
spanning more than 100,000 years.3 Structural and functional
diversification of these natural products requires extensive
reprogramming of their complex biosynthetic assembly lines,
resulting in an evolutionary rate substantially slower than that
of peptides and proteins. In contrast, ribosomally produced
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) can evolve more rapidly due to
the direct translation of changes in the DNA sequence into
structural and functional peptide changes. AMPs are vital
components of the defense systems in virtually all forms of life,
displaying antimicrobial activities that range from narrow to
broad-spectrum. In higher organisms, AMPs are integral to the
innate immune system, acting as a first-line defense barrier
against harmful microorganisms.4 Host and bacterially
produced AMPs also play a major role in microbiomes,
where they strongly influence the balance and dynamics of
microbial communities. Bacterially produced AMPs, known as
bacteriocins, provide a competitive advantage to the producer
strain by eliminating competing bacteria in their ecological
niche.5
The human oral microbiome is a highly complex microbial
community containing more than 500−700 prevalent
species.6,7 Oral microbes are highly structured and spatially
organized within different oral niches,8 and they exhibit
remarkable stability over long periods.9 Within dental biofilms,
oral microbial structure reflects complex interactions of
adhesion, syntrophy, and secretion of signaling molecules
and bacteriocins that influence bacterial colonization, persis-
tence, and immune escape,6 rendering dental biofilms an
excellent model for investigating the AMP evolution. More-
over, dental biofilms naturally calcify during life, forming dental
calculus, which is preserved after death and therefore is nearly
ubiquitous in the archeological record. This dental calculus
bioarchive of the oral microbiome has been shown to exhibit
Received:
August 18, 2025
Revised:
December 2, 2025
Accepted:
December 3, 2025
Published: December 17, 2025
Article
pubs.acs.org/JACS
© 2025 The Authors. Published by
American Chemical Society
48060
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c14335
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 48060−48071
This article is licensed under CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0
Downloaded via 205.198.68.199 on January 4, 2026 at 08:34:22 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.



[PDF physical page 2]
excellent biomolecular preservation, enabling the direct study
of human oral microbiome evolution over tens of thousands of
years.10 These studies revealed a high degree of conservation
within primate oral microbiota over at least 40 million years,
with humans, great apes, and howler monkeys sharing a core
dental biofilm microbiome of at least ten major genera.10
Here, we present a new software tool, AMPcombi, to explore
AMP evolutionary changes within human and Neanderthal
dental biofilms over a period of 100,000 years, as well as within
dental biofilms of nonhuman primates, allowing us to retrace
the structural and functional changes of bacteriocins over key
periods of recent human evolution. In an era of escalating
antimicrobial resistance, an evolutionary approach to discov-
ering AMPs holds great promise as an alternative treatment
strategy. By understanding the evolutionary adaptations and
functions of AMPs, we can develop novel antimicrobial
therapies to combat resistant pathogens.
■RESULTS
De Novo Assembly of Oral Metagenomes from
Human and Nonhuman Primate Dental Calculus. We
compiled a data set of 119 published dental biofilm
metagenomes derived from the dental calculus of present-day
humans (n = 18), archeological humans (n = 43) and
Neanderthals (n = 12), as well as nonhuman primates
consisting of chimpanzees (n = 20), gorillas (n = 29), and
howler monkeys (n = 5)3,10 (Figure 1A; Supplementary Data
1). The Neanderthal samples date to the Middle Paleolithic
(ca. 44−102 ka BP), while the archeological human
populations originate from Europe and Africa and span
multiple time periods, including the Upper Paleolithic (n =
12, ca. 14−31 ka BP), Mesolithic (n = 7, ca. 9−10 ka BP),
Neolithic (n = 6, ca. 4−8 ka BP), and historic (n = 18, ca.
1850−550 BP) periods. We then de novo assembled these
metagenomes using metaSPAdes11 for present-day human
samples and MEGAHIT12 for nonhuman primates and
Figure 1. Antimicrobial peptide sequence prediction from dental calculus using AMPcombi. (a) Geographical map showing the distribution of the
dental calculus metagenomes (DCMs) used in this study indicating the species, time period, and origin they represent. (b) A graphical summary
illustrating the workflow used to generate the input for AMPcombi, the intermediary steps and the downstream processing invoked to recover
putative AMP classes from the DCM. (c) Bubble chart demonstrating the proportion of successfully predicted AMPs derived from the different
DCM samples (small bubbles with sample codes) grouped by age period (large bubbles) using AMPcombi and data set specific filtering steps. The
color code of the different age periods is shown in (a). (d) The bar plots display the number of putative AMPs recovered per one million
nucleotides within the DCMs, while the stacked bar plot illustrates the proportion of the retained AMPs across the DCMs based on the prediction
efficacy of each AMP prediction tool included in the workflow. The color code of the different age periods is shown in (a). Six AMP prediction
tools were used in the workflow. HMMsearch was included as an additional sequence similarity−based method to capture known AMP motifs and
to standardize tool performance, but is not considered a prediction tool. Logo artwork by Anan Ibrahim, used with permission.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c14335
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 48060−48071
48061



[PDF physical page 3]
archeological humans and Neanderthals, producing 3,274,184
contigs >500 bp in length for AMP discovery using AMPcombi
(Supplementary Figure 1, Supplementary Data 2).
Enhanced AMP Discovery with AMPcombi. Recent
years have seen a surge in the development of bioinformatic
tools applying various algorithms to identify genes encoding
antimicrobial peptides (AMP). Each tool has specific strengths
and weaknesses, and AMP discovery is best achieved by
combining the results of multiple tools. However, integrating
the results of such tools is cumbersome and error-prone
because of different output formats and the large amount of
generated data with only minimal overlap. To overcome this
challenge, we developed AMPcombi, a Python-based software
tool that integrates the results of six state-of-the-art computa-
tional tools to narrow down AMP hits in a single workflow,
and provides a GUI interface to dynamically inspect the
results. Applying AMPcombi to our data set of dental calculus
metagenomes (DCMs), we identify a total of 4,628,215
potential AMP hits. However, this large number is likely an
overestimate resulting from AMP misassignment, which is a
longstanding problem in the identification of AMPs.13 Cross-
tool comparison is an essential step for reducing false positives,
but is challenging to manually perform on large data sets.
AMPcombi14 (Figure 1b) automates this process by
consolidating the outputs into a streamlined, tab-separated
table, suitable for interactive exploration via a web interface.
Given the variability in AMP prediction accuracy of the
different AMP prediction tools, user-adjustable parameters are
included to allow for standardization and refinement of results,
ensuring that predictions from large-scale metagenomic data
sets are manageable, and to provide experimentally relevant
hits (Figure 1, Supplementary Figures 2 and 3 and
Supplementary Section 1).
To further increase reliability, AMPcombi also includes an
integrated option using HMMsearch (HMMER v.3.4),15
which can be customized by specific Hidden Markov Models
(HMMs). This standardization by HMMsearch is particularly
well-suited for finding the most suitable tool for the respective
data set (Supplementary Figure 4a). Further validation of the
results is performed by the alignment of the amino acid
Figure 2. Recovery of ancient and oral-derived antimicrobial peptides from dental calculus. (a) The UpSet plot displays the number of AMPs
predicted by six AMP prediction tools and HMMsearch (a sequence similarity−based method) after removing peptides longer than 120 amino
acids and with AMP probability scores <0.8. The numbers above each vertical bar indicate the count of unique or mutually predicted AMPs by the
tools, while the horizontal bars indicate the total number of AMPs predicted solely by each tool in the data set. (b) Heatmap illustrating the final 78
clusters representing different putative AMP classes recovered from DCMs using AMPcombi and the subsequent filtering steps. The AMP clusters
are ordered by their total abundance among archeological human samples and are classified based on annotations obtained from UniRef100.19 The
heatmap color scale represents the number of AMPs recovered per cluster in each time period, with yellow indicating few AMPs and dark blue
indicating more than 70 AMPs, as shown in the scale bar.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c14335
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 48060−48071
48062



[PDF physical page 4]
Figure 3. Overall diversity of oral derived defensin-like peptides originating from Actinomyces. (a) The phylogenetic tree represents the diversity of
mature defensin peptide sequences found in Actinomyces-derived contigs from the dental calculus data set, as well as in Actinomyces genomes
retrieved from NCBI that correspond to oral-derived strains. The tree was rooted using the mature peptide sequence from micasin-A.28 Sample age
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c14335
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 48060−48071
48063



[PDF physical page 5]
sequences of the putative AMPs to reference databases, such as
InterProScan,16 and either APD,17 DRAMP18 or UniRef100.19
Large numbers of predicted AMPs found in metagenomic data
sets can be easily narrowed in AMPcombi to those with the
strongest support by applying user-specified filters to the
results table (Figure 1b).
AMP Prediction Tool Discrepancies Across Metage-
nomes. We applied 65 HMM models representing different
AMP classes in HMMsearch15 to the initial 4.6 million putative
AMP gene hits identified by AMPcombi, of which 48 were
identified in the dental calculus metagenomes (Supplementary
Figure 4a). Cross-validation revealed that each tool has a
distinct prediction tendency, with NeuBI,20 Ampir21 and
AmpGram22 out-performing all other tools using the thresh-
olds we set for this study (Figure 2a). Among the six prediction
tools, Neubl was the only tool to identify nearly all HMM
models aligned by HMMsearch15 (Supplementary Figure 4a).
Finally, each tool exhibited performance differences in
predicting distinct AMP families and AMPs with specific
physicochemical properties and secondary structure (Supple-
mentary Figure 4b−g).
AMP Curation and Refinement. After filtering predicted
AMPs for only peptides shorter than 120 amino acids and with
an AMP probability above 0.8 predicted by at least one tool,
254,718 AMPs were retained. Most of these putative AMPs
were detected solely by one tool, while those identified by
multiple tools were mostly derived from the three high-
performing prediction tools: NeuBI,20 Ampir21 and Amp-
Gram22 (Figure 2a). In an additional step, 5% of these AMPs
were eliminated by removing peptides annotated as ribosomal
proteins by InterProScan16 (Supplementary Figure 3).
AMPs from DCMs were further trimmed using a set of
biologically relevant selection criteria. Given that some AMPs
from DCMs were found on taxonomically unclassified contigs
(Supplementary Figures 5 and 9), only AMPs found on contigs
belonging to a genus known to include oral species
(Supplementary Data 3) were retained (Supplementary Figure
6). As a result, AMP-bearing contigs in the DCM were
predominantly assigned to Actinomyces, Streptococcus, Neisseria,
and Capnocytophaga, with each AMP prediction tool exhibiting
varying tendencies to identify AMPs from the different
taxonomic groups (Supplementary Figures 5 and 6). Addi-
tionally, because predictable forms of DNA damage are known
to accumulate over time,23 we removed archeological DCMs
lacking these signals (Supplementary Figure 7). After these
filtering steps, 140,069 putative AMPs remained.
Although we observed the highest number of putative AMPs
in samples from present-day humans (Figure 1c), when
normalized by the total contig lengths, more AMPs were
recovered collectively from archeological humans (Figure
1c,d). Temporal coverage analysis shows that the most
abundant taxa, e.g. Actinomyces and Arachnia, were found in
similar proportions across the different time periods (Supple-
mentary Figure 8c), whereas AMPs from Capnocytophaga,
Rothia, and Treponema, were less prevalent in human samples
older than 200 years.
We next dereplicated the AMPs by clustering them
according to amino acid sequence homology and removed
any clusters with fewer than 10 AMPs, as well as any cluster
without at least one archeological human. We then further
removed clusters that lacked either a predicted signal peptide
or validation from at least three of the seven AMP prediction
tools (Supplementary Figure 10a). The final data set consisted
of 78 clusters comprising 1669 putative AMPs (see Figure 1b
and Supplementary Section 2.2 for a summary of all filtering
steps).
Comparative Analysis of Clustered AMP Variants. The
1669 putative AMPs retained for analysis span the complete
temporal range of the DCMs (Figure 2b). Approximately 50%
originate from present-day humans, about 10% from recent
periods (18th−20th centuries), 13% from more ancient
periods (Paleolithic, Mesolithic, and Neolithic) and 27%
from nonhuman primates. Of the total AMPs recovered from
the historical samples, 50% were detected in the DCM of
GRF001.A-D (Figure 1c), which originates from King Richard
III of England (AD 1452−1485), and is likely due to the very
deep sequencing of the dental calculus of this individual.24
Only ten clusters contained AMPs derived from human
samples spanning all time periods (Figure 2b, Supplementary
Figure 12 and Supplementary Table 1). In contrast, 17 clusters
contained no AMP from any older archeological periods
(Paleolithic, Mesolithic, Neolithic), and only two clusters
contained no AMP hits from any present-day human samples
(Figure 2b).
The predicted secondary structures of the AMPs indicate
that most clusters include peptides with either exclusively
helical or mixed helical and β-sheet structures (Supplementary
Figure 10c). Annotation of the AMPs was possible in 53% of
the clusters by identifying protein homologies using an HMM
model and databases such as DRAMP,18 APD,17 and
UniRef10019 (Figure 2b and Supplementary Figure 12), of
which 22% were identified as bacteriocins.
Although AMP-coding genes were mainly located on shorter
contigs across all time periods (Supplementary Figure 8a,b),
many clusters still contained enough longer contigs to examine
neighboring genes. These frequently included genes related to
peptide maturation, transport, and enzymatic modification
(Supplementary Figure 13a,b). However, some clusters also
produced false positives, with peptides unrelated to AMPs,
such as conjugal transfer proteins, found alongside with
respective associated elements (Supplementary Figure 13c).
Evolution of Actinomyces Defensin-like Peptides
Across the Past 100,000 Years. Due to its well-preserved
metagenomes and conserved microbial composition, the
distinct microbial community of dental calculus is ideally
suited for analyzing the structure−function relationships of
AMPs in an evolutionary context. Among the final AMPs
cluster set we selected cluster 59324 for further functional and
Figure 3. continued
and type are indicated by symbols, and rings indicate isolation source (inner), host (middle), and species (outer). There is a wide distribution of
defensin classes independent of host origin, species, time, or location. (b) SplitsTree neighbor network based on the consensus hybridization
network of both amino acid- and nucleotide-based alignments (Supplementary Figure 18) computed using the PhyloFusion algorithm. Colors
represent different oral-derived actifensin phylogroups across the split network. The network suggests a common evolutionary origin among the
seven actifensin phylogroups, showing varying levels of reticulate evolution and divergence. Among the two further investigated actifensin pairs,
which fall in Clade 1 (PAFI/MAF I) and Clade 6 (PAF/MAF II), PAF is consistently located basal to MAF.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c14335
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 48060−48071
48064



[PDF physical page 6]
Figure 4. Genetic and structural adaptation of paleo and modern oral actifensins. (a) The phylogenetic tree represents all mature peptide sequences
from actifensins recovered from DCMs and from the dereplicated sequences found to be homologues from all oral Actinomyces genomes
(Supplementary Figure 16). Four mature peptides, labeled as PAF/MAF I and PAF/MAF II, were selected for further structural and functional
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c14335
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 48060−48071
48065



[PDF physical page 7]
evolutionary analysis. The 78 AMPs in this cluster represented
the largest number of peptides among all identified clusters and
were annotated as defensin-like peptides and identified across
all archeological periods, as well as in present-day humans and
nonhuman primates (Figure 1b and Supplementary Table 1).
Taxonomic classification of the contigs revealed that the
defensin-like AMPs all originate from oral-derived Actinomyces
species (Figure 3 and Supplementary Figure 14). Actinomyces is
a genus that has been conserved within the primate lineage for
over 40 million years, and it is a core member of the human
oral microbiome.10 Actinomyces play a major role in dental
biofilm initiation, and its interactions with other oral species
structure the formation of dental plaque.25 Because AMPs play
key roles in shaping microbiota,26 characterizing the evolu-
tionary history of Actinomyces AMPs is an important and
necessary step in understanding the long-term evolution of
human dental biofilms.
Phylogenetic analysis with different classes of defensin-like
AMPs confirmed that the DCM-derived peptides are mostly
related to bacterial homologues (Supplementary Figure 15).
These peptides, recently found in Actinomyces, have been
named actifensins,27 a nomenclature we also adopted here. To
distinguish between ancient and more recent actifensins, we
refer to actifensins originating from archeological DCMs >200
years old as paleo-actifensins (PAF), and actifensins from more
recent DCMs as modern-actifensins (MAF). Most homologues
of PAFs and MAFs found in public databases clustered with
Actinomyces species of oral origin (Figure 3a and Supple-
mentary Figure 16). Although most contigs contained only a
single gene copy encoding a defensin-like peptide, in rare cases,
two or more isoforms were found encoded adjacent to each
other. All actifensins were encoded as larger precursor
molecules with an N-terminal signal peptide, which is typically
cleaved off during secretion at approximately three residues N-
terminal to the first cysteine to release the mature peptide. For
the signal peptide regions of both PAFs and MAFs, amino acid
sequence similarities range from 55% to 100% (mean =
77.4%). In contrast, the mature regions have a greater
variation, ranging from 33% to 100%, and lower average
similarity with a mean of 58.7%, excluding self-comparisons.
Aligning the amino acid sequences of the mature peptides,
together with 127 homologous sequences of oral cavity-
associated Actinomyces strains, resulted in a phylogenetic tree
with seven distinct clades (Figure 3). Across all clades,
nonhuman primate actifensins, when present, appear to exhibit
ancestral characteristics. However, no distinct ancestral pattern
was observed among human PAFs across the clades. In some
cases, such as clades 2 and 3, PAFs (including those
represented by Neanderthals dating to 100,000 years ago)
shared complete amino acid sequence identity with their MAF
counterparts. Notably, only two clades (1 and 6) showed PAF
as an ancestral lineage (Figures 3b and 4, Supplementary
Figure 17) with clade 6 also including a nonhuman actifensin
basal to the ancestral human PAFs (Figures 3 and 4a).
Construction of a consensus hybridization network using
amino acid and nucleotide alignments (Supplementary Figure
18) showed a common evolutionary origin for the seven
actifensin phylogroups, with varying levels of reticulation and
divergence (Figure 3b). Regardless of whether the alignment
was based on structural features, amino acids or nucleotide
sequences, the resulting lineages showed minimal variation
(Supplementary Figure 18). Although each branch in the split
network contains a different degree of splitting, all diverging
branches are connected at the base in a single line, suggesting a
shared evolutionary history and the presence of a common
ancestor for this family of proteins. The polygonal connections
between the splits, more prominent in clade 6, indicate
conflicting signals signifying possible “ongoing” recombination
events, horizontal gene transfer, or purifying selection
pressures acting on some sites on the sequences on those
branches (Figure 3b). Indeed, analyses of different models
indicating pervasive (constant selection pressure) and episodic
diversifications along the mature peptide sequence of all seven
phylogroups showed nine conserved amino acid residues
across oral-derived actifensins (Figure 4b and Supplementary
Figure 19). Seven of these amino acid residues under positive
selection pressure are located within distinct α-helical or β-
strand secondary structure elements (Figure 4b).
Secondary Structure and Antimicrobial Activity of
Modern and Ancient Actifensins. From the sequence-
based predicted secondary structures29 of representative
peptides from each clade, we found that all peptides exhibited
a conserved secondary structure consisting of one α-helix and
two β-strands, possibly connected via three disulfide bonds
(Supplementary Figure 20). Most peptides showed amphi-
pathic character with more extensive positively charged regions
and negatively charged areas are localized in specific patches.
While some structures are predicted to have more compact 3D
structures, the majority exhibit extended surface conformations
(Figure 4c,d).
To confirm the theoretically predicted secondary structures
of the peptides, we recombinantly expressed two pairs (I and
II) of ancestral PAFs and their related MAFs in Escherichia coli
as thioredoxin fusion proteins. The mature peptides were
purified using a combination of affinity and chromatographic
separation methods following removal of the fusion protein by
enterokinase cleavage. Analysis of the secondary structure
using circular dichroism spectroscopy30 revealed that all
peptides display the expected secondary structure content
and that the composition of α- and β-helical content derived
Figure 4. continued
analysis. (b) Sequence alignment illustrates sequence identity along the lineage, residues are colored to display the respective physicochemical
properties. The bar plot at the bottom shows the frequency of each amino acid residue at every alignment position. The bar height reflects the
distribution frequency of residues, while the color encodes selection pressure (light gray indicates no detected selection, hatching indicates
conserved residues, and black denotes positions under positive or diversifying selection) based on pervasive and episodic selection pressure
analyses. The estimated positions of the three main features of the secondary structureone α-helix and two β-strandsare highlighted. (c,d)
Tertiary protein structures represent selected members from the seven actifensin phylogroups. Protein surface is shown from two perspectives, with
the second view rotated 180° relative to the first. While (c) shows the electrostatic surface potential of the peptides, with blue regions indicating
positive charge, red regions indicating negative charge, and white regions representing neutral areas, providing insight into potential electrostatic
interactions, (d) displays surface hydrophobicity, where yellow regions represent hydrophobic areas and turquoise regions indicate hydrophilic
areas, highlighting the peptides’ potential interactions with aqueous or lipid environments.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c14335
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 48060−48071
48066



[PDF physical page 8]
from experimental data is in good agreement with the
respective theoretically predicted secondary structures (Sup-
plementary Figure 20a). Molecular dynamic (MD) simu-
lations31 of the peptides in water during 100 ns revealed an
overall molecular compactness supported by consistent radius
of gyration (Rg) values and structural stability during the
entire simulation with almost no alterations in root-mean-
square deviation (RMSD). Root mean square fluctuations
(RMSF) were only observed in the loop region between the
two antiparallel β-strands (Supplementary Figure 20b). The
structural stability was experimentally confirmed by CD
spectroscopy using thermal denaturation of the recombinant
peptides; all exert high melting temperatures (Tm) of >70 °C
in all cases and can refold after cooling (Supplementary Figure
21).
We tested the antimicrobial activities of the peptides against
three Gram-positive strains, which were previously shown to
be susceptible to actifensins,27,32 representing diverse branches
of two bacterial phyla: Bacillota, Bacillus megaterium and
Pediococcus acidilactici; and Actinomycetota, Lysinibacillus
fusiformis. Based on these assays, peptides of group II were
more potent compared to the peptides of group I. All MAFs
exhibited lower MIC values than their ancient counterparts,
except for MAF I, which showed a slightly higher MIC against
P. acidilactici than its PAF counterpart. None of the peptides
were active against Gram-negative E. coli K12 in the
Pseudomonadota phylum (Figure 5).
■DISCUSSION
The dramatic increase of antimicrobial resistance over the past
century has substantially reduced the efficacy of treatment
options for previously curable diseases. Antimicrobial resist-
ance is now a leading cause of mortality worldwide,33 thus
posing a major threat to the world’s healthcare systems.34
Addressing this urgent challenge requires innovative bio-
prospecting strategies to discover novel antimicrobial peptides
that are intrinsically less prone to the development of bacterial
resistance. AMPs more effectively augment conventional
antibiotics due to their ease of modification, e.g., alteration
of their amino acid sequence, to circumvent resistance.
However, they remain understudied due to outdated models
of their evolution and activity.26
Recently, there has been a growing interest in AMPs as
potential therapeutic agents, not only with renewed efforts for
novel AMPs identification35,36 and the expansion of specialized
AMP databases,17,18 but also in the development of publicly
available mining tools.37 Moreover, the increasing availability
of large metagenomic data sets from previously inaccessible
environments38,39 offers unprecedented opportunities for AMP
discovery. However, the current lack of workflows to
systematically compare, filter, and cross-validate results of
different AMP tools currently limits their potential. To address
this issue, we developed AMPcombi, a workflow that simplifies
the comparison of outputs from different AMP prediction tools
by implementing customizable data filtering based on peptide
features that generate an extensive, high quality collection of
potentially bioactive AMPs ready to be validated experimen-
tally.
In addition to therapeutic applications, it is now also
possible to explore the evolutionary history of AMPs due to
the growing availability of homologous AMP sequences from
diverse species and environments. For instance, analysis of
peptide sequences, such as the prepropeptides of dermaseptin
from frogs, suggests an origin in a common ancestral species
approximately 200 million years ago, coinciding with tectonic
events that separated the Hylidae and Ranidae families.40
Other studies have identified and characterized encrypted
AMPs in Neanderthals and Denisovans defensins,41 from
Figure 5. Functional adaptation of paleo- and modern actifensins (PAF/MAF). (a) The pruned phylogenetic tree illustrates the clades in which
PAF/MAFI and PAF/MAFII are located (see Figure 3). In both clades, the paleo-representative is positioned basal to its modern counterpart,
suggesting potential structural and functional divergence over an evolutionary period. (b) The secondary structures predicted for each member of
the PAF/MAF I and PAF/MAF II groups. Superposition of the peptide structures was performed in PyMOL using the fit command. For PAF/
MAF I, the calculated root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) was 0.941 Å, while PAF/MAF II yielded an RMSD of 1.280 Å, indicating a high level of
structural similarity among the compared peptides. (c) The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values are expressed in μM and represent
the antimicrobial activity of each peptide against four different bacteria, revealing functional differences among the peptide variants. No
antimicrobial activity was observed for E. coli, i.e., its MIC could not determined (n.d.).
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c14335
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 48060−48071
48067



[PDF physical page 9]
extinct birds and a prehistoric mammal,42 and cathelicidins
from extinct marsupials.43 Defensins and defensin-like peptides
represent a very diverse AMP class that has been widely
examined in the context of evolutionary biology. Homologues
have been identified in a broad range of organisms across the
eukaryotic kingdom44 and, more recently, in bacteria.27,32 In
humans, defensins are a key part of the innate immune
system.45 In the oral cavity, periodontal inflammation leads to
the release of defensins and other antimicrobial compounds to
restrict the growth of dental plaque.46 In fact, human defensins
are among the most prevalent and abundant proteins identified
in dental calculus proteomes.47 Some bacterial members of
dental plaque, notably Actinomyces, are also known to produce
defensins (actifensins), and the secretion of such defensins by
this basal member of the dental biofilm may influence
subsequent oral microbial colonization and biofilm growth.
Although defensins in bacteria are most commonly found in
actinomycetes and myxobacteria, defensins from the latter have
previously been shown to share a common evolutionary history
with invertebrate defensins.32 It has been proposed that
defensins comprise two evolutionarily independent super-
families, namely cis- and trans-defensins, with extensive
structural and functional similarities arising through con-
vergent evolution.44 Accordingly, MAFs and PAFs are
classified as members of the cis-defensins superfamily.
Using DCMs, we expand the current insights into structural
and functional adaptations across bacterial AMPs within the
primate lineage representing a period of approximately 40
million years, and through ancient DNA we provide direct and
time-resolved evidence of AMP evolution within Homo over
the past 102,000 years. For this purpose, dental calculus offers
a magnitude of advantages due to its preservation of microbial
content over time, with minimal contamination from
exogenous sources.48 Moreover, the presence of similar
bacterial genomes in DCMs from nonhuman primates and
present-day humans supports the existence of a core set of
highly conserved oral microbes that are suitable for long-term
AMP evolutionary studies.10 This is also reflected by the
recovered AMP cluster sets in which members derived from
DCMs of different ages and types share high sequence
similarity (Figure 2 and Supplementary Figure 12). Most of the
putative AMP hits in all DCM samples originate from
Actinomyces (Supplementary Figures 8 and 9), which is a
prominent core member of the human oral microbiome and a
key early colonizer involved in dental biofilm initiation.
However, in addition to its high relative abundance within
DCMs, the large number of Actinomyces AMPs also likely
reflects these microbes’ prolific antimicrobial capacity49 to
produce secondary metabolites to sustain their survival in the
oral cavity.
Although oral actifensins appear to have a shared common
ancestor, nucleotide-level differences show that they have
diverged into at least seven distinct phylogroups that are
independent of host type or sample age (Figure 3), suggesting
evolutionary adaptation. We observe distinct differences in
polarity and in hydrophobicity of surface properties in these
peptides (Figure 4), and comprehensive evolutionary and
selection pressure analyses identified distinct amino acid
residues under positive or diversifying selection (Figure 4,
Supplementary Figures 17 and 19). These sites are located
near the N-termini, within the loop between the antiparallel β-
sheets, and in the α-helix region. The latter is of particular
interest because sites in the α-helix may significantly influence
peptide specificity.50 In addition to variable positions within
the peptide sequences, there are also conserved residues-most
notably, a characteristic pattern of six cysteine residues-that
classify these peptides as defensin-like (Figure 4). Further-
more, a GXC motif, known as the γ-core motif, is present in all
actifensin sequences. This motif is proposed to be an
archetypal element of antimicrobial peptides, found in all
disulfide-bridged antimicrobial peptides throughout the
phylogenetic kingdoms, thereby reflecting an ancient evolu-
tionary relationship. It is likely that specific configurations of
these structural mosaics optimize the function of antimicrobial
peptides against their targets in distinct environmental or
physiological contexts.51 While the antimicrobial assays were
conducted with strains previously shown to be highly
susceptible to actifensins,27,32 the objective was to assess
whether sequence divergence between ancient and modern
peptides results in measurable functional differences, inde-
pendent of specific ecological interactions. The observed
diversification in actifensin surface properties and the presence
of positively selected sites suggest adaptive fine-tuning of
antimicrobial activity, potentially reflecting long-term inter-
actions between Actinomyces-derived peptides and co-occurring
members of the oral microbiome. This interpretation aligns
with the view that the evolution of defensin-like peptides
involves balancing conservation of core structural motifs with
diversification of residues that influence target specificity.
Although it is not possible to directly assess the activity of
paleo-actifensins against ancient bacterial strains, it is possible
that these peptides exhibited higher activity in their original
microbial context.
Antimicrobial peptides represent a rich and underexplored
source of antimicrobials for translational applications. In
addition to being attractive targets for the development of
clinical therapeutics, AMPs play essential roles in the
regulation of symbiotic communities and thus are of key
interest in understanding the formation and maintenance of
healthy host-associated microbiota. Before undertaking trans-
lational applications, however, it has been argued that it is
essential to understand AMP biology in natural contexts to
maximize effectiveness and to avoid repeating mistakes that
have led to widespread bacterial resistance.26 Recently, it has
become possible to reconstruct oral microbiota metagenomes
through the sequencing and de novo assembly of ancient DNA
from dental calculus, a calcified form of dental plaque that can
preserve biomolecules for millions of years. This enables the
direct investigation of AMP evolution within vertebrate
microbiota and presents a new source of potentially
therapeutic AMPs. However, although resources for AMP
discovery have dramatically expanded in recent years, AMP
studies continue to be limited by the absence of a universally
accepted framework for AMP identification and a lack of
workflows to systematically compare, filter, and cross-validate
results of different AMP tools.
■CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, we streamline the discovery of antimicrobial
peptides (AMPs) by developing AMPcombi, a versatile
workflow for the identification, structural analysis, and
functional characterization of predicted AMPs from large
metagenomic data sets. Applying AMPcombi to ancient and
modern dental calculus metagenomes, we demonstrate that
integrating evolutionary insights with structure−function
analyses, exemplified by PAFs and MAFs, offers a deeper
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c14335
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 48060−48071
48068



[PDF physical page 10]
understanding of AMP evolution and paves the way for future
efforts to optimize these molecules for clinical applications. In
an era of rising antibiotic resistance, the integration of
bioinformatics, evolutionary biology, and experimental vali-
dation is essential to fully harness the therapeutic potential of
AMPs.
■ASSOCIATED CONTENT
Data Availability Statement
AMPcombi developed for this study is freely available under an
MIT license through GitHub (https://github.com/
Darcy220606/AMPcombi).14 The code has also been
deposited at Zenodo
(https://zenodo.org/records/
14177670).52 All scripts to reproduce the complete analysis
described in this study are available through GitHub (https://
github.com/paleobiotechnology/AMP_defensins).53 Supple-
mentary Data sets S1−S3 can be found under AMP_defen-
sins/06-figures_tables in the code repository.
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/jacs.5c14335.
A detailed description of the development of the
AMPcombi tool and the recovery of metagenomes
from ancient and modern dental calculus samples. All
filtering steps for AMP identification in the metage-
nomic data set are described, along with experimental
details of recombinant expression, and structural and
functional analyses of PAFs and MAFs (PDF)
Next-generation sequencing data from all samples used
in this study have been submitted to the European
Nucleotide Archive (ENA). The sample and sequencing
metadata, along with their accession IDs, can be found
in Supplementary Data 1 (XLSX)
An overview of the assembly success and the quality of
the metagenome-assembled genomes before and after
filtering is provided in Supplementary Data 2 (XLSX)
Supplementary Data 3 contains a list of oral-derived
species, the amino acid and nucleotide sequences of the
mature peptides of paleo- and modern-actifensins, as
well as the accession IDs of Actinomyces genomes
downloaded from NCBI (XLSX)
■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
Christina Warinner −Department of Archaeogenetics, Max
Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, 04103
Leipzig, Germany; Associated Research Group of
Archaeogenetics, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product
Research and Infection BiologyHans Knöll Institute, 07745
Jena, Germany; Department of Anthropology, Harvard
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, United States;
Department of Human Evolutionary Biology, Harvard
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, United States;
Cluster of Excellence Balance of the Microverse, Friedrich
Schiller University Jena, 07743 Jena, Germany;
orcid.org/
0000-0002-4528-5877; Email: christina_warinner@
eva.mpg.de
Pierre Stallforth −Department of Paleobiotechnology, Leibniz
Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection
BiologyHans Knöll Institute, 07745 Jena, Germany;
Institute of Organic Chemistry & Macromolecular Chemistry
(IOMC), Friedrich Schiller University Jena, 07743 Jena,
Germany; Cluster of Excellence Balance of the Microverse,
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, 07743 Jena, Germany;
orcid.org/0000-0001-7260-9921;
Email: pierre.stallforth@leibniz-hki.de
Authors
Rosa Herbst −Department of Paleobiotechnology, Leibniz
Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection
BiologyHans Knöll Institute, 07745 Jena, Germany
Anan Ibrahim −Department of Paleobiotechnology, Leibniz
Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection
BiologyHans Knöll Institute, 07745 Jena, Germany
Alexander Hübner −Department of Archaeogenetics, Max
Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, 04103
Leipzig, Germany; Associated Research Group of
Archaeogenetics, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product
Research and Infection BiologyHans Knöll Institute, 07745
Jena, Germany
Uwe Knüpfer −Bio Pilot Plant, Leibniz Institute for Natural
Product Research and Infection BiologyHans Knöll
Institute, 07745 Jena, Germany
Lars Regestein −Bio Pilot Plant, Leibniz Institute for Natural
Product Research and Infection BiologyHans Knöll
Institute, 07745 Jena, Germany;
orcid.org/0000-0003-
1258-7171
Christoph Wiedemann −Institute of Organic Chemistry &
Macromolecular Chemistry (IOMC), Friedrich Schiller
University Jena, 07743 Jena, Germany;
orcid.org/0000-
0003-4351-8857
Ute A. Hellmich −Institute of Organic Chemistry &
Macromolecular Chemistry (IOMC), Friedrich Schiller
University Jena, 07743 Jena, Germany; Cluster of Excellence
Balance of the Microverse, Friedrich Schiller University Jena,
07743 Jena, Germany;
orcid.org/0000-0001-7162-285X
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/jacs.5c14335
Author Contributions
○R.H. and A.I. contributed equally. The manuscript was
written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
Funding
Werner Siemens-Stiftung(Paleobiotechnology); German Re-
search Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) under
Germany’s Excellence StrategyEXC 2051project ID
390713860; German Research Foundation (Deutsche For-
schungsgemeinschaft) the collaborative research cluster
SFB1127/2 ChemBioSysproject ID 239748522; Euro-
päischer Fonds für regionale Entwicklung (instrument grant).
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
■ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the following funding agencies: Werner Siemens-
Stiftung, German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft), Europäischer Fonds für regionale Entwicklung
(instrument grant). We thank Hannah Mendler for assistance
with recombinant protein purifications. During the preparation
of this work, the authors utilized generative AI (ChatGPT by
OpenAI) to assist with the improvement of readability and
code development. All AI-assisted content was critically
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c14335
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 48060−48071
48069



[PDF physical page 11]
reviewed, edited, and validated by the authors, who take full
responsibility for the final content.
■REFERENCES
(1) Hegemann, J. D.; Birkelbach, J.; Walesch, S.; Müller, R. Current
Developments in Antibiotic Discovery. EMBO Rep. 2023, 24 (1),
No. e56184.
(2) Kapoor, R.; Saini, A.; Sharma, D. Indispensable Role of Microbes
in Anticancer Drugs and Discovery Trends. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 2022, 106 (13−16), 4885−4906.
(3) Klapper, M.; Hübner, A.; Ibrahim, A.; Wasmuth, I.; Borry, M.;
Haensch, V. G.; Zhang, S.; Al-Jammal, W. K.; Suma, H.; Fellows
Yates, J. A.; Frangenberg, J.; Velsko, I. M.; Chowdhury, S.; Herbst, R.;
Bratovanov, E. V.; Dahse, H.-M.; Horch, T.; Hertweck, C.; González
Morales, M. R.; Straus, L. G.; Vilotijevic, I.; Warinner, C.; Stallforth,
P. Natural Products from Reconstructed Bacterial Genomes of the
Middle and Upper Paleolithic. Science 2023, 380 (6645), 619−624.
(4) Ganz, T. The Role of Antimicrobial Peptides in Innate
Immunity. Integr. Comp. Biol. 2003, 43 (2), 300−304.
(5) Hassan, M.; Kjos, M.; Nes, I. f.; Diep, D. b.; Lotfipour, F. Natural
Antimicrobial Peptides from Bacteria: Characteristics and Potential
Applications to Fight against Antibiotic Resistance. J. Appl. Microbiol.
2012, 113 (4), 723−736.
(6) Baker, J. L.; Mark Welch, J. L.; Kauffman, K. M.; McLean, J. S.;
He, X. The Oral Microbiome: Diversity, Biogeography and Human
Health. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2024, 22 (2), 89−104.
(7) Escapa, I. F.; Chen, T.; Huang, Y.; Gajare, P.; Dewhirst, F. E.;
Lemon, K. P. New Insights into Human Nostril Microbiome from the
Expanded Human Oral Microbiome Database (eHOMD): A
Resource for the Microbiome of the Human Aerodigestive Tract.
mSystems 2018, 3 (6), No. e00187.
(8) Mark Welch, J. L.; Rossetti, B. J.; Rieken, C. W.; Dewhirst, F. E.;
Borisy, G. G. Biogeography of a Human Oral Microbiome at the
Micron Scale. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2016, 113 (6), E791−E800.
(9) Zaura, E.; Nicu, E. A.; Krom, B. P.; Keijser, B. J. F. Acquiring and
Maintaining a Normal Oral Microbiome: Current Perspective. Front.
Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2014, 4, 85.
(10) Fellows Yates, J. A.; Velsko, I. M.; Aron, F.; Posth, C.; Hofman,
C. A.; Austin, R. M.; Parker, C. E.; Mann, A. E.; Nägele, K.; Arthur, K.
W.; Arthur, J. W.; Bauer, C. C.; Crevecoeur, I.; Cupillard, C.; Curtis,
M. C.; Dalén, L.; Díaz-Zorita Bonilla, M.; Díez Fernández-Lomana, J.
C.; Drucker, D. G.; Escribano Escrivá, E.; Francken, M.; Gibbon, V.
E.; González Morales, M. R.; Grande Mateu, A.; Harvati, K.; Henry,
A. G.; Humphrey, L.; Menéndez, M.; Mihailović, D.; Peresani, M.;
Rodríguez Moroder, S.; Roksandic, M.; Rougier, H.; Sázelová, S.;
Stock, J. T.; Straus, L. G.; Svoboda, J.; Teßmann, B.; Walker, M. J.;
Power, R. C.; Lewis, C. M.; Sankaranarayanan, K.; Guschanski, K.;
Wrangham, R. W.; Dewhirst, F. E.; Salazar-García, D. C.; Krause, J.;
Herbig, A.; Warinner, C. The Evolution and Changing Ecology of the
African Hominid Oral Microbiome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2021,
118 (20), No. e2021655118.
(11) Nurk, S.; Meleshko, D.; Korobeynikov, A.; Pevzner, P. A.
metaSPAdes: A New Versatile Metagenomic Assembler. Genome Res.
2017, 27 (5), 824−834.
(12) Li, D.; Liu, C.-M.; Luo, R.; Sadakane, K.; Lam, T.-W. M. E. G.
A. H. I. T. MEGAHIT: an ultra-fast single-node solution for large and
complex metagenomics assembly via succinct de Bruijn graph.
Bioinformatics 2015, 31 (10), 1674−1676.
(13) Sun, S. Progress in the Identification and Design of Novel
Antimicrobial Peptides Against Pathogenic Microorganisms. Probiotics
Antimicrob. Proteins 2025, 17 (2), 918−936.
(14) Ibrahim, A. Darcy220606/AMPcombi, 2025. https://github.
com/Darcy220606/AMPcombi (accessed 04 17, 2025).
(15) Eddy, S. R. Accelerated Profile HMM Searches. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 2011, 7 (10), No. e1002195.
(16) Jones, P.; Binns, D.; Chang, H.-Y.; Fraser, M.; Li, W.;
McAnulla, C.; McWilliam, H.; Maslen, J.; Mitchell, A.; Nuka, G.;
Pesseat, S.; Quinn, A. F.; Sangrador-Vegas, A.; Scheremetjew, M.;
Yong, S.-Y.; Lopez, R.; Hunter, S. InterProScan 5: Genome-Scale
Protein Function Classification. Bioinformatics 2014, 30 (9), 1236−
1240.
(17) Wang, Z.; Wang, G. APD The Antimicrobial Peptide Database.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2004, 32, D590−D592.
(18) Ma, T.; Liu, Y.; Yu, B.; Sun, X.; Yao, H.; Hao, C.; Li, J.; Nawaz,
M.; Jiang, X.; Lao, X.; Zheng, H. DRAMP 4.0: An Open-Access Data
Repository Dedicated to the Clinical Translation of Antimicrobial
Peptides. Nucleic Acids Res. 2025, 53 (D1), D403−D410.
(19) Suzek, B. E.; Huang, H.; McGarvey, P.; Mazumder, R.; Wu, C.
H. UniRef: Comprehensive and Non-Redundant UniProt Reference
Clusters. Bioinformatics 2007, 23 (10), 1282−1288.
(20) Hamid, M.-N.; Friedberg, I. Identifying Antimicrobial Peptides
Using Word Embedding with Deep Recurrent Neural Networks.
Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 2019, 35 (12), 2009−2016.
(21) Fingerhut, L. C. H. W.; Miller, D. J.; Strugnell, J. M.; Daly, N.
L.; Cooke, I. R. Ampir: An R Package for Fast Genome-Wide
Prediction of Antimicrobial Peptides. Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 2021, 36
(21), 5262−5263.
(22) Burdukiewicz, M.; Sidorczuk, K.; Rafacz, D.; Pietluch, F.;
Chilimoniuk, J.; Rödiger, S.; Gagat, P. Proteomic Screening for
Prediction and Design of Antimicrobial Peptides with AmpGram. Int.
J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21 (12), 4310.
(23) Borry, M.; Hübner, A.; Rohrlach, A. B.; Warinner, C.
PyDamage: Automated Ancient Damage Identification and Estima-
tion for Contigs in Ancient DNA de Novo Assembly. PeerJ 2021, 9,
No. e11845.
(24) Velsko, I. M.; Hübner, A.; Fagernäs, Z.; Yates, J. F.; Mann, A.
E.; Hofman, C.; Ozga, A. T.; Lewis, C. M.; Speller, C.; Fiddyment, S.;
Francken, M.; Wahl, J.; Krause, J.; Radini, A.; King, T.; Warinner, C.
The Oral Microbiome of King Richard III of England. bioRxiv 2025,
677585.
(25) Dewhirst, F. E.; Chen, T.; Izard, J.; Paster, B. J.; Tanner, A. C.
R.; Yu, W.-H.; Lakshmanan, A.; Wade, W. G. The Human Oral
Microbiome. J. Bacteriol. 2010, 192 (19), 5002−5017.
(26) Lazzaro, B. P.; Zasloff, M.; Rolff, J. Antimicrobial Peptides:
Application Informed by Evolution. Science 2020, 368 (6490),
No. eaau5480.
(27) Sugrue, I.; O’Connor, P. M.; Hill, C.; Stanton, C.; Ross, R. P.
Actinomyces Produces Defensin-Like Bacteriocins (Actifensins) with
a Highly Degenerate Structure and Broad Antimicrobial Activity. J.
Bacteriol. 2020, 202 (4), No. e00529.
(28) Zhu, S.; Gao, B.; Harvey, P. J.; Craik, D. J. Dermatophytic
Defensin with Antiinfective Potential. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
2012, 109 (22), 8495−8500.
(29) Jumper, J.; Evans, R.; Pritzel, A.; Green, T.; Figurnov, M.;
Ronneberger, O.; Tunyasuvunakool, K.; Bates, R.; Žídek, A.;
Potapenko, A.; Bridgland, A.; Meyer, C.; Kohl, S. A. A.; Ballard, A.
J.; Cowie, A.; Romera-Paredes, B.; Nikolov, S.; Jain, R.; Adler, J.;
Back, T.; Petersen, S.; Reiman, D.; Clancy, E.; Zielinski, M.;
Steinegger, M.; Pacholska, M.; Berghammer, T.; Bodenstein, S.;
Silver, D.; Vinyals, O.; Senior, A. W.; Kavukcuoglu, K.; Kohli, P.;
Hassabis, D. Highly Accurate Protein Structure Prediction with
AlphaFold. Nature 2021, 596 (7873), 583−589.
(30) Kelly, S. M.; Jess, T. J.; Price, N. C. How to Study Proteins by
Circular Dichroism. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Proteins Proteomics 2005,
1751 (2), 119−139.
(31) Pronk, S.; Páll, S.; Schulz, R.; Larsson, P.; Bjelkmar, P.;
Apostolov, R.; Shirts, M. R.; Smith, J. C.; Kasson, P. M.; van der
Spoel, D.; Hess, B.; Lindahl, E. GROMACS 4.5: A High-Throughput
and Highly Parallel Open Source Molecular Simulation Toolkit.
Bioinformatics 2013, 29 (7), 845−854.
(32) Zhu, S.; Gao, B.; Umetsu, Y.; Peigneur, S.; Li, P.; Ohki, S.;
Tytgat, J. Adaptively Evolved Human Oral Actinomyces-sourced
Defensins Show Therapeutic Potential. EMBO Mol. Med. 2022, 14
(2), No. e14499.
(33) Murray, C. J. L.; Ikuta, K. S.; Sharara, F.; Swetschinski, L.;
Robles Aguilar, G.; Gray, A.; Han, C.; Bisignano, C.; Rao, P.; Wool,
E.; Johnson, S. C.; Browne, A. J.; Chipeta, M. G.; Fell, F.; Hackett, S.;
Haines-Woodhouse, G.; Kashef Hamadani, B. H.; Kumaran, E. A. P.;
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c14335
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 48060−48071
48070



[PDF physical page 12]
McManigal, B.; Achalapong, S.; Agarwal, R.; Akech, S.; Albertson, S.;
Amuasi, J.; Andrews, J.; Aravkin, A.; Ashley, E.; Babin, F.-X.; Bailey,
F.; Baker, S.; Basnyat, B.; Bekker, A.; Bender, R.; Berkley, J. A.;
Bethou, A.; Bielicki, J.; Boonkasidecha, S.; Bukosia, J.; Carvalheiro, C.;
Castañeda-Orjuela, C.; Chansamouth, V.; Chaurasia, S.; Chiurchiù, S.;
Chowdhury, F.; Clotaire Donatien, R.; Cook, A. J.; Cooper, B.;
Cressey, T. R.; Criollo-Mora, E.; Cunningham, M.; Darboe, S.; Day,
N. P. J.; De Luca, M.; Dokova, K.; Dramowski, A.; Dunachie, S. J.;
Duong Bich, T.; Eckmanns, T.; Eibach, D.; Emami, A.; Feasey, N.;
Fisher-Pearson, N.; Forrest, K.; Garcia, C.; Garrett, D.; Gastmeier, P.;
Giref, A. Z.; Greer, R. C.; Gupta, V.; Haller, S.; Haselbeck, A.; Hay, S.
I.; Holm, M.; Hopkins, S.; Hsia, Y.; Iregbu, K. C.; Jacobs, J.; Jarovsky,
D.; Javanmardi, F.; Jenney, A. W. J.; Khorana, M.; Khusuwan, S.;
Kissoon, N.; Kobeissi, E.; Kostyanev, T.; Krapp, F.; Krumkamp, R.;
Kumar, A.; Kyu, H. H.; Lim, C.; Lim, K.; Limmathurotsakul, D.;
Loftus, M. J.; Lunn, M.; Ma, J.; Manoharan, A.; Marks, F.; May, J.;
Mayxay, M.; Mturi, N.; Munera-Huertas, T.; Musicha, P.; Musila, L.
A.; Mussi-Pinhata, M. M.; Naidu, R. N.; Nakamura, T.; Nanavati, R.;
Nangia, S.; Newton, P.; Ngoun, C.; Novotney, A.; Nwakanma, D.;
Obiero, C. W.; Ochoa, T. J.; Olivas-Martinez, A.; Olliaro, P.; Ooko,
E.; Ortiz-Brizuela, E.; Ounchanum, P.; Pak, G. D.; Paredes, J. L.;
Peleg, A. Y.; Perrone, C.; Phe, T.; Phommasone, K.; Plakkal, N.;
Ponce-de-Leon, A.; Raad, M.; Ramdin, T.; Rattanavong, S.; Riddell,
A.; Roberts, T.; Robotham, J. V.; Roca, A.; Rosenthal, V. D.; Rudd, K.
E.; Russell, N.; Sader, H. S.; Saengchan, W.; Schnall, J.; Scott, J. A. G.;
Seekaew, S.; Sharland, M.; Shivamallappa, M.; Sifuentes-Osornio, J.;
Simpson, A. J.; Steenkeste, N.; Stewardson, A. J.; Stoeva, T.; Tasak,
N.; Thaiprakong, A.; Thwaites, G.; Tigoi, C.; Turner, C.; Turner, P.;
van DoornVelaphi, H. R. S.; Vongpradith, A.; Vongsouvath, M.; Vu,
H.; Walsh, T.; Walson, J. L.; Waner, S.; Wangrangsimakul, T.;
Wannapinij, P.; Wozniak, T.; Young Sharma, T. E. M. W.; Yu, K. C.;
Zheng, P.; Sartorius, B.; Lopez, A. D.; Stergachis, A.; Moore, C.;
Dolecek, C.; Naghavi, M.; Naghavi, M. Global Burden of Bacterial
Antimicrobial Resistance in 2019: A Systematic Analysis. Lancet 2022,
399 (10325), 629−655.
(34) WHO/ECDC Report: Antimicrobial Resistance Threatens Patient
Safety in European Region. https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/news-
events/whoecdc-report-antimicrobial-resistance-threatens-patient-
safety-european-region (accessed 2025−04−17).
(35) Mahlapuu, M.; Håkansson, J.; Ringstad, L.; Björn, C.
Antimicrobial Peptides: An Emerging Category of Therapeutic
Agents. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2016, 6, 194.
(36) Aronica, P. G. A.; Reid, L. M.; Desai, N.; Li, J.; Fox, S. J.;
Yadahalli, S.; Essex, J. W.; Verma, C. S. Computational Methods and
Tools in Antimicrobial Peptide Research. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2021,
61 (7), 3172−3196.
(37) Brizuela, C. A.; Liu, G.; Stokes, J. M.; de la Fuente-Nunez, C.
AI Methods for Antimicrobial Peptides: Progress and Challenges.
Microb. Biotechnol. 2025, 18 (1), No. e70072.
(38) Chen, J.; Jia, Y.; Sun, Y.; Liu, K.; Zhou, C.; Liu, C.; Li, D.; Liu,
G.; Zhang, C.; Yang, T.; Huang, L.; Zhuang, Y.; Wang, D.; Xu, D.;
Zhong, Q.; Guo, Y.; Li, A.; Seim, I.; Jiang, L.; Wang, L.; Lee, S. M. Y.;
Liu, Y.; Wang, D.; Zhang, G.; Liu, S.; Wei, X.; Yue, Z.; Zheng, S.;
Shen, X.; Wang, S.; Qi, C.; Chen, J.; Ye, C.; Zhao, F.; Wang, J.; Fan,
J.; Li, B.; Sun, J.; Jia, X.; Xia, Z.; Zhang, H.; Liu, J.; Zheng, Y.; Liu, X.;
Wang, J.; Yang, H.; Kristiansen, K.; Xu, X.; Mock, T.; Li, S.; Zhang,
W.; Fan, G. Global Marine Microbial Diversity and Its Potential in
Bioprospecting. Nature 2024, 633 (8029), 371−379.
(39) Abdill, R. J.; Graham, S. P.; Rubinetti, V.; Ahmadian, M.; Hicks,
P.; Chetty, A.; McDonald, D.; Ferretti, P.; Gibbons, E.; Rossi, M.;
Krishnan, A.; Albert, F. W.; Greene, C. S.; Davis, S.; Blekhman, R.
Integration of 168,000 Samples Reveals Global Patterns of the Human
Gut Microbiome. Cell 2025, 188 (4), 1100−1118.
(40) Vanhoye, D.; Bruston, F.; Nicolas, P.; Amiche, M.
Antimicrobial Peptides from Hylid and Ranin Frogs Originated
from a 150-Million-Year-Old Ancestral Precursor with a Conserved
Signal Peptide but a Hypermutable Antimicrobial Domain. Eur. J.
Biochem. 2003, 270 (9), 2068−2081.
(41) Maasch, J. R. M. A.; Torres, M. D. T.; Melo, M. C. R.; de la
Fuente-Nunez, C. Molecular De-Extinction of Ancient Antimicrobial
Peptides Enabled by Machine Learning. Cell Host Microbe 2023, 31
(8), 1260−1274.
(42) Ferreira, A. F. L.; Osiro, K. O.; de Oliveira, K. B. S.; Cardoso,
M. H.; de Lima, L. R.; Duque, H. M.; Macedo, M. L. R.; Landon, C.;
de la Fuente-Nunez, C.; Franco, O. L. Defensins Identified through
Molecular De-Extinction. Cell Rep. Phys. Sci. 2024, 5 (9), 102193.
(43) Peel, E.; Gonsalvez, A.; Hogg, C. J.; Belov, K. Marsupial
Cathelicidins: Characterization, Antimicrobial Activity and Evolution
in This Unique Mammalian Lineage. Front. Immunol. 2025, 16,
1524092.
(44) Shafee, T. M. A.; Lay, F. T.; Hulett, M. D.; Anderson, M. A.
The Defensins Consist of Two Independent, Convergent Protein
Superfamilies. Mol. Biol. Evol. 2016, 33 (9), 2345−2356.
(45) Schneider, J. J.; Unholzer, A.; Schaller, M.; Schäfer-Korting, M.;
Korting, H. C. Human Defensins. J. Mol. Med. 2005, 83 (8), 587−
595.
(46) Marshall, R. I. Gingival Defensins: Linking the Innate and
Adaptive Immune Responses to Dental Plaque. Periodontology 2004,
35, 14−20.
(47) Warinner, C.; Rodrigues, J. F. M.; Vyas, R.; Trachsel, C.; Shved,
N.; Grossmann, J.; Radini, A.; Hancock, Y.; Tito, R. Y.; Fiddyment, S.;
Speller, C.; Hendy, J.; Charlton, S.; Luder, H. U.; Salazar-García, D.
C.; Eppler, E.; Seiler, R.; Hansen, L. H.; Castruita, J. A. S.; Barkow-
Oesterreicher, S.; Teoh, K. Y.; Kelstrup, C. D.; Olsen, J. V.; Nanni, P.;
Kawai, T.; Willerslev, E.; von Mering, C.; Lewis, C. M.; Collins, M. J.;
Gilbert, M. T. P.; Rühli, F.; Cappellini, E. Pathogens and Host
Immunity in the Ancient Human Oral Cavity. Nat. Genet. 2014, 46
(4), 336−344.
(48) Velsko, I. M.; Fagernäs, Z.; Tromp, M.; Bedford, S.; Buckley, H.
R.; Clark, G.; Dudgeon, J.; Flexner, J.; Galipaud, J.-C.; Kinaston, R.;
Lewis, C. M.; Matisoo-Smith, E.; Nägele, K.; Ozga, A. T.; Posth, C.;
Rohrlach, A. B.; Shing, R.; Simanjuntak, T.; Spriggs, M.; Tamarii, A.;
Valentin, F.; Willie, E.; Warinner, C. Exploring the Potential of Dental
Calculus to Shed Light on Past Human Migrations in Oceania. Nat.
Commun. 2024, 15 (1), 10191.
(49) Landwehr, W.; Wolf, C.; Wink, J. Actinobacteria and
Myxobacteria-Two of the Most Important Bacterial Resources for
Novel Antibiotics. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 2016, 398, 273−
302.
(50) Semple, C. A.; Maxwell, A.; Gautier, P.; Kilanowski, F. M.;
Eastwood, H.; Barran, P. E.; Dorin, J. R. The Complexity of Selection
at the Major Primate β-Defensin Locus. BMC Evol. Biol. 2005, 5 (1),
32.
(51) Yount, N. Y.; Yeaman, M. R. Multidimensional Signatures in
Antimicrobial Peptides. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2004, 101 (19),
7363−7368.
(52) Ibrahim, A.; Perelo, L. Darcy220606/AMPcombi: V.2.0.1, 2024.
(53) paleobiotechnology/AMP_defensins: Contains all Necessary Files
and Codes Required for the Analyses Done in the AMPcombi Defensin
Paper. GitHub. https://github.com/paleobiotechnology/AMP_
defensins (accessed 04 17, 2025).
Journal of the American Chemical Society
pubs.acs.org/JACS
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c14335
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 48060−48071
48071
