
[PDF physical page 1]
                                                  BIOCHEMISTRY                            RESEARCH                                    ARTICLE | CHEMISTRY

   Animal FAS–like polyketide synthases produce diverse
    polypropionates
        Feng Lia, Zhenjian Lina, Patrick J. Krugb      , J. Leon Catrowc      , James E. Coxc,d, and Eric W. Schmidta,1

         Edited by Chaitan Khosla, Stanford University, Stanford, CA; received April 6, 2023; accepted August 1, 2023

       Animal cytoplasmic fatty acid synthase (FAS) represents a unique family of enzymes that
        are classically thought to be most closely related to fungal polyketide synthase (PKS).     Significance
        Recently, a widespread family of animal lipid metabolic enzymes has been described
        that bridges the gap between these two ubiquitous and important enzyme classes: the      The animal FAS–like PKSs are
       animal FAS–like PKSs (AFPKs). Although very similar in sequence to FAS enzymes that       phylogenetically widespread
       produce saturated lipids widely found in animals, AFPKs instead produce structurally      enzymes, bridging the
        diverse compounds that resemble bioactive polyketides. Little is known about the factors       evolutionary gap between lipids
        that bridge lipid and polyketide synthesis in the animals. Here, we describe the function      and bioactive compounds known
        of EcPKS2 from Elysia chlorotica, which synthesizes a complex polypropionate natural       as polyketides in animals. Here,
       product found in this mollusc. EcPKS2 starter unit promiscuity potentially explains                                                                      we demonstrate key functions of
        the high diversity of polyketides found in and among molluscan species. Biochemical                                                                                                               this enzyme class that defy
       comparison of EcPKS2 with the previously described EcPKS1 reveals molecular prin-
                                                                                              expectation for how fatty acid or         ciples governing substrate selectivity that should apply to related enzymes encoded
                                                                                                 polyketide biosynthesis should       within the genomes of photosynthetic gastropods. Hybridization experiments com-
       bining EcPKS1 and EcPKS2 demonstrate the interactions between the ketoreductase       work, revealing an untapped and
      and ketosynthase domains in governing the product outcomes. Overall, these findings       previously unknown source of
       enable an understanding of the molecular principles of structural diversity underlying       chemical richness in the animals.
        the many molluscan polyketides likely produced by the diverse AFPK enzyme family.       These results explain how
                                                                                                         different proteins encoded in the
         polyketide synthase | metazoan biosynthesis | sacoglossan polypropionate                          animal genome contribute to the
                                                                                                            diversity of ecologically important     Much of lipid metabolism is founded in a ubiquitous family of related enzymes, the fatty211.64.159.46.                                                                          compounds in animals, and        acid synthases (FASs) and polyketide synthases (PKSs). In most animals including humans,
address     afattyuniqueacidstype(1). ITheFAScurrentis foundviewinoftheanimalcytoplasm,FAS (aFAS)where isitthatsynthesizesit originatedessentialfromsaturateda type I       suggestunexpecteda tantalizingenzymeswealthand   of
IP    modular PKS, very similar to the highly reducing PKSs (HRPKSs) found in fungi. Indeed,       important chemicals remains to
from     the phylogenetic tree of PKS and aFAS enzymes reveals that related PKSs from animals,      be discovered.        fungi, and bacteria, identified in a single clade, while the aFASs form a distinctly separate
2024     clade (Fig. 1). Recently, we described a widespread family, dubbed the animal FAS–like
16,    PKSs (AFPKs), that are more similar to aFAS than to PKSs, and yet produce polyketide-­like
        products. These enzymes, occupying an intermediate position between characterized PKS
       and aFAS enzymes, offer an opportunity to better understand lipid and bioactive polyket­August        ide biosynthesis across the domains of life (2). In this work, we elucidate the core bio­
on     chemical functions of this class, providing a basis to understand their key role in animal
        biological and chemical diversity.
         Both aFAS and HRPKS consist of a set of enzyme domains that collectively perform      Author affiliations: aDepartment of Medicinal Chemistry,University                                                                                                                                       University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112; bDepartment          all reactions needed to synthesize a lipid chain. The proteins act iteratively, repeatedly      of Biological Sciences, California State University, Los
       condensing units of malonyl-­CoA to synthesize a growing lipid chain. The iteration ofOcean                                                                                                                                  Center,Angeles,SaltCA 90032;Lake City,cMetabolomicsUT 84112; Core,and dDepartmentHealth Sciencesof        these precursors themselves is quite simple: They are first activated by an acyltransferase      Biochemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112
China    (AT) domain from malonyl-­CoA, which is loaded onto the acyl carrier protein (ACP)       and subsequently condensation of two malonate units takes place in the ketosynthase
by     (KS) domain. The actions of ketoreductase (KR), dehydratase (DH), and enoylreductase      Author contributions: F.L. and E.W.S. designed research;
       (ER) domains lead to synthesis of hydroxyl, alkene, and alkane functionality, respectively.        F.L.,Z.L., Z.L.,J.L.C.,P.J.K.,J.E.C.,J.L.C.,and andE.W.S.J.E.C.analyzedperformeddata;research;and F.L., Z.L.,F.L.,
      More complex scenarios occur in some HRPKSs, in which variable reduction or methyl­        P.J.K., and E.W.S. wrote the paper.
        ation by methyltransferase (MT) domain are sometimes seen (3, 4). The aFAS exhibits     The authors declare no competing interest.
                                                                                                                                        This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.       an additional peculiarity: An open pocket within the AT allows it to activate acetyl-­CoA
                                                                                                                                Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.         as a starter unit, as well as the malonyl-­CoA extender unit, so that the domain is often                                                                                                                                        This  article  is distributed under Creative Commonshttps://www.pnas.org      called “MAT” (5).                                                                                                   Attribution-­NonCommercial-­NoDerivatives  License  4.0
          Like aFAS and highly reducing polyketide synthases (HRPKSs), AFPKs comprise single      (CC BY-­NC-­ND).from       modules with multiple domains that act iteratively. However, the discovery of AFPKs broke      1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email:
         several of the established rules noted above (2). The canonical AFPK, EcPKS1 from the     ews1@utah.edu.
        sacoglossan  mollusc  Elysia  chlorotica,  builds  products by  the  iterative  addition  of      Thishttps://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.​article contains supporting information online at
        methylmalonyl-­CoA, rather than the malonyl-­CoA preferred by characterized aFAS and      2305575120/-­/DCSupplemental.Downloaded      HRPKS. Starter-­unit usage also appeared to be quite different from that found in aFAS or      Published September 11, 2023.

      PNAS  2023  Vol. 120  No. 38  e2305575120                                        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2305575120   1 of 10


[PDF physical page 2]
      HRPKS. Moreover, like HRPKS but unlike aFAS, EcPKS1 exhibited     in this enzyme class. EcPKS2 accepts many different starter units,
         variable reduction capacity, reducing some of the condensed meth­     leading to classes of compounds bearing similarity to those from
        ylmalonate units to alkene but leaving others as intact ketones.      many different mollusc and other animal groups. Hybridization of
         While notable, these findings with the single EcPKS1 enzyme     these enzymes revealed the molecular basis of reductive regioselec­
         just scratched the surface of the structural and biochemical diver­      tivity and chain length determination.
         sity of the AFPK products. In vitro, EcPKS1 produces 1 and 2,      These and other results from this study explain the origins of
       which are likely precursors of the pyrone polypropionate natural    key chemical functional groups in AFPK products, including hun­
        products such as 3–6 found in diverse sacoglossan molluscs (Fig. 1    dreds of natural products from molluscs; reveal an unexpected
       and SI Appendix, Fig. S1) (6–8). Many sacoglossans engage in    biochemical diversity of PKSs in the animal world; and demon­
        kleptoplasty, stealing the plastids from algae and using them for     strate key biochemical  relationships between the aFAS and
        photosynthesis (9). Because the route from 1 and 2 to the natural   HRPKS enzymes. By demonstrating that these diverse enzymes
       products involves modifications that appear to be UV-­or singlet    make different products, we reveal that a previously hidden wealth
        oxygen-­dependent,  it is possible that the compounds prevent     of biochemical diversity lies encoded in animal genomes.
      damage that would otherwise be caused by a photosynthetic life­
         style (10–14). Products 1 and 2 do not comprise the sole precur­   Results
         sors to sacoglossan products, since many have variable oxidation
         states and apparently incorporate precursors other than acetate.    Sacoglossan AFPKs Represent a Broad Family of Enzymes
       Moreover, other molluscs contain diverse polyketides that might    with Unknown Structural Diversity. AFPKs are  difficult to
         also originate from AFPKs, and AFPKs are found in many other     discover because of their close sequence similarity to FASs (2).
        animals outside of the molluscs. Virtually nothing is known about    Distinguishing AFPKs from FASs necessitates thorough extensive
        the range of enzymes and enzymatic mechanisms needed to pro­     analysis of phylogenetic trees. For example, low-­diversity KS
       duce the vast array of polyketide natural products reported from    sequences of both FASs and AFPKs (fewer than 10 sequences
        animals, leading to a lack of predictability linking gene sequences    per type) often leads to misclassification in the phylogenetic tree.
        to chemical structures or enabling bioengineering approaches.      Although AFPKs are widespread in nature, they are abundant and
          Here, we sought to define the function of AFPKs by analyzing     likely produce highly structurally diverse compounds in shell-­
         their sequences, characterizing a key AFPK, EcPKS2 from E. chlo-      less sacoglossan molluscs (clade Plakobranchacea). Therefore, to
          rotica, and then hybridizing EcPKS1 and EcPKS2 to create unnat­    gain insight into how AFPK sequence features are reflected in
         ural natural products. In our original work, we used current    chemical structures, using the method described in our previous
       knowledge of sequence motifs that indicate substrate selectivity to    study (2), we performed an exhaustive search of sacoglossan KS
        explain the function of EcPKS1, and to predict that EcPKS2 should    domains from 71 transcriptome SRA datasets and three genome
       produce a malonate-­derived polyene. Here, we show that the knowl­     assemblies in NCBI databases. In total, we identified 36 AFPK
       edge gained from extensive studies of other PKS classes in bacteria,    gene sequences from 14 species, demonstrating the diversity211.64.159.46.        animals, fungi, and plants is not predictive of AFPK function, and    and ubiquity of this enzyme family in one group of molluscs
address      thatexample,largelydespiteundefinedprediction,rules EcPKS2govern thealsobroaduses solelyfamilymethylmalonateof AFPKs. For     (Fig.with 2A).the sameGivenscaffold,that EcPKS1we proposedsynthesizesthat polypropionatesacoglossan pyronespyronesare
IP      as an extender unit, indicating different substrate selectivity rules     synthesized by AFPKs detected in their genomes.
from
2024
16,     A                               B
August
on
University
Ocean
China
by
https://www.pnas.org
from



           Fig. 1. AFPKs and their products. (A) The domain architecture of EcPKS1 and EcPKS2, products of EcPKS1 (1 and 2), and representative polyketides isolatedDownloaded                                                                                                                                                              0        from mollusks (3–8). (B) Phylogenetic analysis reveals that AFPKs are very similar to aFAS and only distantly related to PKSs.  indicates an inactive domain.

   2 of 10   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2305575120                                                                           pnas.org


[PDF physical page 3]
           Fig. 2. AFPK distribution in sacoglossan molluscs. (A) Phylogenetic tree of sacoglossan AFPKs, demonstrating that they form nine separate subclades (see
            SI Appendix, Fig. S4D for a larger version of this tree). (B) Comparison of AFPK KSs with polyketide chain length in the sacoglossans. Molluscs at right often contain
         longer chain products, reflected in the AFPK phylogeny, while those at left often contain shorter-­chain products.

      We divided the sacoglossan AFPKs into subclades 1 through 9     together phylogenetically (SI Appendix, Fig. S2). Moreover, these
         (Fig. 2A), based upon tip distances within each subclade <1.     three genes were adjacent to each other in the genome (SI Appendix,
        Sacoglossans in the superfamily Plakobranchoidea are all photo­     Fig. S2); the physical linkage might relate to enzyme functionality211.64.159.46.        synthetic by virtue of kleptoplasty and often contain long-­chain    during polyketide biosynthesis or could alternatively be related
address     polypropionatecomplex rings (15,pyrones,16). Photosyntheticwith the chainspeciesusuallyexpressedcyclizedsubcladesto form     toduplicationregulationwasof geneinvolvedexpression.in the earlyIt is possiblestage of AFPKthat tandemdiversifica­gene
IP    1 and 7 to 9. Subclades 8 (including EcPKS1) and 9 are especially    tion (17).
from     widely shared, found in five species analyzed here. We propose       Previously, based upon comparison to insights from bacterial        that the proteins in subclades 8 and 9 likely synthesize similar   PKS sequences, we predicted that EcPKS2 in particular would
2024     polyketides, consistent with the similar polypropionates known    synthesize a polyene derived from malonate, whereas EcPKS1
16,    from these species (Fig. 2B). In contrast, the sampled taxa in super­    used methylmalonate (2). This was based upon an analysis of
        family Limapontioidea shared a different set of AFPK lineages   AT domains, in which the GHSXG motif in EcPKS1 was more
        (subclades 2 to 6), although due to data constraints, insufficient    consistent with methylmalonate, while that in EcPKS2 wasAugust        proteins were discovered to link Placida with the primary protein    more consistent with malonate, at least as found in the bacte­
on      cluster  for  related  limapontioidean  taxa. Most  species  in      rial precedents. However, that prediction was tempered by the
       Limapontioidea are nonphotosynthetic, and predominantly con­    observation that the AT domains were quite different from
        tain polypropionate pyrones of short chain length (16). The    those in bacteria and did not encode other diagnostic featuresUniversity      domain architecture of the enzymes in subclades 2 to 6 suggests   commonly found in bacteria. Here, we therefore aimed to
Ocean     that all might make the same type of polypropionates, consistent     investigate and compare these two proteins to unveil key prin­       with the short-­chain compounds found in nonphotosynthetic     ciples governing polyketide biosynthesis that could be used to
China     sacoglossans (Fig. 2B). Interestingly, the basal plakobranchoidean    predict function and chemical products across the diverse         Bosellia sp. contains proteins belonging to both subclades 5 and   AFPK enzyme family.
by      8. This distribution and the phylogenetic position of Bosellia sug­
         gest a transition from short-­ to long-­chain subclade enzymes at    EcPKS2 Synthesizes the Precursor to the Sacoglossan Natural
        the root of the plakobranchoidean radiation, concurrent with the    Product, Elysione (5). To determine whether AFPK function
        acquisition of kleptoplasty.                                   matched prediction, EcPKS2 (GenBank accession: QMU95646.1)
       Many of the species analyzed had multiple AFPKs. We focused    was cloned and expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae BJ5464
      on E. chlorotica because it was the source of the characterized    harboring  the npgA  (phosphopantetheinyl  transferase  gene)https://www.pnas.org    EcPKS1. Reanalysis of the sequencing data from GenBank (acces­    and purified (SI Appendix, Fig. S3) (18). This produced fully
from     sion numbers PRJNA484060, PRJNA437117, PRJNA192596,    modified protein in which the ACP had been activated with      PRJNA76673, and PRJNA75367) revealed six different AFPK    the phosphopantetheine group. In contrast to expectation, the
        sequences in E. chlorotica (SI Appendix, Fig. S2). Their expression    pure protein did not yield products unless methylmalonyl-­CoA
         levels varied and were much lower than cytoplasmic FAS. The    was present, indicating that malonyl-­CoA was not the preferred
        three most highly expressed genes (EcPKS2, EcPKS3, and     substrate. Incubation of EcPKS2 with methylmalonyl-­CoA andDownloaded
      EcPKS6) share high sequence similarity (73 to 80%) and group   NADPH led to the observation of several peaks observed by

      PNAS  2023  Vol. 120  No. 38  e2305575120                                        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2305575120   3 of 10


[PDF physical page 4]
               A





               B





           Fig. 3. EcPKS2 synthesizes polypropionate precursors. MS chromatograms are shown, with the X axis as time in min and the Y axis being ion counts, analyzed211.64.159.46.      using method a (SI Appendix). (A) EcPKS2 synthesizes the elysione (5) precursor (9) in the presence of 2 mM methylmalonyl-­CoA and 2 mM NADPH. The Inset
        shows the same result, but in the presence of additional propionyl-­CoA (2 mM). (B) EcPKS2 synthesizes tridachiahydropyrone precursors in the presence of
        2 mM isovaleryl-­CoA, 2 mM methylmalonyl-­CoA, and 2 mM NADPH. While 9 was fully characterized by NMR, the other compounds in this figure were present inaddress     low abundance or were less stable, and thus were assigned using isotope labeling experiments and an application of EAD MS, which provides a large number of
IP      fragment ions for statistical analysis (SI Appendix). The small numbers present on each compound indicate the chain length from the initiating carboxyl group.
from
2024     mass spectrometry (MS) in negative mode (Fig. 3). One peak     of elysione” (5)]. The absolute configuration was defined using
      (compound 9) was by far the most abundant, exhibiting a UV     electronic circular dichroism (ECD) and NMR experiments. The16,
        absorption similar to polypropionates (λmax 326 nm), while two   ECD spectrum revealed no peaks for 9, as expected if C-­14 is
       minor peaks were also present. Accurate mass measurement revealed    racemic due to its proximity to racemizing functional groups.August        a molecular ion [M-­H]− at m/z 383.2231, indicating a molecular    This is similar to precedents in other polyketides, where such
on     formula of C24H32O4 (calcd m/z 383.2228). This formula was    protons are enzymatically synthesized in a stereospecific manner,
       congruent with the incorporation of eight methylmalonate units,    but then racemized post synthesis (20, 21). The double-­bond
       but with one extra oxygen more than anticipated.                  geometries were all assigned to the Z configuration based uponUniversity      To firmly elucidate the structure of the major enzyme reaction   1D nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) spectra; in all cases, corre­
Ocean     product,ing the enzymewe scaledMatB,up themethylmalonate,EcPKS2 enzymaticand CoA.reaction,MatBalsosynthe­add­     lationsbut notwereto cross-­olefinobserved tomethylneighboringgroups,methineindicatinganda methyltrans relation­groups
                                  in situ                                        to generate                                                           sufficient material                                                                         ship                                                                                   across                                                                             double                                                                              bonds                                                                                                        (SI Appendix,                                                                                                                           Fig. S4).           methylmalony-­CoAChina      sizes        for analysis                              manner                                                (19). Compound                                                 9 was                                                              The                                                                   minor                                                                                         reaction                                                                                          products                                                                                               were identified                                                                                                                                     as 2 and 10,                    in a cost-­effective
by      purified and used for spectroscopic analysis (SI Appendix, Table S1     linear polyene pyrones lacking the initiating ketone group. These
       and Figs. S9–S16). From the 1H and heteronuclear single quan­    were present in too low an abundance for NMR characterization,
      tum coherence (HSQC) NMR spectra, one aliphatic and seven    with 2 and 10 together representing about 5% of the total reac­
         vinylic methyl groups, four aromatic methines, and a methylene     tion products. Nonetheless, it was possible to assign their planar
       proton were readily distinguished. The heteronuclear multiple     structures with a high degree of confidence. High-­resolution
      bond correlation (HMBC) spectrum revealed an additional nine    masses of 2 and 10 were [M-­H]− m/z 367.2278 and 327.1975,https://www.pnas.org     unsaturated carbons that were assigned to a polyene chain and a     respectively. These were consistent with molecular formulas
       pyrone ring system. The presence of an α-­pyrone was further    16 Da and 56 Da lighter than 9, representing with high precisionfrom       confirmed by diagnostic chemical shifts at C-­1 (δC 167.3) and    the lack of an oxygen in 10 in comparison to 9, and the lack of
        C-­3 (δC 166.7). An additional carbon at 214.9 ppm in the   COCH2CH3 for 2 in comparison to 9. We thus hypothesized
    HMBC spectrum revealed an unexpected ketone oxygen. COSY     that 10 contained an additional C-­C double bond in place of
       and HMBC correlations firmly established the planar structure    the C-­15 ketone, while 2 lacked the terminal propionate groupDownloaded         as a previously undescribed molecule, pelysione (9) [“precursor     entirely.  This  hypothesis  was  further  confirmed  using

   4 of 10   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2305575120                                                                           pnas.org


[PDF physical page 5]
       13C4-­methylmalonyl-­CoA incorporation experiments and high    with a mixture of other substrates. The resulting reaction products
        resolution MS2 fragments (SI Appendix, Fig. S36).               were analyzed by high-­resolution mass spectrometry and confirmed
       When propionyl CoA was used in enzyme reactions, the chro­    by 13C4-­methylmalonyl-­CoA incorporation experiments. In no
      matogram was identical to that with methylmalonate only. Thus,     case could EcPKS2 synthesize products without the presence of
      we hypothesized that propionyl-­CoA is the starter unit. Therefore,    methylmalonyl-­CoA, which was required as an extender unit.
      we used experiments including 13C4-­methylmalonyl-­CoA and    However, all substrates except for malonyl-­CoA were accepted as
       propionyl-­CoA to confirm the incorporation. When only U-­13C-­     starter units. The following substrates were accepted by EcPKS2
       methylmalonyl-­CoA was present, ions with m/z 407.3048 (9),     as starter units, which in the case of malonyl derivatives were
       348.2674 (2), and 391.3086 (10) were detected. When propionyl-­    decarboxylated: acetyl-­CoA, benzoyl-­CoA, benzoyl-­SNAC, butyryl-­
     CoA was included, these peaks were missing or very minor, and    CoA, ethylmalonyl-­CoA, isobutyryl-­CoA, methylmalonyl-­CoA,
        instead m/z 404.2932  (9), 345.2569 (2) and 388.2986 (10)    nicotinoyl-­SNAC, and propionyl-­CoA (Fig. 4, and SI Appendix,
         (SI Appendix, Fig. S21) were the major ions. The difference of 3 Da     Figs. S7 and S8).
         resulted from a single addition of unlabeled propionyl-­CoA, indicat­      Malonyl-­CoA was not accepted as a starter or extender unit, and
        ing a preference for propionate. EcPKS2 uses either methylmalonyl-­    in fact inhibited product formation from methylmalonyl-­CoA.
     CoA or propionyl-­CoA as a starter unit and methylmalonyl-­CoA    Depending upon the conditions employed (especially, the relative
         as the extender unit to synthesize pol­ypropionates.                     ratios of various substrates), these starter units sometimes comprised
          Thus, in contrast to prediction, EcPKS2 produces the precursor     the major enzymatic reaction products, although compound 9 was
        to elysione (5), indicating that rules learned from decades of stud­    a significant component in most cases. Between four and six meth­
        ying other classes of PKSs may not apply to the AFPKs. The AT    ylmalonate subunits were incorporated with this diverse set of starter
      domain selectivity in AFPKs is not predictable based upon current     units, with variable ratios of those products reflecting the relative size
       understanding of bacterial AT domain selectivity. A particular     of the starter unit. When larger starter units were present, the
       mystery was the complex oxidation pattern of 9, in which the first     C-­terminal ketone products were relatively less abundant in com­
       propionate unit was not reduced, the ensuing four propionates     parison to compounds lacking that ketone. When aromatic residues
       were reduced to alkenes, and the final three propionates were also     pyridine or phenyl were chain initiators, the ketone was fully reduced.
       not reduced. This pattern is extremely unusual in iterative PKS    This likely reflects the ketoreductase (KR) selectivity, where larger
       and was further explored in experiments described below.             initiators place the ketone further away from the chain terminus.
                                                                               Overall, these results indicated that EcPKS2 is highly promis­
       EcPKS2 Substrate Promiscuity Explains the Biosynthesis of Many    cuous in its starter unit selectivity, potentially explaining some of
       Mollusk Polyketides. Most mollusk polyketides are products of    the natural products found in molluscs. The observed starter unit
       methylmalonate/propionate metabolism, but there are several cases     selectivity resembles that seen for aFAS, in which separate binding
       where the structural features imply that other substrates are used. For     regions are present in the AT, one for acyl-­CoAs and another for
        example, tridachiahydropyrone (6) might start from an isovalerate    malonyl-­CoA (24). It stands in contrast to the fungal HRPKSs,211.64.159.46.        subunit, while placidene B (4) might start with acetate. Previously,     for which data seem to indicate a potentially more stringent starter
address        itlaterwasmodificationsproposed that,afterinstead,PKS action,these structuralsuch as demethylationdifferences resultor methylfrom     selectivity (25, 26).
IP      transfer (22). Other mollusc polyketides contain extender units that    Structural Characterization by MS Methods. Three methods
from     might originate from both methylmalonate and other extenders,    were used to characterize compounds (2, 9-­24) synthesized by       such as malonate (22). For example, navenones (7 and 8) and related    EcPKS2. First, their accurate masses were assessed by qTOF
2024    compounds appear to initiate with nicotinic acid and benzoic acid    mass spectrometry (SI Appendix, Figs. S21–S28). Second, the
16,      (23). To further investigate these questions, we incubated EcPKS2    incorporation of a single starter unit was verified using the inverse
August
on
University
Ocean
China
by
https://www.pnas.org
from
           Fig. 4. EcPKS2 has promiscuous selectivity for the starter unit. EcPKS2 reacts with 2 mM NADPH, 2 mM methylmalonyl-­CoA, and: (A) 2 mM ethylmalonyl-­CoA,
        and the Inset shows the same result when butyryl-­CoAa (2 mM) replace ethylmalonyl-­CoA; (B) 2 mM acetyl-­CoAa; (C) 2 mM isobutyryl-­CoAa; (D) 2 mM benzoyl-­
        CoAa (Inset shows peaks that are closely overlapping in the main figure); (E) 16 mM benzoyl SNACb (Inset shows peaks that are closely overlapping in the main
           figure); (F) 16 mM nicotinoyl SNACb. MS chromatograms are shown, with the X axis as time in min and the Y axis as ion counts. a and b indicate different chemicalDownloaded          analysis methods described in SI Appendix. Small numbers on structures are the carbon position indicating chain length.

      PNAS  2023  Vol. 120  No. 38  e2305575120                                        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2305575120   5 of 10


[PDF physical page 6]
        labeling approach, with natural abundance starter units and [13C4-­     To test this hypothesis, we incubated apoEcPKS1, lacking the
       methylmalonyl]-­CoA (SI Appendix, Figs. S21–S28), in a manner    phosphopantetheinylation required to activate the ACP, with CoA
        similar to the inverse stable isotopic labeling method (27). The     substrates. Previous studies show that PKSs can directly utilize
         utility of this method was validated using NMR-­characterized    such active substrates even in the absence of a functional ACP,
      compound 9. In comparison to unlabeled enzymatic reaction    and that such experiments enable detection of early steps in the
        products, in  all  cases the observed masses exactly matched     reaction cycle (29). Here, apoEcPKS1 was treated with either
        expectation, with  all carbons comprising 13C derived from     acetyl-­or malonyl-­CoA, and methylmalonyl-­CoA in the presence
       methylmalonate except for those derived from starter units. Third,     of NADPH. Abundant tiglyl-­CoA (34) was obtained (SI Appendix,
     MS2 fragments were generated by electron-­activated dissociation     Fig. S38), representing the activity of the KS in condensing one
       (EAD). NMR-­characterized 9 was used to establish and validate    unit of acetate and one unit of methylmalonate, followed by
        the MS2 method. Pelysione (9) fragmented well, and the resulting    ketoreduction and dehydration. However, tiglyl-­CoA was not
        ions could be matched with the structure with high accuracy. With     further chain extended. Similarly, the same conditions absent
         this method in hand, the structures of the remaining compounds   NADPH led to the production of the homologous compound
         (2, 10-­24) were confirmed (SI Appendix, Figs. S36 and S37).     (35), with ketone still intact (SI Appendix, Fig. S41). The struc­
       Thus, while multiple methods were used to support structures 2     tures of 34 and 35 were assigned by high-­resolution MS data,
       and 10-­24, only 9 was determined with standard NMR methods,    coupled with generation of a standard for 34.
        while others are not supported by a full dataset.                  By   contrast,  when  apoEcPKS1  was  incubated  with
                                                                    methylmalonyl-­CoA and NADPH, no 2-­methyl-­2-­pentenal-­CoA
     NADPH Dependence of Ketone Production. The presence of a    (36) accumulated, and instead it appeared that substrates were
       ketone at C-­15 in 9 is unusual for iterative PKS biochemistry,     further elongated by the enzyme (SI Appendix, Fig. S40). Thus,
       but many sacoglossan natural products such as elysione (5) have   we proposed that tiglyl-­ACP inhibits the function of EcPKS1
        a ketone in this position. Therefore, we wished to determine    because it is not a good substrate for further chain extension in
       what biochemical factors might account for its biosynthesis.    the KS. In summary, the substrates used by EcPKS1 and EcPKS2
      The small amount of compounds 2 and 10, lacking a ketone at     are similar, except that EcPKS1 did not accept the intermediate
        C-­15, suggested that a limitation or unnatural concentration     tiglyl-­CoA for further chain elongation.
        of the reductant, NADPH, might contribute to this result.
        Therefore, we ran enzyme assays at NADPH concentrations    Hybrid Enzymes Explain the Product Suite Synthesized by
       ranging from 0.009 to 50 mM (SI Appendix, Fig. S42). Only    EcPKS1 and EcPKS2. The experiments described above left several
      compound 9, and not 2 and 10, was detected in the presence of    immediate questions: What controls the regioselectivity of ketone
    NADPH at low concentrations (9.38 to 62.5 μM). Production    reduction in EcPKS2? Is the KS domain really responsible for
        of 2 and 10 remained insignificant at NADPH concentrations      tiglic acid inhibition of EcPKS1, and what controls substrate
      <1 mM, representing <1% of the reaction products (as low as     selectivity? What controls the chain length differences observed211.64.159.46.       0.3%), but plateaued at about 5% (high of 7%) of the total     in EcPKS1 versus EcPKS2 products, and potentially the larger
address     productsanalogs decreased,by 4 mMpotentiallyand above.dueAt to50substratemM, productioninhibition.of Basedthese    familythese questionsof sacoglossanwould polyketides?enable betterWesequence-­functionenvisioned that predictionanswering
IP    upon these results, at physiological NADPH concentrations, 9    and engineering of AFPKs, while also potentially shedding light
from     should be by far the major enzymatic product. This indicates    on aFAS and iterative PKS function.        that presence of a compound 9 with a ketone at C-­15 is the    We synthesized hybrid enzymes in which either the KS or the
2024     true product formed by the AFPK in nature, and does not    KS-­AT  didomain  from  one  protein  was  fused  with  the
16,      result from modification after biosynthesis or as an artifact of    DH-­MT0-­ER0-­KR-­ACP domains from another. The KS-­only
         insufficient NADPH.                                               fusions proved difficult to work with, being very poorly soluble. By
                                                                                  contrast, soluble KS-­AT fusions could easily be expressed. TheAugust       Substrate Selectivity Comparison with EcPKS1. Previous work     fusion between EcPKS1 KS-­AT and EcPKS2 DH-­MT0-­ER0-­KR-­on
       with EcPKS1 showed that it could not accept acetyl-­or malonyl-­   ACP is hereafter referred to as “EcPKSf1-­2,” while its counterpart
      CoA, but  instead used methylmalonyl-­CoA  exclusively. By    with the EcPKS2 KS-­AT and EcPKS1 DH-­ MT0-­ER0-­KR-­ACP
        contrast, EcPKS2 could accept every substrate attempted except      is “EcPKSf2-­1.” Since these proteins are only ~52% sequence iden­University         for malonyl-­CoA. In initial studies, we repeated the experiments      tical, optimization of conditions was required for the expression
Ocean    and found that, similarly, EcPKS1 only accepted methylmalonyl-­   and purification of mutants. In comparison to wild type, in the      CoA. In comparison to EcPKS2, EcPKS1 provided a relatively    mutants a greater percentage was found in the aggregate fraction
China    much low product yield, leading us to suspect that the holoprotein     rather than in the functional dimeric fraction, as indicated by a        purified from yeast might be inhibited in comparison to EcPKS2.     smaller  proportion  of  soluble  dimeric  protein  observed  in
by     Thus, we expressed the EcPKS1 apo form in a yeast strain lacking     size-­exclusion chromatograms (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). The purified,
      NpgA, and then pantetheinylated the ACP with the purified    dimeric protein was used in all experiments.
       apoprotein in vitro using Sfp (28). To our surprise, we found       In answering the question about regioselectivity of ketone
        that the in vitro synthesized apoprotein was broadly accepting of     reduction, we envisioned two possibilities: Control of this mod­
         starter units, including methylmalonyl-­, propionyl-­, isovaleryl-­,     ification may be the result of either the KS or KR domains (or
       and benzoyl-­CoA. We could even detect a slight trace of products     potentially, a combination of both). For example,  if KS werehttps://www.pnas.org     derived from acetyl-­/malonyl-­CoA as the starter unit. This led us     responsible, the EcPKS1 KS domain would potentially not extend
        to hypothesize that EcPKS1 also does not discriminate between    a ketone-­containing starter unit. If the KR were responsible, thenfrom        acetate versus propionate starter units, like EcPKS2. Instead, we    the KR from EcPKS2 would govern ketone formation regardless
       proposed that a discrete intermediate incorporating an acetate     of whether the KS from EcPKS1 or EcPKS2 was present. When
         starter unit inhibited product formation. Since yeast cells are    the  fusion  proteins were  treated with methylmalonyl-­CoA,
       dominated by acetyl-­ and malonyl-­CoA, this would potentially    EcPKSf1-­2 gave primarily compound 25, in which a ketone wasDownloaded        inhibit an enzyme that was active in vivo.                           present in the first oxidation position, whereas EcPKSf2-­1 gave

   6 of 10   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2305575120                                                                           pnas.org


[PDF physical page 7]
        primarily 2 and 10, in which the ketone was absent. This result
       unambiguously demonstrated that the reductive domains, and
         specifically the KRs in the AFPKs, control the complex reduction
         regioselectivity. In addition, EcPKSf1-­2 gave shunt products 30
       and 31 (Fig. 5). We believe that this may represent imperfect
       complementation between the ACPs and KS domains of EcPKS1
       and EcPKS2, since the intermediates resemble what was observed
        in apoprotein experiments.
          These results also strongly supported the role of KS in chain
        length determination, independent of the KR. Compounds 2 and
      10 (with a chain length closer to the native products of EcPKS2)
       produced by EcPKSf2-­1 reflect the chain length preferences of
      EcPKS2, even though the ketone is absent; similarly, 25 (with a
       chain length equal to the native products of EcPKS1) produced
       by EcPKSf1-­2 is the preferred chain length of EcPKS1, but with
        a carbonyl present in the first propionate group. In all cases, results
       were as expected if KS controls the chain length.
        To determine whether tiglyl-­CoA (34) is really likely to inhibit
        the KS of EcPKS1, we repeated the same experiments described
       above for apoEcPKS enzymes. As found with apoEcPKS1, abun­
       dant tiglyl-­CoA was detected based upon high-­resolution Q-­Tof
        data in apoEcPKSf1-­2, but not in EcPKSf2-­1 (SI Appendix,
         Fig. S38). The results were identical, demonstrating one turnover
       through the KS and one through KR/DH, strongly supporting
       our identification of tiglate as an inhibitor of chain elongation by
        the KS (SI Appendix, Fig. S39). Thus, overall, the KS role in sub­
         strate selectivity and chain length was reinforced by hybridization
        experiments.

      Discussion                                                                       Fig. 5. MS chromatograms showing the major products when EcPKSf2-­1 and                                                                                            EcPKSf1-­2 are treated with methylmalonyl-­CoA and NADPH.
      The AFPKs represent a class of enzymes encoded in the genomes211.64.159.46.     of phylogenetically diverse animal lineages, and which bridge the    PKSs, the KS domain is implicated as the gatekeeper governing
        evolutionary gap between aFAS and HRPKSs (2). While it is now     starter  selectivity (37, 38). Like HRPKSs, instead of being
        well established that animals have their own groups of PKSs as     restricted to repetitive, saturated alkanes, the AFPKs produce aaddress
IP      well, the animal PKS enzymes function much differently from the    complex oxidation pattern, where the oxidation state varies across
       aFASs, and they are more distantly related to aFASs than are the    the length of the polyketide (39). Together, these two properties
from     fungal HRPKSs (30). Extensive studies of biosynthetic enzymes    would enable the production of most of the diverse polyketides
2024     such as the PKSs found in bacteria and fungi have yielded an    found in sacoglossans and other molluscs. AFPKs also exhibit their
         integrative knowledge base connecting molecular sequence to   own unique properties. Unlike HRPKSs and aFASs that are highly16,        protein function to chemical structure. These principles have led     restricted to using malonate, EcPKS1 and EcPKS2 utilize meth­
August     tofromkeyDNAenablingsequencetechnologiesto chemicalthat structure,now makeandit muchto performeasier toengi­go    ylmalonate.observed in Intheaddition,EcPKS2theproductscomplexispatternquite ofdifferentketone reductionthan that
on     neering of unnatural natural products and drug discovery studies    observed in HRPKSs so far studied. Such differences observed in
        (31, 32).                                                                  just two of the vast number of AFPKs hints at much biochemical
       No such knowledge base exists for animal PKSs, let alone for    and structural diversity awaiting discovery.University     the newly defined AFPKs (2, 33, 34). It is currently impossible to     Our sequence analysis revealed a phylogenetic tree of AFPK
Ocean     predictenzymesthefoundproductsin animals,producedand engineeringby the countlessof thesePKSpathwaysand AFPKhas    genesthetic versusreflectingnonphotosyntheticthe different productsacoglossans.suites foundSince thein long-­chainphotosyn­
        yet to be performed or even proposed in the literature. Here, we     polyketides are associated with photoprotection and photosyn­
China    aimed to remedy some of these key limitations by characterizing     thesis, the products of AFPKs potentially serve a different biolog­
by    EcPKS2 and comparing its function with the related enzyme,      ical role than those of other animal PKSs (14, 40–42). Our
      EcPKS1. We envisioned that these studies would provide a foun­    biochemical results may also explain the broad suite of molluscan
        dation for understanding how molecular features of the biosyn­     natural products: The different starter units and oxidation state
         thetic machinery explain the many polyketide-­like chemical     patterns found in many molluscan polyketides are recapitulated
        structures found in diverse animals. Simultaneously, we would     in the products created in this study.
        learn which protein domains control key factors such as regiose­      The biosynthetic steps governed by EcPKS1 and EcPKS2 canhttps://www.pnas.org      lectivity and chain length, enabling structure prediction and engi­    be proposed as follows. In both enzymes, the starter unit is first
        neering approaches.                                              generated either by loading the ACP with methylmalonate fol­
from       Here, we show that AFPKs combine key structural diversity–    lowed by decarboxylation, or by loading an acyl-­thioester onto
        generating principles found in aFAS and in HRPKSs. For example,    the KS. Subsequent condensation with ACP-­bound methyl­
         like aFASs, EcPKS1 and EcPKS2 accept a broad range of starter    malonate yields the first diketide intermediate. In EcPKS1, this
        units (Fig. 6). This may be due to a similarity in the AT between    intermediate is reduced to the α, β-­unsaturated thioester, while itDownloaded        the aFASs and AFPKs (35, 36). Alternatively, in bacterial modular      is not modified by EcPKS2; the redox difference is solely governed


      PNAS  2023  Vol. 120  No. 38  e2305575120                                        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2305575120   7 of 10


[PDF physical page 8]
211.64.159.46.
address
IP
from
2024
                                                                   Fig. 6. Representative products from enzyme assays.16,

       by the KR domain. Next, the diketide is extended by either 1      is  still not understood, and potentially may include the KSAugust       (EcPKS1) or 3 (EcPKS2) methylmalonate units, in which the    domain.  Finally,  despite  predictive  efforts to  categorize the
on     ketones are reduced and dehydrated to the double bonds. Finally,     sacoglossan AFPKs, we still do not have predictive power to antic­
       an additional three methylmalonate units are added without     ipate function based upon sequence. Given the many AFPKs
        reduction and spontaneously released from the ACP via pyrone    found in nature, it is important to address these limitations toUniversity       formation (SI Appendix, Fig. S43). After the action of the PKSs,     better understand the breadth of lipid diversity in the animal
Ocean     other as-­yet unidentified enzymes are likely involved in further    kingdom.        processing toward the complex natural products. Since these      Although little is known about pyrone biosynthesis in animals,
China    enzymes do not appear to be encoded in gene clusters along with    pyrones themselves are common products or byproducts of PKS        the PKSs, they are not described in the current study. Interestingly,    enzymology. In an interesting case of convergent evolution, the
by     there is the potential that at least some of the EcPKS enzymes are    EcPKS2 products bear similarity to bacterial polypropionate pyrones
       encoded in a biosynthetic gene cluster, since they are found in    such as aureothin (43). Unlike EcPKS2 that uses a single module
        adjacent positions in the E. chlorotica genome.                            iteratively, enzymes that make aureothin and relatives are modular,
         While this current study was extensive, it leaves many remaining    comprising a different module for each unit loaded (44–46). An
        mysteries about EcPKS1 and EcPKS2. The enzymes decarboxylate     exception is the first module, which loads the starter unit and
       methylmalonyl-­CoA to generate starter units; how this is accom­    extends by two methylmalonyl units, yet still operates by some dif­https://www.pnas.org      plished, in comparison to aFASs which do not perform this reac­     ferent rules in comparison to EcPKS2. The loading module in aure­
         tion, has yet to be characterized. We do not yet know conclusively     othin biosynthesis was flexible, enabling the creation of analogs (47).from       whether the promiscuous starter unit selectivity of these enzymes      It is difficult to compare biochemical studies directly, but from our
           is governed by KS, as found in some bacterial PKSs, or by AT, as     data it appears that EcPKS2 may be more efficient in processing a
       found in aFAS. The strict selectivity for methylmalonyl-­CoA     diverse array of substrates. It would be interesting to hybridize these
        extender units might be determined by the AT or KS domains,    two biochemical systems to see whether increased biochemicalDownloaded        or a combination of both. The release mechanism from the ACP     diversity is feasible in the broad chemical class of pyrones. The

   8 of 10   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2305575120                                                                           pnas.org


[PDF physical page 9]
        biosynthetic plasticity of EcPKS2 should lend itself to a range of     In Vitro AFPK Assays. Purified enyzme (5 μM) was incubated with MatB (19)
        applications including bioengineering and  synthetic biology      (5 μM), Sfp (28) (5 μM), MgCl2 (7 mM), adenosine triphosphate (ATP; 7 mM),
         efforts.                                                                methylmalonate (5 mM), coenzyme A (2 mM), and NADPH (2 mM), in aqueous
          This study represents one of only a few biochemical studies on     sodium phosphate (25 μL; 100 mM, pH 7.5) at 22 °C for 18 h, keeping reactions
       animal PKS or AFPK enzymes (2, 33, 34). In each case so far      in the dark.
        reported, significantly different chemical products and biochemical     Purification of EcPKS2 Reaction Products. A 40 mL-­scale reaction mixture
         features have been seen, reflecting an immense potential of the     contained EcPKS2 (200 mg), sodium phosphate (100 mM, pH 7.5), MatB
        unstudied animal AFPKs and PKSs to produce new compounds     (70 mg), Sfp (20 mg), MgCl2 · 6 H2O (50 mg), ATP (150 mg), methylmalonic
       with unanticipated biochemical reactions. Overall, these results map      acid (20 mg), coenzyme A (50 mg), and NADPH (50 mg). After 2 h at 22 °C, an
        the biosynthesis of animal polyketides, connecting mollusc genetics      additional aliquot [10 mL of 100 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.5 containing ATP
       and enzymology with the resulting structural diversity of their natural     (70 mg), methylmalonic acid (20 mg), coenzyme A (10 mg), and NADPH (50 mg)]
        products. Because many more AFPKs are found in molluscs and     was added at a rate of 0.1 mL/min. The resulting mixture was stirred in the dark
        await characterization, we expect to see further structural diversity      for 20 h at 22 °C. The reaction was quenched with ethyl acetate (50 mL), and the
        unveiled from this unusual group of PKS-­like enzymes.                 mixture was centrifuged for 30 min at 4,500 × g to separate precipitated protein
                                                                          and liquid. The ethyl acetate layer was removed, and the water layer was further
      Materials and Methods                                              extracted twice more with ethyl acetate (50 mL). The combined ethyl acetate
                                                                                                     fraction was dried with sodium sulfate, concentrated under reduced pressure,
         Detailed Materials and Methods are described in SI Appendix.                  and purified using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Thermo
                                                                                                             Scientific, UltiMate 3000) with Luna 5 µm Phenyl-­Hexyl 100 Å LC column (250 ×
         KS-­Containing Protein Identification. The raw transcriptome sequencing data    10 mm) with a linear gradient of 30 to 80% mobile phase B over 30 min (solvent
           for sacoglossan molluscs were downloaded from SRA database and assembled      A, H2O; solvent B, MeCN) at a flow of 3.5 mL/min; tR = 25.6 min; yield of isolated
         using rnaSPADES. The genes were called out using prodigal using “-­meta” mode.    compound 9: 0.5 mg.
          Previously identified aFAS, AFPK, and animal PKS sequences were used as query
          to do Blastp search against the transcriptome database. The target sequences that     In Vitro Reaction to Generate Holoenyzmes. Purified apo-­AFPK (5 μM),
        formed significant alignment (qcov > 80) with the queries were considered as     Sfp (20 μM), MgCl2 (10 mM), coenzyme A (5 mM) were combined in buffer (100
        PKS hits. To remove any contamination from the SRA transcriptome assemblies,   mM sodium phosphate pH 7.5) at 22 °C for 2 h and used in described enzymatic
         the corresponding contigs that contain the KS hits were analyzed using the tax-      reactions.
       onomy assignment pipeline in the Autometa package (make_taxonomy_table.py     13C4-­methylmalonyl-­CoA Labeling Experiments. AFPK-­enzymes (5 μM), 13C3-­
              -­a ks_hit_contigs.fa -­l 700) (43). The output “.lca” file gives taxonomy ID for the     methylmalonic acid (3 mM), MatB (5 μM), starter units (4 mM; except benzoyl-­         lowest common ancestor of each contig. Based on the taxonomy ID, contigs for                                                                    SNAC and nicotinoyl-­SNAC at 16 mM), MgCl2 (7 mM), ATP (7 mM), and NADPH          bacteria, fungi, plants, and algae were removed. The KS domains of the remain-                                                                                             (2 mM) were added to sodium phosphate buffer (25 μL; 100 mM, pH 7.5). Starter         ing contigs were predicted by antiSMASH and InterPro. Protein sequences for                                                                                              units included ethylmalonyl-­CoA, butyryl-­CoA, isobutyryl-­CoA, isovaleryl-­CoA,           E. chlorotica were also downloaded from GenBank (RQTK01) and analyzed using                                                                                                     acetyl-­CoA, benzoyl-­CoA, benzoyl-­SNAC, or nicotinoyl-­SNAC. The mixtures were211.64.159.46.      the same method above to obtain the KS-­containing protein sequences.            kept in the dark at 22 °C for 18 h.
         Phylogenetic Analyses. Orthologous genes were aligned using t-­Coffee (-­mode     Chemical Analysis. MS used an Acquity ultra-­performance liquid chromatogra-address
         mcoffee -­output = msf, fasta_aln) (48). To remove poorly aligned regions, the     phy (UPLC) protein ethylene bridged hybrid (BEH) C4 1.7 μm column (2.1 × 100IP
          resulting alignment was subsequently trimmed with Clipkit with model param-    mm) with a 6-­min linear gradient of 5 to 100% mobile phase B (solvent A, H2O
from       eter “-­m kpi-­gappy” (49). The trimmed alignment was then manually inspected    0.05% formic acid; solvent B, MeCN) at 0.4 mL/min. Sample (5 μL) was injected
          to remove any remaining poorly aligned region. The maximum likelihood tree     using an autosampler. MS method: negative ion and sensitivity mode; range: 100
2024     was constructed using iqtree (./iqtree -­nt AUTO -­st AA -­alrt 1000 -­bb 1000) (50).      to 1,000 Da; scan time: 0.5 s; data format: centroid. MS/MS method: negative
16,      The ML tree was visualized using the ggtree library (51)                            ion and sensitivity mode; range: 100 to 1,000 Da, scan time: 0.1 s; data format:
                                                                                continuum; fixed collision energy value at 30 V.
        Overexpression and Purification of PKSs. Expression vector pxw55-­EcPKS1,August
         pxw55-­EcPKS2, pxw55-­EcPKSf1-­2, and pxw55-­EcPKSf2-­1 were transformed     Data, Materials, and Software Availability. All study data are included in theon
          into S. cerevisiae BJ5464-­NpgA (MATα ura3-­52 trp1 leu2-­Δ1 his3Δ200       article and/or SI Appendix.
         pep::HIS3 prb1d1.6R can1 GAL, with phosphopantetheinyl  transferase
        npgA) or S. cerevisiae BJ5464 (18, 52). Single colonies were propagated in    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This work was funded by NSF CHE 2203613. PhylogeneticUniversity       liquid broth (1 mL) and then transferred to yeast peptone dextrose broth (1 L,      analysis was funded by NSF IOS 2127111. We thank P.D. Scesa and J. Skalicky for
Ocean     10Expressiong/L yeastwasextract,performed20 g/L atpeptone,28 °C at20180g/Lrpmglucose)for 3 d.inProteins2.8 L Fernbachwere purifiedflasks.      assistancedata acquisitionwith NMRin NADPHdata acquisitionexperiments.andS. cerevisaeJ.A. MaschekstrainforBJ5464assistanceand withplasmidMS
China     bychromatographyNi-­NTA and further(FPLC).chromatography methods including fast protein liquid    pxw55(UniversitywereofgiftsCaliforniaof NancyLos DaAngeles),Silva (Universityrespectively.of California Irvine) and Yi Tang
by


              1.    B. Chakravarty, Z. Gu, S. S. Chirala, S. J. Wakil, F. A. Quiocho, Human fatty acid synthase: Structure and           8.    A. Cutignano, G. Villani, A. Fontana, One metabolite, two pathways: Convergence of polypropionate
                   substrate selectivity of the thioesterase domain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 15567–15572 (2004).              biosynthesis in fungi and marine molluscs. Org. Lett. 14, 992–995 (2012).
              2.    J. P. Torres, Z. Lin, J. M. Winter, P. J. Krug, E. W. Schmidt, Animal biosynthesis of complex polyketides         9.    K. Händeler, Y. P. Grzymbowski, P. J. Krug, H. Wägele, Functional chloroplasts in metazoan cells -­A
                   in a photosynthetic partnership. Nat. Commun. 11, 2882 (2020).                                        unique evolutionary strategy in animal life. Front. Zool. 6, 1–18 (2009).
              3.    C. T. Walsh, Y. Tang, Natural Product Biosynthesis (The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2017).                  10.  C. Ireland, P. J. Scheuer, Photosynthetic marine mollusks: In vivo 14C incorporation into metabolites
              4.    C. Hertweck, The biosynthetic logic of polyketide diversity. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 48, 4688–4716                 of the sacoglossan placobranchus ocellatus. Science 80, 922–923 (1979).https://www.pnas.org             (2009).                                                                                          11.  C. Ireland, J. Faulkner, The metabolites of the marine molluscs Tridachiella diomedea and Tridachia
              5.    A. Rittner, K. S. Paithankar, K. V. Huu, M. Grininger, Characterization of the polyspecific transferase of               crispata. Tetrahedron 37, 233–240 (1981).
from            murine type I fatty acid synthase (FAS) and implications for polyketide synthase (PKS) engineering.        12.  A. K. Miller, D. Trauner, Mining the tetraene manifold: Total synthesis of complex pyrones from
               ACS Chem. Biol. 13, 723–732 (2018).                                                                   Placobranchus ocellatus. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 44, 4602–4606 (2005).
              6.   G. Cimino, M. L. Ciavatta, A. Fontana, M. Gavagnin, Bioactive Compounds from Natural Sources, C.          13.  S. Brückner, J. E. Baldwin, J. Moses, R. M. Adlington, A. R. Cowley, Mechanistic evidence supporting
                     Tringali, Ed. (Taylor & Francis Inc., New York, 2001).                                                         the biosynthesis of photodeoxytridachione. Tetrahedron Lett. 44, 7471–7473 (2003).
              7.    Z. H. Chen, Y. W. Guo, X. W. Li, Recent advances on marine mollusk-­derived natural products:              14.  D. R. Zuidema, A. K. Miller, D. Trauner, P. B. Jones, Photosensitized conversion of
                  Chemistry, chemical ecology and therapeutical potential. Nat. Prod. Rep. 40, 509–556 (2023).                   9,10-­deoxytridachione to photodeoxytridachione. Org. Lett. 7, 4959–4962 (2005).Downloaded


      PNAS  2023  Vol. 120  No. 38  e2305575120                                        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2305575120   9 of 10


[PDF physical page 10]
            15.   J. Mistry, R. D. Finn, S. R. Eddy, A. Bateman, M. Punta, Challenges in homology search: HMMER3           34.   T. F. Cooke et al., Genetic mapping and biochemical basis of yellow feather pigmentation in
               and convergent evolution of coiled-­coil regions. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, e121 (2013).                           budgerigars. Cell 171, 427–439 (2017).
            16.  A. M. Bolger, M. Lohse, B. Usadel, Trimmomatic: A flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data.            35.  S. Smith, A. Stern, The effect of aromatic CoA esters on fatty acid synthetase: Biosynthesis of w-­
                   Bioinformatics 30, 2114–2120 (2014).                                                                Phenyl fatty acids. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 222, 259–265 (1983).
            17.  M. Morley et al., Genetic analysis of genome-­wide variation in human gene expression. Nature 430,       36.  A. Witkowski, A. K. Joshi, S. Smith, Characterization of the interthiol acyltransferase reaction
              743–747 (2004).                                                                                              catalyzed by the β-­ketoacyl synthase domain of the animal fatty acid synthase. Biochemistry 36,
            18.  R. A. Cacho, Y. Tang, Reconstitution of fungal nonribosomal peptide synthetases in yeast and in vitro.          16338–16344 (1997).
               Methods Mol. Biol. 1401, 103–119 (2016).                                                          37.  M. Hirsch, B. J. Fitzgerald, A. T. Keatinge-­Clay, How cis-­acyltransferase assembly-­line ketosynthases
            19.  A. J. Hughes, A. Keatinge-­Clay, Enzymatic extender unit generation for in vitro polyketide synthase             gatekeep for processed polyketide intermediates. ACS Chem. Biol. 16, 2515–2526 (2021).
                   reactions: Structural and functional showcasing of Streptomyces coelicolor MatB. Chem. Biol. 18,          38.   L. Zhang et al., Characterization of giant modular PKSs provides insight into genetic mechanism for
              165–176 (2011).                                                                                                      structural diversification of aminopolyol polyketides. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 56, 1740–1745 (2017).
            20.  B. Sedgwick, J. W. Cornforth, The biosynthesis of long-­chain fatty acids. Stereochemical                  39.   Y. Tang, E. B. Go, “Fungal highly-­reducing polyketide synthases and associated natural products” in
                   differentiation in the enzymic incorporation of chiral acetates. Eur. J. Biochem. 75, 465–479                 Comprehensive Natural Products III, C. A. Townsend, I. Abe, Y. Tang, Eds. (Elsevier, 2020), vol. 1, pp.
                 (1977).                                                                                         333–364.
            21.  K. J. Weissman et al., The molecular basis of Celmer’s rules: The stereochemistry of the                   40.  D. R. Zuidema, P. B. Jones, Triplet photosensitization in cyercene A and related pyrones. J.
                 condensation step in chain extension on the erythromycin polyketide synthase. Biochemistry 36,              Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 83, 137–145 (2006).
              13849–13855 (1997).                                                                             41.  D. R. Zuidema, P. B. Jones, Photochemical relationships in Sacoglossan polypropionates. J. Nat.
            22.   V. Di Marzo et al., Cyercenes, novel pyrones from the ascoglossan mollusc Cyerce cristallina. Tissue               Prod. 68, 481–486 (2005).
                    distribution, biosynthesis and possible involvement in defense and regenerative processes.               42.   J. de Vries et al., Comparison of sister species identifies factors underpinning plastid compatibility
                   Experientia 47, 1221–1227 (1991).                                                                              in green sea slugs. Proc. Biol. Sci. 282, 20142519 (2015).
            23.   L. Howard, Sleeper and William Fenical, Navenones A-­C: Trail-­breaking alarm pheromones from the       43.  N. N. Gerber, Phenazines, phenoxazinones, and dioxopiperazines from Streptomyces thioluteus. J.
                marine opisthobranch Navanax inermis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 99, 2367–2368 (1977).                            Org. Chem. 32, 4055–4057 (1967).
            24.  A. Rittner, K. S. Paithankar, A. Himmler, M. Grininger, Type I fatty acid synthase trapped in the              44.   J. He, C. Hertweck, Functional analysis of the aureothin iterative type I polyketide synthase.
                  octanoyl-­bound state. Protein Sci. 29, 589–605 (2020).                                          ChemBioChem 6, 908–912 (2005).
            25.  D. A. Herbst, C. A. Townsend, T. Maier, The architectures of iterative type I PKS and FAS. Nat. Prod.           45.  N. Traitcheva, H. Jenke-­kodama, J. He, E. Dittmann, C. Hertweck, Non-­colinear polyketide
                 Rep. 35, 1046–1069 (2018).                                                                                 biosynthesis in the aureothin and neoaureothin pathways: An evolutionary perspective.
            26.  C. Chiang, M. Ohashi, Y. Tang, Deciphering chemical logic of fungal natural product biosynthesis          ChemBioChem 8, 1841–1849 (2007).
                through heterologous expression and genome mining. Nat. Prod. Rep. 40, 89–127                    46.  B. Busch, C. Hertweck, Phytochemistry evolution of metabolic diversity in polyketide-­derived
                 (2023).                                                                                                pyrones: Using the non-­colinear aureothin assembly line as a model system. Phytochemistry 70,
            27.  D. A. Cummings, A. I. Snelling, A. W. Puri, Methylotroph quorum sensing signal identification by              1833–1840 (2009).
                  inverse stable isotopic labeling. ACS Chem. Biol. 16, 1332–1338 (2021).                                47.  M. Werneburg et al., Exploiting enzymatic promiscuity to engineer a focused library of highly
            28.   Z. Zhou et al., Genetically encoded short peptide tags for orthogonal protein labeling by Sfp and                  selective antifungal and antiproliferative aureothin analogues. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 10407–
               AcpS phosphopantetheinyl transferases. Am. J. Chem. Biol. 2, 337–346 (2007).                         10413 (2010).
            29.  O. Ad, B. W. Thuronyi, M. C. Y. Chang, Elucidating the mechanism of fluorinated extender unit              48.  C. Notredame, D. G. Higgins, J. Heringa, T-­coffee: A novel method for fast and accurate multiple
                 loading for improved production of fluorine-­containing polyketides. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.               sequence alignment. J. Mol. Biol. 302, 205–217 (2000), 11Edited by. J. Thornton.
               114, E660–E668 (2017).                                                                          49.   J. L. Steenwyk, T. J. Buida III, Y. Li, X.-­X. Shen, A. Rokas, ClipKIT: A multiple sequence alignment
            30.   T. A. Castoe, T. Stephens, B. P. Noonan, C. Calestani, A novel group of type I polyketide synthases               trimming software for accurate phylogenomic inference. PLOS Biol. 18, 1–17 (2020).
                  (PKS) in animals and the complex phylogenomics of PKSs. Gene 392, 47–58 (2007).                     50.   L.-­T. Nguyen, H. A. Schmidt, A. von Haeseler, B. Q. Minh, IQ-­TREE: A fast and effective stochastic
            31.  M. Klaus, M. Grininger, Engineering strategies for rational polyketide synthase design. Nat. Prod.               algorithm for estimating maximum-­likelihood phylogenies. Mol. Biol. Evol. 32, 268–274 (2015).
                 Rep. 35, 1070–1081 (2018).                                                                       51.   L.-­G. Wang et al., Treeio: An R package for phylogenetic tree input and output with richly annotated
            32.  A. Rittner et al., Chemoenzymatic synthesis of fluorinated polyketides. Nat. Chem. 14, 1000–1006            and associated data. Mol. Biol. Evol. 37, 599–603 (2020).
                  (2022).                                                                                          52.  K. K. M. Lee, N. A. D. Silva, J. T. Kealey, Determination of the extent of phosphopantetheinylation of
            33.   F. Li et al., Sea urchin polyketide synthase SpPks1 produces the naphthalene precursor to                       polyketide synthases expressed in Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Anal. Biochem.
                echinoderm pigments. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144, 9363–9371 (2022).                                      394, 75–80 (2009).211.64.159.46.
address
IP
from
2024
16,
August
on
University
Ocean
China
by
https://www.pnas.org
from
Downloaded


   10 of 10   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2305575120                                                                          pnas.org