ACS Catalysis                                          pubs.acs.org/acscatalysis                                         Research Article

was observed in the production of maytansinol, which was a     AstC TE with representative type I TEs revealed a conserved
shunt metabolite of ansamitocin biosynthesis in Actinosynnema    GXSXG motif but diverged in the composition of catalytic
pretiosum. Maytansinol served  as the  direct precursor  for       triads. While the canonical Ser-Asp-His  triad was  typically
maytansine-derived antibody-drug conjugates and a  useful      conserved among the TE domains of NRPSs, AstC TE featured
probe for studying microtubule dynamics.22−24 The current      a catalytic triad consisting of Ser-Asn-His. This departure from
process for generating maytansinol predominantly relied on      the conventional acidic residue aligned with similar enzyme
reductive  hydrolysis  to remove  the  3-O-acyl groups  of       profiles found within partial single-module NRPS-like enzymes
ansamitocins, which underwent harsh conditions and resulted      characterized by the A-T-TE domain composition (Figure
in the inevitable formation of side products.25 The 3-O-acyl       S2).29,30 To assess the impact of this substitution on catalytic
moieties  in ansamitocins were incorporated by  the 3-O-       activity, the N117 residue of AstC TE was mutated. The N117D
acyltransferase, namely Asm19. Asm19 catalyzed promiscuous     mutant of AstC TE exhibited a 5-fold decrease in activity, while
3-O-acylations of the biosynthetic precursor N-desmethyl-4,5-      the N117A mutant completely abolished the activity (Figure
desepoxymaytansinol (DDM).26 The sequential nature of 3-O-     1D). This distinctive structural feature observed in AstC TE
acylation occurring prior to the 4,5-epoxidation and amide N-     would  distinguish  it from  other TEs and  facilitate  the
methylation rendered  direct  biosynthesis  of maytansinol       identification of related homologous enzymes.
unattainable despite the exhaustive  efforts of manipulating       Substrate Scope of AstC TE Domain. Given that AstC TE
ansamitocin biosynthesis over the past two decades.27             was demonstrated to independently catalyze the intermolecular
  During examining the activity of the single-module NRPS-like       esterification between  the  acyl donor and  acceptor, we
D-alanyltransferase AstC  in  vitro, the  D-alanylated product     embarked on exploring the substrate scope of AstC TE with
displayed a tendency  to  revert  to the  substrate  state  via      diverse acyl SNACs and ansamycins with distinct backbones.
spontaneous hydrolysis. The stable presence of the D-alanyl      Previously,  the attachment  of  several D-amino  acids was
group within ansatrienins may be facilitated by the subsequent      achieved with full-length AstC, but the attachment of L-amino
N-cyclohexanecarboxyl modification.19 This fortuitous discov-      acids  failed.19  Herein,  several L-aminoacyl SNACs were
ery led us to contemplate the potential of harnessing the      chemically  synthesized and  utilized  as  substrates  for  the
distinctive  catalytic property of D-alanyltransferases  for the      enzymatic assays of the standalone AstC TE. The loading of L-
biosynthesis of maytansinol. The reprogrammed pathway for       alanyl, L-methionyl, L-leucyl, and L-phenylalanyl moieties that
maytansinol was based on the biosynthesis of ansamitocins in A.     were  previously  unutilized by the  full-length  protein was
pretiosum, which differed from maytansinol only in the 3-O-acyl      accomplished by the standalone AstC TE (Figure 2A). Further,
esters that were challenging to remove chemically. Instead of the      the attachment of N-substituted amino acids, e.g., N-methyl-L-
enzyme Asm19  responsible  for  3-O-acylations, the newly       alanyl moiety, was carried out through utilizing the correspond-
characterized NRPS-like  D-alanyltransferase SmAstC was      ing SNAC derivatives. Despite the challenges in loading fatty
employed in this pathway, substituting a D-alanyl moiety for       acyl moieties, such as butyryl, AstC TE showcased limited
the acyl ester on the same hydroxyl group. With the D-alanylated       catalytic activity toward acetyl SNAC as detected through ESI-
intermediate, the following epoxidation and N-methylation    HRMS analysis (Figure S3). These results demonstrated that
steps catalyzed by Asm11 and Asm10, respectively, still took     AstC TE did exhibit broad compatibility with diverse acyl
place. The hydrolytic lability of the 3-O-D-alanyl ester ultimately     donors and suggested that the stringent preference of the full-
led to the formation of the free alcohol maytansinol.                length AstC for D-amino acids with small side chains would be
                                                                       attributed to its A domain.
        AND DISCUSSION                     On the basis of suboptimal acyl donors provided in the SNAC■RESULTSIntermolecular Esterification Catalyzed by the TE      form, the full-length AstC was subsequently utilized to screen
Domain of the D-Alanyltransferase AstC. Previously, the      the compatibility toward a range of ansamycins as acyl acceptors.
role of AstC was revealed in transferring D-alanine to the 11-OH     The detection of D-alanylated products by ESI-HRMS analysis
of  ansatrienins. However, the  precise  functionalities  of  its     demonstrated that AstC was able to D-alanylize two distinct
domains remain elusive, particularly the role of the TE domain      types of pentaketide ansamycins and two octaketide ansamycins,
in  catalyzing  intermolecular  esterification. Herein, the TE      exhibiting high promiscuity toward acyl acceptors (Figures 2B
domain of AstC (AstC TE) was purified, and its activity was     and S5). In particular, regarding that DDM (3) was a 4,5-
examined by utilizing D-alanyl N-acetylcysteamine thioester (D-      desepoxyl intermediate in the biosynthesis of ansamitocins,
alanyl SNAC) as an acyl donor (the primers, plasmids, and     modest catalytic activity was observed for the formation of 3-O-
strains used in this study are listed in Tables S1, S2, and S3,      D-alanyl DDM (4) from 3, but no activity was detected toward
respectively).28 The incubation of AstC TE with D-alanyl SNAC      maytansinol (5), which showed a similar catalytic logic to that of
and trienomycinol (1) successfully resulted in the formation of      the 3-O-acyltransferase Asm19 in ansamitocin biosynthesis, i.e.,
11-O-D-alanyl trienomycinol (2), consistent with the result of      3-O-acylation preceded 4,5-epoxidation.18
the enzymatic assay performed with full-length AstC (Figure       Discovery of Homologous D-Alanyltransferases and
1B). However, the D-alanyl product 2 readily reverted to 1      Structural Basis of Specific D-Alanylation. As observed in
through spontaneous hydrolysis (Figure S1).                       the SSN network, AstC was not an isolated entity but belonged
  The phylogenetic analysis highlighted AstC TE as a distinctive      to a cluster of homologous enzymes, including AnsC and MycC,
catalyst  for  the  intermolecular  esterification between  the     which were previously  identified  in other  ansatrienin  bio-
aminoacyl donor and the polyketide backbone (Figure 1C).      synthetic pathways but remained uncharacterized (Figure S6).
Two other TEs (Sln9 TE and FrsA TE), positioned within the      In this concern, a phylogenetic tree of these AstC homologs was
same clade as AstC, were derived from comparable single-      constructed  using  the maximum  likelihood method.  Six
module NRPSs featuring the C-A-T-TE architecture that was     homologs, namely SyAstC, SmAstC, AnsC, MycC, SlAstC,
responsible for the intermolecular esterification of modified     and KbAstC (Figure 2C), from different branches were selected
amino acids and depsipeptides.20,21 The sequence alignment of      as  natural  variants  to  identify  potential  candidates with

                                                             8065                                                       https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.4c00082
                                                                                                                                      ACS Catal. 2024, 14, 8062−8072