ACS Catalysis                                          pubs.acs.org/acscatalysis                                         Research Article





Figure 1. Adenylation-thiolation-thioesterase (A-T-TE) tridomain NRPS-like enzymes and the unique function of the TE domain of D-
alanyltransferase AstC. (A) Sequence similarity network (SSN) analysis of A-T-TE-type single-module NRPSs. AstC served as a representative enzyme
catalyzing intermolecular esterification. AtrA, TdiA, AcyN, PngA, ApvA, BtyA, AtqA, and MelA were representative enzymes catalyzing the
dimerization of diverse α-keto acids in fungi, while EchA was found in Streptomyces. PacP was an A-T-TE tridomain NRPS with an inactive TE domain.
Details of these enzymes are listed in Table S4. The gray dots represent atypical enzymes with unknown functions. (B) AstC TE independently
catalyzed the intermolecular esterification between trienomycinol (1) and D-alanyl SNAC. (C) Phylogenetic analysis and functional diversity of
representative type I TEs of NRPSs. Details of the TEs are listed in Table S5. The TE domain of erythromycin polyketide synthase (DEBS TE) was
used as the outgroup. (D) Catalytic triad of AstC TE consisted of Ser-Asn-His instead of the conventional Ser-Asp-His. The sequence alignment of TEs
was performed with Clustal Omega and ESPript 3. The activities of the wild-type enzyme (WT) and its mutants were detected by HPLC analysis.

In the functions of typical NRPSs, the incorporation of a D-     (PKS) modifications catalyzed by NRPS-like enzymes com-
configured amino  acid  rarely occurred through the  direct     posed of A-T-TE.20,21 Therefore, these unique properties of D-
activation by the A domains but  relied on epimerization       alanyltransferases inspired our further research endeavors.
mediated by the E domains. Additionally, while the catalysis of        In the biosynthesis of polyketide natural products, certain
intermolecular esterification by the TE domains was observed in     post-PKS modifications greatly elevate bioactive potential but
the post-NRPS  modifications  of  depsipeptides, such an      incur  distinctive  challenges  in  the  synthesis  of  target
occurrence was not documented in post-polyketide synthase     compounds. An illustration of such biosynthetic complexity

                                                             8063                                                       https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.4c00082
                                                                                                                                      ACS Catal. 2024, 14, 8062−8072