
[PDF physical page 1]
       HHS Public Access
                 Author manuscript
                   CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.

                Published in final edited form as:Author           CurrOpinBiotechnol. 2016 December ; 42: 74–83. doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2016.02.033.

         Technology development for natural product biosynthesis inManuscript       Saccharomyces cerevisiae

            John M Billingsley1,2, Anthony B DeNicola1,2, and Yi Tang1,2
              1Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles,
          CA 90095, United States
              2Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095,
               United StatesAuthor
            Abstract
                 The explosion of genomic sequence data and the significant advancements in synthetic biology
                   have led to the development of new technologies for natural products discovery and production.
                   Using powerful genetic tools, the yeast Saccharomycescerevisiaehas been engineered as aManuscript
                     production host for natural product pathways from bacterial, fungal, and plant species. With an
                   expanding library of characterized genetic parts, biosynthetic pathways can be refactored for
                    optimized expression in yeast. New engineering strategies have enabled the increased production
                      of valuable secondary metabolites by tuning metabolic pathways. Improvements in high-
                    throughput screening methods have facilitated the rapid identification of variants with improved
                      biosynthetic capabilities. In this review, we focus on the molecular tools and engineering strategies
                        that have recently empowered heterologous natural product biosynthesis.Author
            Graphical abstract
Manuscript


Author          IntroductionNatural products play an indispensable role as pharmaceuticals, specialty chemicals, and
Manuscript               Corresponding author:industriallyTang, Yi (yitang@ucla.edu).relevant compounds. The recent surge of genomics data has revitalized the
                   #These authors contributed equally
                     Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
                    customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
                      the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
                     discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


[PDF physical page 2]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                                Page 2

                               discovery and characterization of enzymatic machinery used by plants, fungi, and bacteria
                                  for natural product biosynthesis. Meanwhile, the development of new genetic tools for
                               engineering the yeast Saccharomycescerevisiaehas fueled efforts to refactor biosyntheticAuthor                            pathways for heterologous production of valuable compounds (Fig. 1). In contrast to many
                                 native production hosts, yeast is fermentable, genetically tractable, and generally recognized
                                as safe. Furthermore, many natural product biosynthesis enzymes have been successfully
                                 reconstituted in S. cerevisiaethat show poor activity when expressed in the modelManuscript                           prokaryote Escherichiacoli[1]. Strategies drawing from genomics, synthetic biology, and
                              metabolic engineering have been applied to refactor biosynthetic pathways and optimize
                              production of secondary metabolites. In the past several years, numerous pioneering
                            accomplishments in the field have been realized, including reconstitution of complex
                            pathways [2] and industrial scale-up of engineered systems [3]. The development of tools
                           and strategies employed to engineer yeast for natural product production will be discussed.

            Refactoring biosynthetic gene clustersAuthor
                               Refactoring biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) involves restructuring the genetic elements of
                                the pathway with characterized regulatory parts for expression in the native producer or a
                               heterologous host. The Voigt group established the methodology for biosynthetic pathway
                                 refactoring when they rebuilt the entire 23.5 kb nitrogen fixation gene cluster fromManuscript                              Klebsiellaoxytocawith synthetic parts for de-regulated expression in the native host [4].
                            During pathway refactoring for heterologous expression in S.cerevisiae, each gene in a
                   BGC is either synthesized or amplified from genomic DNA or cDNA. Promoters and
                                terminators are cloned upstream and downstream of each coding region to generate
                               expression cassettes, which are assembled and introduced into the desired platform strain
                                  (Fig. 2).

              Preparing pathway genes for heterologous expressionAuthor
                           Pathway refactoring of gene clusters identified from eukaryotic genomic DNA often requires
                                the removal of non-coding intron sequences. Fungal species, such as Aspergillus, contain
                        many introns [5] and individual genes involved in natural products pathways frequently
                               contain as many as 5-9 introns [6]. Although there are several methods for successful inManuscript                               silicointron prediction from genome sequences [7], even one improperly annotated intron
                            can derail pathway characterization efforts due to incorrect protein translation. Intron-less
                    cDNA can be generated from active gene clusters, but silent gene clusters cannot be
                                 interrogated by this approach. Further, the native spliceosome of S.cerevisiaedoes not have
                                the capability to remove introns from distant fungi [8]. Through the mutation of specific
                                yeast splicing factors, we have enabled the recognition of intron sequence motifs from
                             Aspergillusfumigatus(unpublished data). With the continued rise in genomic sequence data,
                                               it will become increasingly important to develop new computational and experimental toolsAuthor
                                  to solve the intron problem.

                              Despite the difficulties caused by heterologous introns in the original pathway sequence,
                                 introns native to S.cerevisiaehave recently been added to the synthetic biology toolbox asManuscript                             predictable regulators of gene expression levels. Yofe etal. generated a gene expression




                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 3]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                                Page 3

                                   library consisting of 240 unique yeast strains, each expressing a yellow fluorescent protein
                          (YFP) gene interrupted by a natural S.cerevisiaeintron [9]. By quantifying the fluorescence,
                                 introns were shown to reliably reduce reporter gene expression. Incorporating S.cerevisiaeAuthor                                 introns into gene assembly strategies would be useful for tuning optimal expression ratios of
                                the different pathway enzymes, especially if promoter choices are limited due to the need for
                                  specific pathway regulation.

                                Either through gene synthesis or site-directed mutagenesis, sequences can be codon-Manuscript
                              optimized for improved translational efficiency in S.cerevisiae. Codon-optimizing two
                             genes in the carotenoid pathway (crtIand crtYB) improved beta-carotene production in yeast
                          by 200% [10]. However, as recent work by Lanza etal. has shown, genes designed by
                                   traditional algorithms do not always yield higher expression than the wild type gene [11].
                         The authors proposed a condition-specific approach to determine optimal codon usage under
                              a given growth condition instead of relying on the frequency of codon usage in the entire
                           genome. The catechol 1,2-dioxygenase gene from Acinetobacterbaylyiwas optimized forAuthor                           production at stationary phase and had 2.6-fold higher catalytic activity than the wild type
                           and 2.9-fold higher activity than a commercially optimized variant.

              Regulatory DNA sequences control the strength of gene expression

                          Each coding region must be flanked by a promoter and a terminator, which are regulatoryManuscript
                   DNA sequences that influence the frequency of gene transcription and the stability of the
                                    transcripts, respectively. Promoters, classified as constitutive or regulated, are cis-acting
                                regulatory elements upstream of a coding sequence where transcription factors bind and
                                   recruit the RNA polymerase in order to initiate transcription. The report by Sun etal.
                                 detailed the characterization of 14 constitutive promoters via expression of green fluorescent
                                 protein (GFP) under varied glucose and oxygen conditions [12]. Promoters of high and
                        medium strength were used in the refactoring of xylan degradation and zeaxanthinAuthor                            biosynthesis pathways and the resultant yeast strain produced 0.74 mg/L of zeaxanthin.

                          To avoid the generation of toxic products and metabolic stress during heterologous
                                expression, cell growth can be decoupled from the production phase using regulated
                               promoters, which are inducible or repressible under different physiological conditions. ForManuscript                             example, a modified GAL induction system, repressed by glucose and induced by galactose,
                          was used successfully in the production of artemisinic acid at 25 g/L in S.cerevisiae[3].
                            Another glucose repressible promoter, ADH2p, induces strong transcription once glucose is
                               depleted and has been shown to provide higher expression levels than the GAL promoter
                                  [13]. The ADH2 promoter has proven highly useful for the heterologous expression of
                                biosynthetic genes and recently enabled the discovery of new fungal indole diterpenes [14].
                  A library of ADH2-like promoters would prove beneficial for pathway refactoring and
                                 characterization of new biosynthetic gene clusters.Author

                                Unfortunately, yeast promoters tend to be hundreds of base pairs in length, which
                          compounds the difficulties for rapid pathway refactoring. Recent work by Redden and Alper
                              has focused on the construction of short synthetic promoters [15]. The authors combinedManuscript                           core promoter elements with upstream activation sequences to generate minimal promoters.




                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 4]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                                Page 4

                          They achieved high levels of both inducible and constitutive expression with an up to 80%
Author                           reductionThe terminatorin thesequences,size of the downstreampromoter.   of the coding region, influence the mRNA half-life.
                            Yamanishi etal. evaluated 5302 terminator regions by quantifying the level of GFP
                              expressed under the control of a strong promoter [16]. Work by Curran etal. focused on
                                 characterizing the activity of over 30 terminator regions for metabolic engineering
                                 applications in yeast [17]. Terminators were coupled to promoters with a variety of strengthsManuscript
                           and a yellow fluorescent protein was expressed and quantified with FACS. The Alper group
                                 also systematically developed short (35-70 bp) synthetic terminators and proved they
                                function as effectively as native terminators for the expression of the heterologous proteins
                               involved in the biosynthesis of itaconic acid [18].

             Episomal expression and plasmid assembly techniques

                              Refactored genes can be assembled into plasmids or integrated into the genome forAuthor                           expression in yeast. Episomal expression is an effective strategy as there are a variety of
                                    efficient methods for plasmid assembly and high copy numbers are accessible with few
                               cloning steps. During plasmid construction, the identity of the selection marker and origin of
                                  replication must be decided upon depending on the genotype of the yeast strain used and
                                desired copy number of the plasmid. Prototrophic markers and markers conferring drugManuscript
                                 resistance are commonly used selection markers [19]. However, the identity of the selection
                            marker can negatively impact the growth rates of yeast and the metabolite production levels,
                                  particularly in haploid strains [20]. Plasmid copy number is controlled by two frequently
                             used origins: low copy CEN/ARS and high copy 2 μ. Low copy plasmids have been found to
                               generate reliable expression patterns, while high copy plasmids can display more variable
                               expression [21]. The identity of the gene being expressed can also influence which origin to
                                     select. In a recent report by Trenchard and Smolke, it was found that low copy expression ofAuthor                             plant P450s yielded higher production levels of the target compound cheilanthifoline [22].
                          High copy expression of the endomembrane-localized P450s induced a stress response in the
                             endoplasmic reticulum, causing membrane proliferation, and ultimately lowered
                                  cheilanthifoline biosynthesis.Manuscript                            There have been many recent advances for the invitroand invivoassembly of DNA parts.
                           Gibson assembly is a sequence independent, one-pot method for assembling multiple
                               overlapping DNA fragments through the combined activities of an exonuclease, polymerase,
                           and ligase [23]. Golden Gate method, which is sequence dependent, utilizes type II
                                    restriction enzymes to efficiently combine modular parts in a one-pot reaction [24] and an
                               extension of this technology has recently been adapted specifically for yeast assemblies [21].
                         The methodologies based on Golden Gate do not require downstream sequencing of
                            assembled constructs as point mutations cannot arise once the individual components haveAuthor
                            been generated. The homologous recombination machinery of yeast can also be utilized for
                                the assembly of plasmids invivo, requiring only one transformation step and as few as 29
                                nucleotides of overlapping sequence between DNA fragments [25]. Yeast homologous
                              recombination has been used to refactor silent and orphan gene clusters, such as in theManuscript                           discovery of the antibiotic taromycin A from the marine actinomycete Saccharomonospora




                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 5]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                                Page 5

                                  [26], and potent indolotryptoline antiproliferative agents, lazarimides A and B, from
Author         Genomic expressionenvironmentally-derivedand gene integrationDNA [27].technologies

                                 Integration of heterologous genes has unique advantages over episomal expression,
                                  particularly for metabolic engineering applications. Genes integrated through homologous
                              recombination are stably maintained in cell populations without the need for selectionManuscript                             pressure, although simultaneous integration of a marker is necessary to select for integrants.
                                        If higher copy number is desired, multiple copies of pathway genes can be sequentially
                                 targeted to multiple locations in the genome or integrated using the repeating delta sites [28].
                             For this purpose, the expression levels of many loci have been characterized using lacZand
                                  luciferase reporters [29], [30]. In a recent report by Brown etal., the plant natural product
                                   strictosidine was detected after a rate-limiting enzyme in the pathway was integrated
Author                            multipleRecent advancementstimes into theingenomeintegrationand expressedtechnologyfromrevolvea higharoundcopy theplasmidinduction[31].of a double-
                                strand break (DSB) in the DNA to greatly improve the efficiency of integration. The homing
                             endonuclease I-SceI was used to introduce a DSB at a target locus and eight overlapping
                               fragments, seven genes and one selection marker, were efficiently integrated simultaneously
                                  [32]. Another robust method for the construction of multigene pathways is ReiterativeManuscript
                            Recombination [33]. Two endonucleases, SceI and HO, are used iteratively in conjunction
                              with recyclable markers to sequentially assembly DNA fragments into a single locus with
                              high efficiencies. Despite these elegant advances, the development of Clustered Regularly
                               Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) and CRISPR associated systems (Cas) has
                              ushered in a new era of efficient marker-free genome editing, promising greater flexibility
                           and utility than previous DSB technologies. First adapted for utilization in yeast by DiCarlo
                        etal. [34], CRISPR/Cas9 has proven to be a powerful tool for rapid pathway construction.Author                     Mans etal. demonstrated the simultaneous integration of 6 genes, composing the
                           Enterococcusfaecalispyruvate dehydrogenase complex, at a single locus combined with a
                                separate gene deletion to construct an acetyl-CoA overproducing strain [35]. The potential
                                of multigene pathway assembly using CRISPR/Cas9 was further explored in a report by
                              Jakočiūnas etal. [36]. A total of 15 DNA parts (3 expression cassettes) were integrated intoManuscript
                                 three separate loci without selection and with an efficiency of 31%. By programming
                         CRISPR/Cas9 to cut at the repeating delta sites, 18 genomic copies of a combined xylose
                                    utilization and (R,R)-2,3-butanediol production pathway were integrated in one
                               transformation step [37]. The ability to assemble gene clusters at any genomic location
                              through the combined use of DSB technologies and yeast homologous recombination will
                             prove invaluable for the continued production of natural products in yeast.
Author          Strategies to optimize production of secondary metabolites

                              Genetic refactoring plays a vital role in the initial reconstitution of heterologous biosynthetic
                              pathways. However, the power of yeast as an efficient microbial production factory can only
                            be realized after secondary metabolite production is extensively optimized. Yeast strainsManuscript                          producing low levels of natural products thus provide important platforms for exploring




                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 6]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                                Page 6

                                   strategies that may be applied to increase rates, titers, and yields. In recent years, a variety of
                                  tools have been reported which have allowed engineers to increase small molecule
                              production many fold. These approaches, shown in Fig. 3, typically involve tuningAuthor                            endogenous yeast metabolism, engineering components of the heterologous pathway, and
                            employing high throughput screening methods.

              Redirecting the endogenous yeast metabolic networkManuscript                           Natural product biosynthesis in S.cerevisiaerelies on tuning endogenous metabolism as a
                               necessary step to ensure sufficient precursor supply. Many cofactors and substrates required
                                  for the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites are shared by yeast primary metabolism,
                           which is robust and complex [38]. Furthermore, pathway intermediates can be metabolized
                                or excreted by yeast or can exert toxic effects by disrupting normal biomolecular functions.
                  A survey of successful metabolic engineering efforts indicates that developing platform
                                   strains producing high levels of precursors enhances production of complex secondary
                                 metabolites. Nielsen recently highlighted that a single platform strain can be adapted toAuthor                             produce a versatile array of different natural products [39]. Advancements in the ability to
                           modify yeast metabolism have resulted in the development of platform strains leveraged for
                              production of valuable compounds.

                  A large number of natural products including terpenes, polyketides, and sterols are derivedManuscript
                           from the primary yeast metabolite, acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-CoA plays a critical role in carbon
                                catabolism, but can also be converted into the fatty acid precursor malonyl-CoA or shuttled
                                  into the mevalonate pathway for isoprenoid production. In order to boost cytosolic acetyl-
                     CoA levels, Chen etal. employed a combined “push-pull-block” strategy to engineer the
                              pyruvate dehydrogenase bypass. Overexpressing yeast ADH2 and ALD6, involved in the
                              conversion of ethanol to acetate, as well as overexpression of an acetyl-CoA C-
                                 acetyltransferase resulted in enhanced production of the sesquiterpene α-santalene [40].Author                         Lian etal. took a different approach to construct a platform strain by deleting four genes
                               implicated in ethanol and glycerol production, thus redirecting flux towards acetyl-CoA
                                  [41]. Each of the aforementioned strategies also employed a non-feedback regulated mutant
                             acetyl-CoA synthetase from Salmonellaentericacharacterized in an earlier study [42]. An
                               impressive 37-fold increase in the acetyl-CoA/malonyl-CoA derived polyketide triacetic acidManuscript
                                lactone was obtained through a combination of computational guided knockouts and culture
                                 attenuation [43]. Optimization of yeast metabolism for production of downstream
                               isoprenoids via the mevalonate pathway has been extensively engineered to the point of
                            commercial production of artemesinin [3]. In a recent report, CRISPR/Cas9 was employed
                                  to carry out multiplexed genome editing for optimization of mevalonate levels by greater
                               than 41 fold. In addition to generating a markerless, quintuple gene knock-out in a single
                               transformation step, genome resequencing indicated that CRISPR/Cas9 endonucleaseAuthor                               activity resulted in no increase in off-target mutations [44].

                              Engineering amino acid production pathways is also of great interest for natural product
                                 biosynthesis. Amino acids can be considered value-added primary metabolites and are
                                precursors to natural products, including benzylisoquinoline alkaloids, indole alkaloids,Manuscript                               stilbenes, flavonoids, and non-ribosomal peptides. Several platform strains have been




                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 7]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                                Page 7

                                 established in recent years for enhanced production of amino acids and their derivatives.
                                Introduction of feedback insensitive alleles of genes involved in amino acid biosynthesis has
                            been employed to increase extracellular concentration of aromatic compounds 200-fold [45].Author                              This strategy was extended to the biosynthesis of p-coumaric acid, an important precursor to
                        many secondary metabolites. In conjunction with gene knockouts and expression of Escoli
                           pathway analogues, Rodriguez etal. developed a yeast strain capable of producing nearly 2
                            g/L p-coumaric acid [46]. Qin and coworkers carried out a comprehensive, modularManuscript                           engineering of yeast metabolism for high-level production of the amino acid intermediate L-
                                  ornithine. Pathway rewiring of the urea cycle and TCA cycle in combination with other
                              metabolic engineering strategies enabled a 23-fold improvement in L-ornithine titers [47].

              Engineering components of the exogenous pathway

                                 Spatial organization of pathway components has been employed to increase flux through a
                               heterologous pathway. The outcome of this system-level engineering approach is a decrease
                                  in diffusion of metabolic intermediates from pathway enzymes and an increase in fluxAuthor                              through the pathway via substrate channeling. DeLoache recently highlighted the unique
                             chemical environments of eukaryotic organelles as an emerging target for heterologous
                           pathway localization [48]. Sequestering enzymes into an area of the cell with a distinct pH,
                             redox potential, or cofactor profile allows for optimization of the reaction environment.Manuscript                            Farhi etal. employed a mitochondrial signaling peptide (COX4) in order to target plant
                               terpene biosynthesis to the yeast mitochondria. In conjunction with other efforts to enhance
                                 flux through the mevalonate pathway, subcellular localization resulted in an 8-fold increase
                                  in valencene production and a 20-fold increase in amorphadiene production [49]. Avalos et
                                    al. applied a similar strategy to explore the effects of pathway compartmentalization on the
                              production of isobutanol. Targeting the Ehrlich pathway to the mitochondria resulted in a
                       260% increase in isobutanol titers, a marked improvement over the 10% increase when
                              cytoplasmic overexpression was employed [50]. An opposite effect was reported when QinAuthor                        etal. implemented pathway re-localization as a part of their modular pathway rewiring
                                 strategy for production of the amino acid intermediate L-ornithine. When a portion of the L-
                                 ornithine biosynthetic pathway was localized to the mitochondria, titers dropped
                                    significantly, whereas re-localization of the complete pathway to the cytosol resulted inManuscript                           increased L-ornithine production [47].

                               Localizing natural product biosynthetic enzymes on engineered scaffolds has also been used
                                  to increase pathway flux. Dueber and coworkers engineered a synthetic protein scaffold in E.
                            coliby generating polymers of repeated interaction domain subunits from a mammalian
                                scaffolding protein. After tuning enzyme stoichiometry, an impressive 77-fold increase in
                             mevalonate titers was observed [51]. This system was extended to resveratrol biosynthesis in
                                yeast and resulted in a 5-fold improvement relative to a non-scaffolded control strain [52].Author                           Zalatan etal. employed endonuclease deficient Cas9 scaffolds to execute complex
                                  transcriptional programming rules and modulate flux through the branched violacein
                           pathway reconstituted in yeast [53].

                            Another strategy to increase pathway flux is to target the activity of a specific enzyme thatManuscript                          has been identified as a pathway bottleneck. Not surprisingly, enzymes that have been




                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 8]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                                Page 8

                                 evolutionarily optimized to function in the native context can show decreased activity when
                              expressed in a heterologous host. If codon-optimization and enzyme overexpression fail to
                               address bottleneck issues, protein engineering offers an attractive solution. Both rationalAuthor                                 protein design and directed evolution (discussed below in the context of Tools for high-
                              throughput screening) have proven to be successful tools for improving specific enzyme
                                      activities. In order to efficiently produce resveratrol in yeast, Zhang etal. generated a fusion
                                 protein of the last two enzymes in the resveratrol biosynthetic pathway. Expression of theManuscript                            fusion increased bioconversion of a resveratrol precursor up to 15-fold relative to
                              coexpression of the individual enzymes [54]. In an effort to recapitulate substrate channeling
                                exhibited by multidomain terpene synthases, Zhou etal. engineered two consecutive terpene
                                synthesis enzymes into a single protein fusion. When this strategy was coupled with the
                                fusion of enzymes supplying pathway precursors, the production of miltiradiene increased
                                  significantly and the accumulation of byproducts decreased [55]. Fusion of heterologous
                          enzymes with yeast enzymes has also been utilized to increase flux towards a natural
                              product of interest. Albertsen and coworkers doubled production of the sesquiterpeneAuthor                           patchoulol by fusing a yeast farnesyl diphosphate synthase with a patchoulol synthase of
                                 plant origin [56]. Chemler etal. deployed yeast homologous recombination to assemble
                              chimeric polyketide synthase (PKS) variants capable of combinatorial biosynthesis. By
                                 shuffling catalytic domains from two bacterial PKSs, novel antibiotic analogues were
                               generated [57]. Domain swapping also played a key role in a recent milestone in syntheticManuscript
                                biology: the denovoproduction of opioids in yeast. Galanie and coworkers identified an N-
                                terminal anchoring domain responsible for the incorrect sorting and processing of a C-C
                              coupling P450, and replaced it with the anchoring domain from a functionally expressed
                             P450. The resulting protein chimera demonstrated a 3-6-fold increase in substrate
                              conversion relative to the wild-type enzyme [2].

                               Indeed, cytochrome P450s are of particular interest with regards to engineering naturalAuthor                          product pathway proteins in yeast. Plant and fungal P450s are N-terminally anchored into
                                the endoplasmic reticulum, and typically co-localize with an NADPH dependent reductase
                                   partner. The remarkable chemistry performed by P450s offers great opportunities along with
                            tremendous technical hurdles for the metabolic engineer. However, the ubiquitous presence
                                of P450s in natural product pathways has resulted in the development of strategies toManuscript                               engineer P450 performance in yeast including tuning P450-reductase coupling [3] and
                               optimization of culture conditions [22]. For a more complete review of developments and
                               challenges regarding P450-mediated metabolic engineering, see [58].

              Tools for high-throughput screening

                         The effectiveness of pathway engineering can be greatly enhanced if a high-throughput
                               screening method is leveraged to identify strains with improved metabolite production.Author                          Furthermore, mutagenesis based directed evolution of enzymes and strains is only possible if
                              a robust screening method is developed which links metabolite production with a selectable
                              phenotype. Biosensors have been successfully employed as high-throughput screening tools
                              with which selection is imposed either in situ (survivability during culture) or ex situ (cell
                                 sorting using FACS). High-throughput screening thus allows for numerous iterations of theManuscript
                                design, test, build strain engineering approach to be carried out in a way that is partially or



                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 9]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                                Page 9

                                   fully automated. If a natural product is pigmented or may be coupled to production of a
                              pigment, chromophores may serve as biosensors to facilitate pathway optimization [59],
                                  [60], [61]. Bermejo and coworkers reported a more generalizable optical sensor strategy forAuthor                            measuring dynamic changes in metabolite levels based on Förster resonance energy transfer
                           (FRET). This approach takes advantage of conformational changes of a protein interaction
                          domain fused to a fluorescent protein and subsequent changes in emission spectra. Thus,
                      FRET based biosensors are applicable to any metabolite for which a substrate recognitionManuscript                          element can be identified [62]. Schlect etal. demonstrated that a multiplexed
                            complementation assay could be used to identify small-molecule dependent growth changes
                                  in reporter strains [63]. Engineered RNA-based riboswitches have been successfully
                           employed as both metabolite sensors and regulatory actuators. Upon binding to a ligand,
                               riboswitches change conformation and generate an output that typically results in controlled
                            gene expression. Michener etal. developed a riboswitch reporter to link metabolite levels
                              with GFP expression and applied this system for mutagenesis based evolution of a bacterial
                                 caffeine demethylase. Iterative screening resulted in an enzyme variant with a 33-foldAuthor                           increased activity and a 22-fold increased product selectivity [64]. Lee and coworkers
                                 integrated a survivability output into a riboswitch circuit for automatic invivoselection of
                               metabolite overproducing variants [65].
Manuscript         Future Directions

                              Despite the many advantages of yeast as a heterologous host for natural product
                                 biosynthesis, there are still challenges that must be overcome to fully realize the potential of
                                    this organism. During pathway refactoring efforts, introns must be removed from the protein
                             coding sequences because the native spliceosome of S.cerevisiaeis unable to splice
                               heterologous introns. Proteins may prove nonfunctional or exhibit low activity when
                              expressed despite prior intron removal and codon-optimization. Due to suboptimal pathway
                                 flux or insufficient precursor supply, titers of natural products may be too low forAuthor
                                 characterization or for further engineering applications. The requirement for selection
                             markers in well-established strain engineering strategies reduces the throughput of
                               multiplexed genomic modifications and pathway building. [AD1]However, an ever
                                increasing number of tools and strategies are being applied to engineer and optimize yeast toManuscript                           overcome these challenges and produce secondary metabolites of great value. Our ability to
                                successfully refactor biosynthetic pathways will continue to improve with the expansion of
                        new synthetic biology tools, development of high throughput, computationally driven
                               engineering approaches, and the discovery of new molecular biology phenomena. In the past
                                 several decades, scientists have documented the astonishing machinery perfected by Mother
                             Nature over millions of years. Finally, we are beginning to leverage this information to
                               engineer microbial production factories in order to meet the global demand for valuable
                                 natural products. Ultimately, natural product biosynthesis in S.cerevisiaehas the potential toAuthor
                               address this demand using technology that is safe, affordable, and sustainable.

          Acknowledgments

                              Due to space constraint, we apologize for the omission of other relevant reports. ABD is supported by a Chemistry-Manuscript
                                    Biology Interface Training Grant (USPHS National Research Service Award 5 T32 GM008496) and JMB is



                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 10]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                               Page 10


                                      supported by the NIH T32 Biotechnology Training Grant (2 T32 GM067555). Related research in our lab is
                                      supported by NIH 1U01GM110706-01.
Author         References and Recommended Reading
                              Papers of particular interest, published within the period of the review, have been highlighted
                                    as:

                            •Of special interestManuscript
                              ••Of outstanding interest

                                       1. Siddiqui MS, Thodey K, Trenchard I, Smolke CD. Advancing secondary metabolite biosynthesis in
                                      yeast with synthetic biology tools. FEMS Yeast Res. 2012; 12:144–170. [PubMed: 22136110]
                                        2••. Galanie S, Thodey K, Trenchard IJ, Filsinger Interrante M, Smolke CD. Complete biosynthesis of
                                        opioids in yeast. Science. 2015; 349:1095–1100. A number of engineering strategies enabled de
                             novobiosynthesis of the opiates thebaine at 6.4 μg/L and hydrocodone at 0.3 μg/L Heterologous
                                       production relied on metabolic engineering for precursor supply, elucidation and engineering of
                                    key enzymatic steps, along with expression of more than 20 enzymes of plant, mammal, andAuthor                                   microbial origin. [PubMed: 26272907]
                                       3. Paddon CJ, Westfall PJ, Pitera DJ, Benjamin K, Fisher K, McPhee D, Leavell MD, Tai A, Main A,
                             Eng D, et al. High-level semi-synthetic production of the potent antimalarial artemisinin. Nature.
                                   2013; 496:528–532. [PubMed: 23575629]
                                       4. Temme K, Zhao D, Voigt CA. Refactoring the nitrogen fixation gene cluster from Klebsiella
                                    oxytoca. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:7085–7090. [PubMed: 22509035]Manuscript
                                       5. Zafrir Z, Tuller T. Nucleotide sequence composition adjacent to intronic splice sites improves
                                        splicing efficiency via its effect on pre-mRNA local folding in fungi. RNA. 2015; 21:1704–1718.
                                [PubMed: 26246046]
                                       6. Nicholson MJ, Eaton CJ, Starkel C, Tapper BA, Cox MP, Scott B. Molecular Cloning and
                                     Functional Analysis of Gene Clusters for the Biosynthesis of Indole-Diterpenes in Penicillium
                                crustosumand P.janthinellum. Toxins. 2015; 7:2701–2722. [PubMed: 26213965]
                                       7. Cacho RA, Tang Y, Chooi YH. Next-generation sequencing approach for connecting secondary
                                      metabolites to biosynthetic gene clusters in fungi. Front Microbiol. 2015; 5:774. [PubMed:
                                 25642215]Author
                                       8. Kakule TB, Jadulco RC, Koch M, Janso JE, Barrows LR, Schmidt EW. Native Promoter Strategy for
                                   High-Yielding Synthesis and Engineering of Fungal Secondary Metabolites. ACS Synth Biol. 2015;
                                   4:625–633. [PubMed: 25226362]
                                       9. Yofe I, Zafrir Z, Blau R, Schuldiner M, Tuller T, Shapiro E, Ben-Yehezkel T. Accurate, Model-
                                Based Tuning of Synthetic Gene Expression Using Introns in S.cerevisiae. PLoS Genet. 2014; 10Manuscript                                   10. Li Q, Sun ZQ, Li J, Zhang YS. Enhancing beta-carotene production in Saccharomycescerevisiae
                                 by metabolic engineering. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2013; 345:94–101. [PubMed: 23718229]
                                   11. Lanza AM, Curran KA, Rey LG, Alper HS. A condition-specific codon optimization approach for
                                  improved heterologous gene expression in Saccharomycescerevisiae. BMC Syst Biol. 2014; 8
                                   12. Sun J, Shao ZY, Zhao H, Nair N, Wen F, Xu JH, Zhao HM. Cloning and characterization of a panel
                                       of constitutive promoters for applications in pathway engineering in Saccharomycescerevisiae.
                                     Biotechnol Bioeng. 2012; 109:2082–2092. [PubMed: 22383307]
                                   13. Shen MW, Fang F, Sandmeyer S, Da Silva NA. Development and characterization of a vector set
                                     with regulated promoters for systematic metabolic engineering in Saccharomycescerevisiae.Author                                    Yeast. 2012; 29:495–503. [PubMed: 23166051]
                                     14•. Tang MC, Lin HC, Li DH, Zou Y, Li J, Xu W, Cacho RA, Hillenmeyer ME, Garg NK, Tang Y.
                                     Discovery of Unclustered Fungal Indole Diterpene Biosynthetic Pathways through Combinatorial
                                   Pathway Reassembly in Engineered Yeast. J Am Chem Soc. 2015; 137:13724–13727. A
                                         phylogenetically guided enzyme mining strategy was deployed to identify unclustered indole
                                         diterpene cyclases from different fungal hosts. Using S.cerevisiaeas a heterologous host, theManuscript
                                         biosynthetic pathways were assembled and expressed, allowing the identification of new cyclases



                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 11]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                               Page 11

                                       involved in the cyclization of aflavinine and anominine. This report validates that refactored
                                    pathways expressed in yeast can generate products in line with those generated by the native
                                        producer. [PubMed: 26469304]
                                      15••. Redden H, Alper HS. The development and characterization of synthetic minimal yeastAuthor
                                       promoters. Nature Communications. 2015; 6:7810. Synthetic yeast promoters are constructed
                                   from minimal core elements linked to upstream activating sequences that confer strong
                                            constitutive and regulated behavior. A workflow for the generation of the promoters is described,
                                          consisting of library-based synthesis of promoter components and application of various
                                        robustness tests to determine their capabilities.Manuscript                               16. Yamanishi M, Ito Y, Kintaka R, Imamura C, Katahira S, Ikeuchi A, Moriya H, Matsuyama T. A
                                 genome-wide activity assessment of terminator regions in Saccharomycescerevisiaeprovides a
                                    “terminatome” toolbox. ACS Synth Biol. 2013; 2:337–347. [PubMed: 23654277]
                                   17. Curran KA, Karim AS, Gupta A, Alper HS. Use of expression-enhancing terminators in
                                Saccharomycescerevisiaeto increase mRNA half-life and improve gene expression control for
                                     metabolic engineering applications. Metab Eng. 2013; 19:88–97. [PubMed: 23856240]
                                     18•. Curran KA, Morse NJ, Markham KA, Wagman AM, Gupta A, Alper HS. Short Synthetic
                                       Terminators for Improved Heterologous Gene Expression in Yeast. ACS Synthetic Biology. 2015;
                                     4:824–832. In this study, synthetic terminators are added to the list of characterized parts for gene
                                        expression in yeast. A panel of terminators, ranging from 35-70 bp, are generated and the highestAuthor
                                     performing terminator yielded 3.7-fold more fluorescent protein output and 4.4-fold increase in
                                             transcript level compared to a commonly used natural terminator. With their short length, they
                                    can be easily synthesized and cloned. [PubMed: 25686303]
                                   19. Siewers V. An Overview on Selection Marker Genes for Transformation of Saccharomyces
                                         cerevisiae. Methods Mol Biol. 2014; 1152:3–15. [PubMed: 24744024]Manuscript                                   20. Karim AS, Curran KA, Alper HS. Characterization of plasmid burden and copy number in
                                Saccharomycescerevisiaefor optimization of metabolic engineering applications. FEMS Yeast
                                     Res. 2013; 13:107–116. [PubMed: 23107142]
                                     21•. Lee ME, DeLoache WC, Cervantes B, Dueber JE. A Highly Characterized Yeast Toolkit for
                                     Modular, Multipart Assembly. ACS Synth Biol. 2015; 4:975–986. In this report, a methodology
                                           for engineering yeast and a standard toolkit is described. From a set of characterized regulatory
                                              parts, genes are systematically assembled using an adapted Golden Gate technology or yeast
                                       recombination. Genome-editing tools that utilize double-strand break technology, such as
                                  CRISPR/Cas9, are detailed for the efficient modification of yeast chromosomes. [PubMed:Author                               25871405]
                                     22•. Trenchard IJ, Smolke CD. Engineering strategies for the fermentative production of plant
                                          alkaloids in yeast. Metab Eng. 2015; 30:96–104. In this report, the authors describe the
                                        expression of the sanguinarine branch of the benzylisoquinoline alkaloid pathway in S.
                                           cerevisiae, and production of the compounds cheilanthifoline, stylopine, cis-N-methylstylopine,
                                         protopine, and sanguinarine. They also detail the genetic and culture strategies used to optimizeManuscript                                         the functional expression of multiple plant cytochrome P450s in yeast. [PubMed: 25981946]
                                   23. Gibson DG, Young L, Chuang RY, Venter JC, Hutchison CA, Smith HO. Enzymatic assembly of
                       DNA molecules up to several hundred kilobases. Nature Methods. 2009; 6:343–345. [PubMed:
                                  19363495]
                                   24. Engler C, Kandzia R, Marillonnet S. A one pot, one step, precision cloning method with high
                                     throughput capability. PLoS ONE. 2008; 3:e3647. [PubMed: 18985154]
                                   25. Joska TM, Mashruwala A, Boyd JM, Belden WJ. A universal cloning method based on yeast
                                 homologous recombination that is simple, efficient, and versatile. J Microbiol Methods. 2014;
                                    100:46–51. [PubMed: 24418681]Author                                     26•. Yamanaka K, Reynolds KA, Kersten RD, Ryan KS, Gonzalez DJ, Nizet V, Dorrestein PC, Moore
                                  BS. Direct cloning and refactoring of a silent lipopeptide biosynthetic gene cluster yields the
                                             antibiotic taromycin A. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:1957–1962. The authors develop
                                        yeast-based Transformation-Associated Recombination (TAR) cloning for the capture,
                                            refactoring, and expression of a 67-kb nonribosomal peptide synthetase biosynthetic gene clusterManuscript                               from a marine actinomycete. The gene cluster was activated in Streptomycescoelicolorand
                                    produced the dichlorinated lipopeptide antibiotic taromycin A. [PubMed: 24449899]



                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 12]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                               Page 12

                                     27•. Montiel D, Kang HS, Chang FY, Charlop-Powers Z, Brady SF. Yeast homologous recombination-
                                     based promoter engineering for the activation of silent natural product biosynthetic gene clusters.
                                     Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015; 112:8953–8958. An environmentally-derived gene cluster was
                                          refactored using yeast homologous recombination for heterologous expression in Streptomyces.Author                                 The use of characterized regulatory parts to drive gene expression allowed the discovery of potent
                                          indolotryptoline antiproliferative agents. This report details a generic gene cluster activation
                                           strategy for interrogating sequenced gene clusters. [PubMed: 26150486]
                                   28. Shao ZY, Zhao H, Zhao HM. DNA assembler, an in vivo genetic method for rapid construction of
                                     biochemical pathways. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37Manuscript                               29. Flagfeldt DB, Siewers V, Huang L, Nielsen J. Characterization of chromosomal integration sites
                                          for heterologous gene expression in Saccharomycescerevisiae. Yeast. 2009; 26:545–551.
                                 [PubMed: 19681174]
                                   30. Fang F, Salmon K, Shen MW, Aeling KA, Ito E, Irwin B, Tran UP, Hatfield GW, Da Silva NA,
                                 Sandmeyer S. A vector set for systematic metabolic engineering in Saccharomycescerevisiae.
                                        Yeast. 2011; 28:123–136. [PubMed: 20936606]
                                   31. Brown S, Clastre M, Courdavault V, O'Connor SE. De novo production of the plant-derived
                                         alkaloid strictosidine in yeast. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015; 112:3205–3210. The authors report
                                        the first case of the de novo biosynthesis of a plant-derived alkaloid, strictosidine, in S.cerevisiae.
                                     Fourteen known monoterpene indole alkaloid pathway genes were integrated into the yeastAuthor
                               genome and secondary metabolism was enhanced by the integration of an additional seven genes
                                  and deletion of three endogenous yeast genes. This platform strain provides insights into the
                                       bottlenecks associated with monoterpene indole alkaloid biosynthesis in yeast. [PubMed:
                                  25675512]
                                   32. Kuijpers NGA, Chroumpi S, Vos T, Solis-Escalante D, Bosman L, Pronk JT, Daran JM, Daran-Manuscript                               Lapujade P. One-step assembly and targeted integration of multigene constructs assisted by the I-
                                     SceI meganuclease in Saccharomycescerevisiae. FEMS Yeast Res. 2013; 13:769–781. [PubMed:
                                  24028550]
                                   33. Wingler LM, Cornish VW. Reiterative Recombination for the in vivo assembly of libraries of
                                     multigene pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011; 108:15135–15140. [PubMed: 21876185]
                                   34. DiCarlo JE, Norville JE, Mali P, Rios X, Aach J, Church GM. Genome engineering in
                                Saccharomycescerevisiaeusing CRISPR-Cas systems. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41:4336–4343.
                                 [PubMed: 23460208]
                                   35. Mans R, van Rossum HM, Wijsman M, Backx A, Kuijpers NG, van den Broek M, Daran-LapujadeAuthor                                          P, Pronk JT, van Maris AJ, Daran JM. CRISPR/Cas9: a molecular Swiss army knife for
                                     simultaneous introduction of multiple genetic modifications in Saccharomycescerevisiae. FEMS
                                     Yeast Res. 2015; 15
                                     36•. Jakočiūnas T, Rajkumar AS, Zhang J, Arsovska D, Rodriguez A, Jendresen CB, Skjødt ML,
                                       Nielsen AT, Borodina I, Jensen MK, et al. CasEMBLR: Cas9-Facilitated Multiloci Genomic
                                          Integration of in Vivo Assembled DNA Parts in Saccharomycescerevisiae. ACS Synth Biol.Manuscript
                                     2015; 4:1226–1234. The authors report using CRISPR/Cas9 for the simultaneous assembly and
                                           integration of multiple DNA parts at up to three genomic loci without any selection markers. The
                                        carotenoid pathway is assembled in yeast from 15 individual DNA fragments targeted for
                                           integration across three loci. A tyrosine production strain is generated by integrating 10 DNA
                                           parts across two loci, simultaneously deleting two native yeast genes. [PubMed: 25781611]
                                   37. Shi S, Liang Y, Zhang MM, Ang EL, Zhao H. A highly efficient single-step, markerless strategy
                                          for multi-copy chromosomal integration of large biochemical pathways in Saccharomyces
                                         cerevisiae. Metab Eng. 2015; 33:19–27. [PubMed: 26546089]
                                   38. Herrgård MJ, Swainston N, Dobson P, Dunn WB, Arga KY, Arvas M, Bluthgen N, Borger S,Author                                Costenoble R, Heinemann M, et al. A consensus yeast metabolic network reconstruction obtained
                                  from a community approach to systems biology. Nat Biotechnol. 2008; 26:1155–1160. [PubMed:
                                  18846089]
                                   39. Nielsen J. Yeast cell factories on the horizon. Science. 2015; 349:1050–1051. [PubMed: 26339012]
                                   40. Chen Y, Daviet L, Schalk M, Siewers V, Nielsen J. Establishing a platform cell factory throughManuscript                                  engineering of yeast acetyl-CoA metabolism. Metab Eng. 2013; 15:48–54. [PubMed: 23164578]




                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 13]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                               Page 13

                                   41. Lian JZ, Si T, Nair NU, Zhao HM. Design and construction of acetyl-CoA overproducing
                                Saccharomycescerevisiaestrains. Metab Eng. 2014; 24:139–149. [PubMed: 24853351]
                                   42. Shiba Y, Paradise EM, Kirby J, Ro DK, Keasing JD. Engineering of the pyruvate dehydrogenase
                                    bypass in Saccharomycescerevisiaefor high-level production of isoprenoids. Metab Eng. 2007;Author
                                    9:160–168. [PubMed: 17196416]
                                   43. Cardenas J, Da Silva NA. Metabolic engineering of Saccharomycescerevisiaefor the production of
                                              triacetic acid lactone. Metab Eng. 2014; 25:194–203. [PubMed: 25084369]
                                      44••. Jakočiūnas T, Bonde I, Herrgård M, Harrison SJ, Kristensen M, Pedersen LE, Jensen MK,
                                      Keasling JD. Multiplex metabolic pathway engineering using CRISPR/Cas9 in SaccharomycesManuscript                                      cerevisiae. Metab Eng. 2015; 28:213–222. The authors report efficient, markerless genome
                                           editing using CRISPR/Cas9 to generate a strain exhibiting more than 40-fold improvement in
                                     mevalonate titers. Multiplexed genomic deletion was described, including an unprecedented
                                        quintuple gene knockout with 100% efficiency. Furthermore, using computational prediction of
                                     unique gRNAs, no off-target Cas9 endonuclease effects were observed. [PubMed: 25638686]
                                   45. Luttik MAH, Vuralhan Z, Suir E, Braus GH, Pronk JT, Daran JM. Alleviation of feedback
                                          inhibition in Saccharomycescerevisiaearomatic amino acid biosynthesis: Quantification of
                                     metabolic impact. Metab Eng. 2008; 10:141–153. [PubMed: 18372204]
                                   46. Rodriguez A, Kildegaard KR, Li MJ, Borodina I, Nielsen J. Establishment of a yeast platformAuthor                                       strain for production of p-coumaric acid through metabolic engineering of aromatic amino acid
                                         biosynthesis. Metab Eng. 2015; 31:181–188. [PubMed: 26292030]
                                      47••. Qin J, Zhou YJ, Krivoruchko A, Huang M, Liu L, Khoomrung S, Siewers V, Jiang B, Nielsen J.
                                  Modular pathway rewiring of Saccharomycescerevisiaeenables high-level production of l-
                                            ornithine. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:8224. A comprehensive optimization of yeast metabolism for
                                       production of the natural product precursor l-ornithine enabled titers of over 5 g/L. l-ornithineManuscript                                       production was cast into three modules, which could be individually optimized. Successful
                                       engineering strategies included extensive rewiring of both the urea cycle and citric acid cycle,
                                           culture attenuation, and pathway translocation. [PubMed: 26345617]
                                   48. DeLoache WC, Dueber JE. Compartmentalizing metabolic pathways in organelles. Nat Biotechnol.
                                    2013; 31:320–321. [PubMed: 23563429]
                                   49. Farhi M, Marhevka E, Masci T, Marcos E, Eyal Y, Ovadis M, Abeliovich H, Vainstein A.
                                    Harnessing yeast subcellular compartments for the production of plant terpenoids. Metab Eng.
                                    2011; 13:474–481. [PubMed: 21601648]
                                   50. Avalos JL, Fink GR, Stephanopoulos G. Compartmentalization of metabolic pathways in yeastAuthor                                 mitochondria improves the production of branched-chain alcohols. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:335–
                                     341. [PubMed: 23417095]
                                   51. Dueber JE, Wu GC, Malmirchegini GR, Moon TS, Petzold CJ, Ullal AV, Prather KLJ, Keasling
                                    JD. Synthetic protein scaffolds provide modular control over metabolic flux. Nat Biotechnol.
                                    2009; 27:753–759. [PubMed: 19648908]Manuscript                               52. Wang YC, Yu O. Synthetic scaffolds increased resveratrol biosynthesis in engineered yeast cells. J
                                       Biotechnol. 2012; 157:258–260. [PubMed: 22100267]
                                     53•. Zalatan JG, Lee ME, Almeida R, Gilbert LA, Whitehead EH, La Russa M, Tsai JC, Weissman JS,
                                  Dueber JE, Qi LS, et al. Engineering Complex Synthetic Transcriptional Programs with CRISPR
                        RNA Scaffolds. Cell. 2015; 160:339–350. The authors recruited an endonuclease deficient Cas9
                                           to activate, repress, and tune expression of a branched pathway refactored from
                                 Chromobacteriumviolaceum. By placing the deactivated Cas9 under inducible expression, the
                                  Cas9 functioned as a master regulatory control point. Using different scaffold RNAs to modulate
                                    gene expression, complex programming rules were employed to reroute precursor flux to four
                                            different output states. [PubMed: 25533786]Author
                                   54. Zhang YS, Li SZ, Li J, Pan XQ, Cahoon RE, Jaworski JG, Wang XM, Jez JM, Chen F, Yu O.
                                  Using unnatural protein fusions to engineer resveratrol biosynthesis in yeast and mammalian cells.
                                          J Am Chem Soc. 2006; 128:13030–13031. [PubMed: 17017764]
                                   55. Zhou YJ, Gao W, Rong Q, Jin G, Chu H, Liu W, Yang W, Zhu Z, Li G, Zhu G, et al. Modular
                                  pathway engineering of diterpenoid synthases and the mevalonic acid pathway for miltiradieneManuscript                                   production. J Am Chem Soc. 2012; 134:3234–3241. [PubMed: 22280121]




                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 14]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                               Page 14

                                   56. Albertsen L, Chen Y, Bach LS, Rattleff S, Maury J, Brix S, Nielsen J, Mortensen UH. Diversion of
                                    Flux toward Sesquiterpene Production in Saccharomycescerevisiaeby Fusion of Host and
                                    Heterologous Enzymes. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2011; 77:1033–1040. [PubMed: 21148687]
                                   57. Chemler JA, Tripathi A, Hansen DA, O'Neil-Johnson M, Williams RB, Starks C, Park SR,Author
                                Sherman DH. Evolution of Efficient Modular Polyketide Synthases by Homologous
                                    Recombination. J Am Chem Soc. 2015; 137:10603–10609. [PubMed: 26230368]
                                   58. Renault H, Bassard JE, Hamberger B, Werck-Reichhart D. Cytochrome P450-mediated metabolic
                                       engineering: current progress and future challenges. Curr Opin Plant Biol. 2014; 19:27–34.
                                 [PubMed: 24709279]Manuscript                                59•. DeLoache WC, Russ ZN, Narcross L, Gonzales AM, Martin VJJ, Dueber JE. An enzyme-coupled
                                        biosensor enables (S)-reticuline production in yeast from glucose. Nat Chem Biol. 2015; 11:465–
                                       471. The authors describe a biosensor which enabled the identification and evolution of a
                                          tyrosine hydrolase, a rate limiting enzyme in benzylisoquinoline alkaloids production. The sensor
                                       involved a plant-derived oxygenase capable of converting the tyrosine hydrolase product, l-3,4-
                                       dihydroxyphenylalanine, to a highly fluorescent pigment. After PCR mutagenesis, a variant with
                                          2.8-fold increase in yields was employed for production of (S)-reticuline from glucose. [PubMed:
                                   25984720]
                                   60. Furubayashi M, Li L, Katabami A, Saito K, Umeno D. Directed evolution of squalene synthase for
                                    dehydrosqualene biosynthesis. FEBS Lett. 2014; 588:3375–3381. [PubMed: 25093296]Author
                                   61. Tang SY, Qian S, Akinterinwa O, Frei CS, Gredell JA, Cirino PC. Screening for Enhanced
                                          Triacetic Acid Lactone Production by Recombinant EscherichiacoliExpressing a Designed
                                          Triacetic Acid Lactone Reporter. J Am Chem Soc. 2013; 135:10099–10103. [PubMed: 23786422]
                                   62. Bermejo C, Haerizadeh F, Takanaga H, Chermak D, Frommer WB. Optical sensors for measuring
                                 dynamic changes of cytosolic metabolite levels in yeast. Nat Protoc. 2011; 6:1806–1817.Manuscript                                 [PubMed: 22036883]
                                   63. Schlecht U, Miranda M, Suresh S, Davis RW, St Onge RP. Multiplex assay for condition-
                                    dependent changes in protein-protein interactions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:9213–
                                    9218. [PubMed: 22615397]
                                   64. Michener JK, Smolke CD. High-throughput enzyme evolution in Saccharomycescerevisiaeusing a
                                         synthetic RNA switch. Metab Eng. 2012; 14:306–316. [PubMed: 22554528]
                                   65. Lee SW, Oh MK. A synthetic suicide riboswitch for the high-throughput screening of metabolite
                                      production in Saccharomycescerevisiae. Metab Eng. 2015; 28:143–150. [PubMed: 25596509]
Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript




                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 15]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                               Page 15

                                                           Highlights

                     New tools allow rapid refactoring and assembly of gene clusters for optimized expressionAuthor                              in yeast

                   DNA double-strand break technologies enable efficient integration of biosynthetic
                            pathways

                             Rewiring of yeast metabolic network generates versatile platform strainsManuscript
                           Novel strategies facilitated by synthetic biology increase natural product titers


Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript




                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 16]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                               Page 16

Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript




                               Figure 1.
                      S.cerevisiaehas been engineered for production of a wide array of natural products.
Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript




                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 17]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                               Page 17

Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript





                               Figure 2.
                                  (a) Overview of the process and tools used in refactoring biosynthetic gene clusters for
                               heterologous expression in yeast. Introns are removed from eukaryotic genomic DNAAuthor                           sequences, codons can be optimized for improved translational efficiency in yeast, and
                             promoters and terminators are required for tuning heterologous expression. (b) (Left) In
                             vitroand invivoDNA Assembly of plasmids for episomal expression. (Right) Multigene
                                  integration of refactored pathway genes is facilitated by DNA double-strand break
                               technology. (c) Expression of the refactored biosynthetic pathway in a pre-engineeredManuscript
                               platform strain for detection and characterization of natural products.


Author
Manuscript




                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.


[PDF physical page 18]
                   Billingsley et al.                                                                                               Page 18

Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript





                               Figure 3.
                      An expanding engineering toolkit for natural product biosynthesis in S.cerevisiae.
Author
Manuscript


Author
Manuscript




                              CurrOpinBiotechnol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 01.