
[PDF physical page 1]
      SEE CORRECTION FOR THIS ARTICLE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PLUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PNAS
   Gene cluster conservation provides insight into
    cercosporin biosynthesis and extends production
    to the genus Colletotrichum

       Ronnie de Jongea,b,c,d,1,2, Malaika K. Eberte,f,g,1, Callie R. Huitt-Roehlh,1, Paramita Palh, Jeffrey C. Suttlee,
       Rebecca E. Spannere,f, Jonathan D. Neubauere, Wayne M. Jurick IIi, Karina A. Stotte,f, Gary A. Secorf,
        Bart P. H. J. Thommag, Yves Van de Peerb,c,d,j, Craig A. Townsendh,2, and Melvin D. Boltone,f,2

          aPlant-Microbe Interactions, Department of Biology, Science4Life, Utrecht University, 3584 CH, Utrecht, The Netherlands; bDepartment of Plant
         Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, B-9052, Ghent, Belgium; cVIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium; dBioinformatics
           Institute Ghent, Ghent University, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium; eRed River Valley Agricultural Research Center, US Department of Agriculture, Fargo, ND 58102;
         fDepartment of Plant Pathology, North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND 58108; gLaboratory of Phytopathology, Wageningen University, 6708 PB
         Wageningen, The Netherlands; hDepartment of Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218; iFood Quality Laboratory, US Department of
           Agriculture, Beltsville, MD 20705; and jDepartment of Genetics, Genomics Research Institute, University of Pretoria, 0028 Pretoria, South Africa

          Edited by Paul Schulze-Lefert, Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, Cologne, Germany, and approved May 4, 2018 (received for review July
           18, 2017)

         Species in the genus Cercospora cause economically devastating dis-   Indeed, cercosporin is nearly universally toxic to a wide array of
         eases in sugar beet, maize, rice, soy bean, and other major food   organisms, including bacteria, mammals, plants, and most fungal
          crops. Here, we sequenced the genome of the sugar beet pathogen    species, with the key exception of cercosporin-producing fungi,
         Cercospora beticola and found it encodes 63 putative secondary me-   which exhibit cercosporin autoresistance. To date, cercosporin
          tabolite gene clusters, including the cercosporin toxin biosynthesis   has been reported to be produced only by Cercospora spp., with
         (CTB) cluster. We show that the CTB gene cluster has experienced   the single exception of the brassica pathogen Pseudocercosporella
         multiple duplications and horizontal transfers across a spectrum of    capsellae (15). However, Pseudocercosporella and Cercospora are
         plant pathogenic fungi, including the wide-host range Colletotri-                                                                            phylogenetically closely related, residing in a large clade within
       chum genus as well as the rice pathogen Magnaporthe oryzae. Al-                                                                    Mycosphaerellaceae (16).
        though cercosporin biosynthesis has been thought to rely on an                                                                         In contrast to the large body of information on cercosporin
         eight-gene CTB cluster, our phylogenomic analysis revealed gene
                                                                           biology spanning several decades (17, 18), the cercosporin toxin
          collinearity adjacent to the established cluster in all CTB cluster-
         harboring species. We demonstrate that the CTB cluster is larger than
                                                                        Significance211.64.141.217.      previously recognized and includes cercosporin facilitator protein,
         previously shown to be involved with cercosporin autoresistance,
       and four additional genes required for cercosporin biosynthesis, in-     Species in the fungal genus Cercospora cause diseases in manyaddress      cluding the final pathway enzymes that install the unusual cerco-     important crops worldwide. Their success as pathogens  is
IP      sporin methylenedioxy bridge. Lastly, we demonstrate production     largely due to the secretion of cercosporin during infection. We
from      of cercosporin by Colletotrichum fioriniae, the first known cerco-     report that the cercosporin toxin biosynthesis (CTB) gene         sporin producer within this agriculturally important genus. Thus,      cluster is ancient and was horizontally transferred to diverse
        our results provide insight into the intricate evolution and biology     fungal plant pathogens. Because our analyses revealed genes2024
8,      of a toxin critical to agriculture and broaden the production of cer-     adjacent to the established CTB cluster with similar evolution-         cosporin to another fungal genus containing many plant pathogens     ary trajectories, we evaluated their role in Cercospora beticola                                       SCIENCES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AGRICULTURAL         of important crops worldwide.                                       to show that four are necessary for cercosporin biosynthesis.
                                                                                        Lastly, we confirmed that the apple pathogen ColletotrichumDecember          natural product | perylenequinone | secondary metabolism |                    fioriniae produces cercosporin, the first case outside the family
on          cercosporin | Cercospora                                              Mycosphaerellaceae. Other Colletotrichum plant pathogens
                                                                                also harbor the CTB cluster, which points to a wider role that
                                                                                        this toxin may play in virulence.
          mong the most speciose genera in  all of Fungi are theUniversity          Cercospora (1). First described in 1863 (2), the genus has  A                                                                         Author contributions: R.d.J., C.R.H.-R., C.A.T., and M.D.B. designed research; R.d.J., M.K.E.,
Ocean      sustainedagent of leafa longspothistory,diseaseslargelyin a widedue torangenotorietyof plants,as theincludingcausal     C.R.H.-R.,Y.V.d.P., C.A.T.,P.P., J.C.S.,and M.D.B.R.E.S., J.D.N.,contributedW.M.J.,newandreagents/analyticK.A.S. performedtools;research;R.d.J., G.A.S.,M.K.E.,B.P.H.J.T.,C.R.H.-R.,

                                                                                          wrote the paper.China      agriculturallymaize, and riceimportantthat togethercropsaccountsuch foras hundredssugar  beet,of millionssoybean,of      P.P., J.C.S., C.A.T., and M.D.B. analyzed data; and R.d.J., M.K.E., C.R.H.-R., C.A.T., and M.D.B.
by      dollars in lost revenue annually to growers worldwide (3–8).    The authors declare no conflict of interest.
        Although Cercospora spp. share several characteristics associated     This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
        with pathogenicity, such as penetration through natural openings     This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
       and extracellular growth during the biotrophic stage of infection,     NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND).
       most rely on the production of the secondary metabolite (SM)    Data deposition: The sequences reported in this paper have been deposited in the Na-
        cercosporin (1) to facilitate infection (9, 10). Studies spanning     tional Center for Biotechnology Information, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/
                                                                                      PRJNA270309 (BioProject ID: PRJNA270309). Custom code and auxillary data are available
         nearly 60 y have made cercosporin a model perylenequinone    through Zenodo (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1156551) and Figshare (http://doi.org/
         (11), a class of SMs characterized by a core pentacyclic conju-     10.6084/m9.figshare.4056522), respectively.https://www.pnas.org
        gated chromophore that gives rise to  its photoactivity. When      1R.d.J., M.K.E., and C.R.H.-R. contributed equally to this work.
from     exposed to ambient light, cercosporin is a potent producer of    2To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: r.dejonge@uu.nl, ctownsend@jhu.
         reactive oxygen species in the presence of oxygen (12), with a     edu, or melvin.bolton@ars.usda.gov.
       quantum efficiency of >80% (13). This small molecule is lipo-     This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
          philic and can readily penetrate plant leaves, leading to in-    1073/pnas.1712798115/-/DCSupplemental.
         discriminate cellular damage within minutes of exposure (14).     Published online May 29, 2018.Downloaded


          www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1712798115                                                        PNAS   |  vol. 115   |  no. 24   |  E5459–E5466


[PDF physical page 2]
          biosynthesis (CTB) gene cluster was only recently resolved in   Repeated Duplication and Lateral Transfer of the Cercosporin Biosynthetic
         Cercospora nicotianae (19). The keystone enzyme for cercosporin    Cluster. To study the evolutionary relationships of C. beticola
          biosynthesis, CTB1, bears  all the hallmarks of an  iterative,   PKSs, we conducted large-scale phylogenomic analyses that in-
         nonreducing polyketide synthase (PKS) (20). Using CTB1 as a   cluded various previously characterized PKSs from selected
          point of reference, the complete C. nicotianae CTB gene cluster    species (27). Because resolving orthologous relationships among
        was determined to consist of eight contiguous genes, of which six   PKSs can predict the type of SM that will be synthesized, we first
         are believed to be responsible for cercosporin assembly (CTB1,    built a phylogenetic tree of the conserved core β-ketoacyl syn-
           2, 3, 5, 6, and 7) (19, 21). The zinc finger transcription factor   thase domains of each PKS that resulted in separating PKS en-
       CTB8 coregulates expression of the cluster (19), while the major   zymes into four major groups (SI Appendix, Fig. S2A). Among
           facilitator superfamily transporter CTB4 exports the final me-   the eight C. beticola nonreducing PKSs, phylogenetic analysis
           tabolite (22). Downstream of the CTB cluster are two ORFs   revealed significant similarity among CbCTB1, CBET3_10910-RA,
         encoding truncated transcription factors, while loci designated as   and CBET3_11350-RA, which cluster at the base of the cerco-
       ORF9 and ORF10 upstream of the CTB cluster are not regulated   sporin clade (SI Appendix, Fig. S2B). Interestingly, genes flanking
         by light and are not believed to encode proteins with metabolic   CBET3_10910-RA, but not CBET3_11350-RA, were also strikingly
          functions (19). Consequently, the clustering of eight genes with    similar to CbCTB cluster genes (Fig. 1). Consequently, we hy-
         demonstrated coregulation by light that are flanked by ORFs   pothesized that the CBET3_10910 SM cluster is the result of a
         with no apparent role in cercosporin biosynthesis has suggested  CTB  cluster  duplication. Since  duplicated SM gene  clusters
          that cercosporin production relies on the eight-gene CTB cluster   appeared to be relatively rare in fungi (28), we investigated the
           (19). In this study, we used an evolutionary comparative geno-    origin and specificity of the CTB cluster and the putative dupli-
         mics approach to show that the CTB gene cluster underwent    cation by searching for CbCTB1 homologs against a selected set
          multiple duplication events and was transferred horizontally   of 48 published Ascomycetes proteomes (SI Appendix, Table S3)
          across large taxonomic distances. Since these horizontal transfer   representing a diverse group of fungal orders. We identified
          events included genes adjacent to the canonical eight-gene CTB  CbCTB1 orthologs in the Cercospora spp. C. berteroae and
           cluster, we used reverse genetics to show that the CTB cluster   C. canescens and confirmed its presence in Cladosporium fulvum
          includes additional genes in Cercospora beticola, including one    (27) and Parastagonospora nodorum (29). Surprisingly, seven ad-
         gene that was previously shown to be involved with cercosporin    ditional orthologs were identified in Sordariomycetes species
          autoresistance (23) and four previously unrecognized genes in-    (Colletotrichum orbiculare, Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, C. fioriniae,
         volved with biosynthesis. The CTB cluster was found in several                                                                         Colletotrichum graminicola, Colletotrichum higginsianum, and
          Colletotrichum spp., and we confirmed that the apple pathogen                                                                Magnaporthe oryzae), as well as one within Leotiomycetes
          Colletotrichum fioriniae can also produce cercosporin. As  all                                                                                        (Sclerotinia sclerotiorum) (SI Appendix, Fig. S3A), representing di-
           earlier understanding of cercosporin biosynthesis has been un-                                                                               verse taxa harboring CTB1. Analysis of sequence identity showed
           wittingly limited by a truncated set of genes in Cercospora spp.,                                                                                  that intraspecies (CbCTB1 to CBET3_10910-RA) sequence identity
         the full dimension of the gene cluster provides deeper insight                                                                (45%) was lower than the interspecies [e.g., CbCTB1 and C. fulvum211.64.141.217.       into the evolution, biosynthesis, and dissemination of a fungal                                                    CTB1 (Clafu1_196875)] sequence identity (55%) (SI Appendix,
          toxin critical to worldwide agriculture.                                                                   Table S4), suggesting that the CTB1 duplication event occurredaddress       Results                                                        before Dothideomycetes speciation.
IP                                                       To develop a “phylogenetic roadmap” that may explain CTB1
       SM Cluster Expansion in C. beticola. C. beticola strain 09-40 was
from      sequenced to 100-fold coverage and scaffolded with optical and   accountevolution,bothwe speciesused theandprocessgene ofhistories“reconciliation”(30). Althoughthat takesnot con-into
                                                                                        clusive, reconciliation considers the costs of evolutionary events2024      genomebeing placedmaps,in resulting12 supercontigs,in 96.5%of whichof the 1037.06-Mbpare assumedassemblyto be
                                                                                                       (i.e., gene duplications, transfers, and/or losses) to explain the
8,      chromosomes. Despite their ubiquitous presence in nature and
                                                                 most parsimonious evolutionary route to the present scenario
         cropping systems, genome sequences of Cercospora spp. are not
                                                                                     (31). Reconciliation of the species tree (SI Appendix, Fig. S4) with
          well represented in public databases. Therefore, to aid compar-
                                                                          the CTB1 protein tree revealed that the predicted evolutionaryDecember        ative analysis within the Cercospora genus, we also sequenced the    history of CTB1 can be characterized by four duplications, three
on      genome of Cercospora berteroae and reassembled the genome of
         Cercospora canescens (24) (SI Appendix, Table S1). To identify
         gene clusters responsible for biosynthesis of aromatic polyketides
           in C. beticola, we mined the genome to identify all SM clustersUniversity       (25) and compared these with predicted  clusters in related
Ocean      Dothideomycetes.63 predicted SM clustersThe C.ofbeticolaseveralgenomeclasses, possessesrepresentinga totalan ex-of
China      pandedpared withSMcloselyrepertoirerelatedwithDothideomycetesalmost twice thefungi,numberwhich asaveragecom-
by      34 SM clusters (SI Appendix, Table S2 and Dataset S1). Notably,
         C. beticola encodes 23 candidate nonribosomal peptide synthe-
          tase clusters, which is considerably higher than most Dothideo-
         mycetes fungi, which have an average of 13 (26). To identify the
         C. beticola PKS cluster responsible for cercosporin biosynthesis,
       we compared the sequence of the C. nicotianae CTB cluster (19)
         with predicted PKS clusters of C. beticola. To fill in sequencing     Fig. 1.  The cercosporin biosynthetic cluster is duplicated and maintained in
         gaps between genes in the C. nicotianae CTB cluster, we se-    C. beticola. CBET3_10910 and flanking genes are syntenic with the CTBhttps://www.pnas.org                                                                                               cluster (CBET3_00833 and flanking genes) in C. beticola. Alignment lines
        quenced  the genome  of C.  nicotianae, which showed  that
from       C. beticola PKS CBET3_00833 (CbCTB1) and flanking genes    correspondgenomic regionsto DNAcomprisingfragmentsthe exhibitinggene clusterssignificantare comparedsimilaritywithwhentBLASTx.the
        (CBET3_00830  – CBET3_00837)  were ∼96%  identical  to    Direct hits are displayed in red, whereas complementary hits are in blue. The
         C. nicotianae CTB1 to CTB8, and  all genes were collinear,    intensity of the alignments represents the percentage similarity ranging
          strongly suggesting that this region houses the CTB cluster in   from 23 to 100%. Genes flanking CBET3_11350-RA were not syntenic with
         C. beticola (SI Appendix, Fig. S1).                                CTB cluster genes.Downloaded


           E5460   |  www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1712798115                                                                            de Jonge et al.


[PDF physical page 3]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PLUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PNAS
          transfers, and widespread loss to most species analyzed (SI Ap-
         pendix, Fig. S5A) and further corroborates our hypothesis that the
      CTB1 duplication event (D1) occurred early in Dothideomycetes
         speciation. Reconciliation also revealed an ancient CTB1 ortholog
         in S. sclerotiorum (SI Appendix, Fig. S5A), suggesting that CTB1
        arose before speciation of Dothideomycetes. Duplications D2 to
      D4 arose after lateral transfer (T1) of CTB1 into the last common
         ancestor of Glomerellales. CTB1 was then transferred (T2) from a
      common ancestor in Glomerellales to M. oryzae (SI Appendix,
          Fig. S5A).
      We extended the search for CTB cluster protein orthologs by
         scanning the 48 proteomes for homologs of CbCTB2 (CBET3_00830)
         to CbCTB8 (CBET3_00837), followed by phylogenetic tree con-
         struction and subtree selection (SI Appendix, Fig. S3 B–N). This
         resulted in the identification of orthologs in the same set of
         species previously listed to contain CTB1, with the only excep-
         tions in cases where CTB gene homologs were lost in a species.
        Although the loss of CTB6 and CTB7 orthologs limits reconcil-
         iation analysis of these gene families, reconciliation of the sub-
         trees for CTB2, CTB3, CTB4, CTB5, and CTB8 (SI Appendix,
         Fig. S5 B–H) supported a similar scenario as proposed for CTB1,
         involving at least two duplications (D1 and D2) and two hori-
         zontal transfer events (T1 and T2) that explain the present-day
      CTB scenario (Fig. 2). However, an alternative explanation in-
         volving a single transfer to an ancestral Glomerellales species
        followed by widespread loss in most species in this lineage, ex-
        cept for M. oryzae and the analyzed Colletotrichum spp. (Fig. 2
       and SI Appendix, Table S5), cannot be ruled out by our analyses
         at this stage.

         Extension of the Predicted Cercosporin Biosynthetic Cluster Based on
         Microsynteny. To further examine the CTB clusters across all
         recipient species, we generated pairwise alignments relative to211.64.141.217.      the C. beticola CTB cluster and flanks. To our surprise, we ob-     Fig. 2.  Phylogenetic roadmap of CTB cluster evolution. Phylogenetic road-
        served a striking level of similarity outside the known eight CTB   map detailing the proposed evolutionary trajectory of the CTB cluster in-
        genes on the 3′ end of the cluster (Fig. 3) in all CTB-containing    volving horizontal gene transfer events from Capnodiales to Glomerellalesaddress                                                                                            (T1) and another from Glomerellales to Magnaporthales (T2), as well as        genomes. To investigate whether the amount of microsynteny
IP                                                                                    multiple duplications (D1 to D4) and frequent gene loss (x). Cladogram of
        observed for the CTB cluster and these flanking genes can    the phylogenetic relationship of Cercospora spp. and 45 other sequenced
from     be reasonably expected when comparing Dothideomycetes and    fungi. The unscaled tree was constructed using CVTree. Duplication nodes
        Sordariomycetes genomes, we assessed the genome-wide micro-    are marked with blue stars, losses are indicated by x’s, and transfers are
2024      synteny between the genomes of C. beticola and C. gloeosporioides    highlighted by green arrows. Species without the CTB cluster are depicted in
8,     and between C. beticola and M. oryzae. This analysis identified    gray; those encompassing it are in black. An alternative and slightly less                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SCIENCES        the CTB cluster together with its flanking genes as having the    parsimonious scenario involving a single transfer from Capnodiales into the                                 AGRICULTURAL
         highest level of microsynteny among all regions in the genome     last common ancestor of Magnaporthales and Glomerellales is shown by the
        between C. beticola and C. gloeosporioides and showed that the    dashed arrow.December
        observed CTB microsynteny between C. beticola and M. oryzaeon
       was also higher than the genome-wide average (Fig. 4). Likewise,                                                                              β-ig-h3 fasciclin (CBET3_00844), a laccase (CBET3_00845), zinc
        sequence identity of most CTB proteins between C. beticola and                                                                               finger domain-containing protein (CBET3_00846), and protein
         Colletotrichum spp., and to a lesser degree with M. oryzae, is
                                                                    phosphatase 2A (CBET3_00847; SI Appendix, Table S7), severalUniversity      higher compared with the genome-wide average (SI Appendix,
                                                                            of which have functions associated with multidomain enzymes
         Figs. S6 and S7). In contrast, sequence conservation of CTB8, a
                                                                       or polyketide biosynthesis in fungi or bacteria (19, 22, 32–36).Ocean     Zn2Cys6  transcription  factor  previously implicated  for  tran-                                                                        Phylogenetic analyses of these flanking genes and reconciliation         scriptional regulation of the CTB cluster (19), appears much
                                                                            of their respective protein phylogenies (SI Appendix, Figs. S3 andChina      lower than that of other CTB and non-CTB proteins and,                                                                     S5) with the species tree (SI Appendix, Fig. S4) suggest that all
by      therefore, is suggestive of positive diversifying selection. Con-                                                                     genes except CBET3_00840, CBET3_00846, and CBET3_00847         sidering the level of microsynteny and protein conservation, we
                                                                  have undergone highly similar evolutionary trajectories as the        hypothesized that these flanking genes are part of the C. beticola
      CTB cluster. To test this proposal, we first determined the rel-    established CTB cluster genes (Fig. 2 and SI Appendix, Fig. S5),
         ative expression of all eight established C. beticola CTB genes as   suggesting that the CTB cluster was transferred as a whole at
         well as a number of flanking genes (CBET3_00828 to CBET3_00848)    least once, followed by species-specific evolutionary trajectories
        under light (cercosporin-inducing) vs. dark (cercosporin-repressing)    involving frequent gene loss as well as gene gain (Fig. 2). We
         conditions, which showed that all candidate CTB genes on the    further evaluated the hypothesis of horizontal cluster transferhttps://www.pnas.org
          3′ flank were induced in the light, except CBET3_00846 and   using a comparative topology test that examines whether the
from     CBET3_00848 (SI Appendix, Table S7). Functional annotation of   determined  tree  topologies  that  support  horizontal  cluster
         these genes revealed one nonconserved phenylalanine ammonia    transfer are significantly better than constrained topologies that
         lyase (CBET3_00840), the cercosporin facilitator protein (CFP)   would not support transfer. Tree topologies were compared using
         (23) (CBET3_00841), a candidate α-ketoglutarate–dependent   the Approximately Unbiased test (37), implemented in CONSEL
        dioxygenase (CBET3_00842), a dehydratase (CBET3_00843), a   (38) as previously described by Wisecaver and Rokas (39).Downloaded


         de Jonge et al.                                                                                     PNAS   |  vol. 115   |  no. 24   |  E5461


[PDF physical page 4]
                                                                   mutant extracts with identical retention times and UV-Vis spectra
                                                                                   (Fig. 5). This peak was compared with a reference sample of
                                                                          cercosporin produced by wild-type C. beticola. The retention
                                                                      time of this peak was shorter than that of cercosporin, suggesting
                                                                    a more polar metabolite. Comparison of the UV-Vis spectra
                                                                                   (Fig. 5 B–D)  of  the unknown compound and  cercosporin
                                                                          revealed nearly identical chromophores, suggesting close struc-
                                                                                   tural relation. The exact mass of the metabolite from the mutants
                                                                 was determined (Δ842/CTB9: m/z 537.1762, Δ843/CTB10: m/z
                                                                          537.1757, [M+H+]), consistent with the elemental composition
                                                                     C29H28O10. This mass is 2 Da greater than that of cercosporin
                                                                 (+2 hydrogens), which led to a proposed structure for precercosporin
                                                                                (2) (Fig. 6). Alternative hydroquinones of cercosporin could be
                                                                       excluded simply on the basis of the UV-Vis spectral information
                                                               and chemical instability. The presence of a free phenol in pre-
                                                                          cercosporin in place of the unusual seven-membered methyl-
                                                                       enedioxy of cercosporin is consonant with the red shift of the
                                                                        long wavelength (λmax) and the shorter HPLC retention time.
                                                         To firmly support the tentative structure of precercosporin,
                                                                         the crude extract of Δ842/CTB9 was further purified by reverse-
                                                                    phase HPLC. To obtain sufficient material for 1H-NMR analysis,
                                                                               extractions were performed quickly and in low light and reduced
                                                                     temperature to slow apparent polymerization of precercosporin.
             Fig. 3.  Synteny and rearrangements of the conserved C. beticola cerco-   The relative instability of precercosporin compared with cerco-
            sporin biosynthetic cluster. The cercosporin biosynthetic cluster in C. beticola   sporin suggests a possible role for the methylenedioxy bridge in
           (top line) and flanking genes are conserved in C. fulvum, C. higginsianum, C.    overall stability. Immediately evident from the 1H-NMR spectrum
            graminicola, M. oryzae, and P. nodorum. For  all species, the displayed
                                                                                (SI Appendix, Fig. S9A), apart from its overall similarity to that of             identifiers are transcript IDs, and the corresponding sequences can be re-
            trieved from JGI MycoCosm or ORCAE. CTB orthologs are colored relative to   cercosporin itself, was not only the absence of the methylenedioxy
           the C. beticola CTB cluster genes; the color key and annotated functions are    singlet at δ5.74 diagnostic of cercosporin but also the appearance
           highlighted below the CTB cluster graphic. Cercospora-specific CTB genes    of a new methoxyl signal at δ4.28 and a phenol at δ9.25. Consistent
         CTB6 and CTB7 are underlined.                                        with the new asymmetry in precercosporin, two strongly hydrogen-
                                                                bonded peri-hydroxy groups could be seen far downfield at around
                                                                   15 ppm, and two aryl hydrogens were observed at δ6.92 and δ6.87.211.64.141.217.       Constrained topologies in which we force either a monophyletic   That these latter resonances are observed only in pairs (as are the

          of all Sordariomycetes proteins were significantly worse than trees    signals are doubled implies that precercosporin is formed as aaddress       origin of all Dothideomycetes proteins or a monophyletic origin   two side-chain methyl doublets at around 0.6 ppm) and the other
         without such constraint (SI Appendix, Table S6). Thus, the com-    single atropisomer having a helical configuration likely identicalIP
          parative topology tests support the previously determined to-    to that of cercosporin, although it is conceivable that CTB9 or
from       pologies, which suggest horizontal cluster transfer.            CTB10 sets the final stereochemistry.
2024      CTB Genes Essential for Cercosporin Biosynthesis. To confirm indi-   number13C-NMRof PDAspectroscopyplates of dataΔ842/CTB9were obtainedsupplementedby growingwitha 2largermM
8,       vidual gene contributions for cercosporin production, we gener-   [1-13C]-sodium acetate and 2 mM [2-13C]-sodium acetate to
         ated single-gene deletion mutants of all candidate genes from                                                                             equally enrich all polyketide-derived carbons (∼3% per site).
        CBET3_00840 to CBET3_00846 and tested their ability to pro-                                                               Working quickly to isolate and purify precercosporin in low light
         duce cercosporin. Initial assays of selected mutants showed thatDecember                                                             and low temperature as described earlier, both 1D and hetero-
          cercosporin production in ΔCBET3_00844 and ΔCBET3_00845on                                                                       nuclear single quantum coherence spectra of precercosporin
         mutants was abolished, while ΔCBET3_00842 mutants accumu-                                                                  were acquired (SI Appendix, Fig. S9 B and C). As seen in the 1H-
          lated only a red, cercosporin-like metabolite that migrated dif-                                        NMR spectrum, breaking the symmetry of cercosporin was evi-
           ferently in potato dextrose agar (PDA) culture plates and TLC (SI                                                                   dent in the observation of all 29 carbons in the 13C-NMRUniversity       Appendix, Fig. S8). To provide more definitive analyses of cerco-
Ocean       sporindate CTBproduction,gene mutantsHPLCandprofilescomparedwerewithobtainedWT cercosporinfrom all candi-(Fig.
China       5A).ΔCBET3_00846Unlike  otherproducedanalyzedcompoundsmutants,withΔCBET3_00840HPLC profiles andlike
by       cercosporin (Fig. 5A), suggesting that these genes are not involved
          with cercosporin biosynthesis. Together, these results corrobo-
          rate our hypothesis that the CTB cluster extends to at least
        CBET3_00845 at the 3′ side and includes four additional CTB
          biosynthetic genes, as well as CbCFP. Consequently, we propose
        naming genes CBET3_00842, CBET3_00843, CBET3_00844,
        and CBET_00845 as CTB9 to CTB12, respectively (SI Appendix,     Fig. 4.  CTB cluster microsynteny conservation segregates from the genome-
                                                                            wide                                                                                           average.                                                                                       The                                                                                             genome-wide,                                                                                                               gene-by-gene                                                                                                                                 microsynteny                                                                                                                            between                                                                                                                                                                                C.https://www.pnas.org      Table S7).                                                                                             beticola                                                                               and C.                                                                                                       gloeosporioides                                                                                                                        (depicted                                                                                                                                               in red)                                                                                                                 and between                                                                                                                                                                      C. beticola
                                                                          M. oryzae                                                                                                                            (in                                                                                                             blue) across                                                                                                               the                                                                                                          10                                                                                                                 assembled                                                                                                                                                     C.                                                                                                                                                 beticola                                                                                                                          chromosomes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is          Precercosporin Isolation and Characterization. To characterize the   andfrom                                                                              shown.                                                                                      Each dot                                                                                                          represents                                                                                               one                                                                                                                                     C.                                                                                                                                 beticola                                                                                                              gene                                                                                                                 and                                                                                                                                                                                                     its respective                                                                                                                                                           micro-
         red metabolite that accumulated in the Δ842/CTB9 and Δ843/    synteny score. The red arrow indicates the position of the CTB cluster on
       CTB10 mutants (Fig. 5A and SI Appendix, Fig. S8), an ethyl   chromosome 1 and coincides with high microsynteny in both C. gloeospor-
          acetate extract of the collected mycelia was analyzed by reverse-    ioides and M. oryzae. The dashed lines represent the 99th quantile of the
         phase HPLC. At 280 nm, a single peak was observed in both    microsynteny scores for both comparisons independently.Downloaded


           E5462   |  www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1712798115                                                                            de Jonge et al.


[PDF physical page 5]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PLUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PNAS





211.64.141.217.        Fig. 5.  Analysis of cercosporin production in CTB mutants of C. beticola. Site-directed knockout mutants in genes CBET3_00840, CFP (CBET3_00841), CTB9
          (CBET3_00842), CTB10 (CBET3_00843), CTB11 (CBET3_00844), CTB12 (CBET3_00845), and CBET3_00846 were assayed for cercosporin production by HPLC.
          Cercosporin extracted from C. beticola strain 10-73-4 (WT) was used as a positive control. (A) 280 nm HPLC chromatograms and images of representativeaddress       colonies for each knockout. (Scale bar, 250 mAu.) Cercosporin (1) and precercosporin (2) peaks are indicated by dashed lines. (B–D) UV-Vis spectra from wild-
IP       type C. beticola (7.25-min peak in B), C. beticola ΔCTB9 (5.36-min peak in C), and C. beticola ΔCTB10 (5.36-min peak in D) were extracted from 280 nm HPLC
from      chromatograms. Wavelengths of relevant UV maxima are indicated.
2024      spectrum, which notably revealed three methoxyl groups and   medium under the same conditions that stimulate cercosporin8,      diagnostic doubling of all resonances, save two overlapping pairs   production in C. beticola. Since epigenetic modifiers have been                                SCIENCES         of signals. This behavior  is fully in accord with the assigned   used to induce production of SMs in fungal species (50, 51), we                                 AGRICULTURAL
         structure of precercosporin.                                     considered whether this strategy could be used to induce cer-December                                                                     cosporin production in C. fioriniae. Medium augmented with the
          Identification of Cercosporin from C. fioriniae. Because our initialon                                                                          histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) (50) induced
        phylogenomic analyses suggested that several Colletotrichum spp.
        harbored CTB clusters (Figs. 2 and 3), we questioned whether
        the CTB cluster can be found in additional Colletotrichum spp.University      CTB protein orthology analysis revealed that 8 of the 13 Colle-
         totrichum spp. hosted at Ensembl Fungi (https://fungi.ensembl.Ocean      org/index.html) encode a similar set of CTB proteins as observed
China      arein C.planthigginsianumpathogens(SIof cropsAppendix,such Tableas apple,S8).safflower,These eightmelon,speciesand
by     cucumber; a variety of Brassica and cereal crops; as well as
         various tree species (40–46) (SI Appendix, Figs. S10 and S11 and
        Table S8). Remarkably, many species have lost several CTB
         genes, such as the endophyte Colletotrichum tofieldiae, which has
          lost the cluster entirely (SI Appendix, Figs. S10 and S11 and
        Table S8).
           Earlier reports suggested the production of a red pigment byhttps://www.pnas.org       some Colletotrichum spp. such as the apple pathogen C. fioriniae
         (47, 48); therefore, we questioned whether the red pigment wasfrom
         cercosporin. As a first step, two C. fioriniae strains (HC89 and
                                                                                                      Fig. 6.  Proposed biogenesis of cercosporin. Tentative proposal for bio-
       HC91) from our collection that were previously isolated from    synthesis of cercosporin (1), incorporating biosynthetic genes identified in
        apple were assayed for cercosporin production using the KOH     this study. Intermediates in brackets are logically inferred and have not been
         assay (49). No cercosporinlike pigment was observed in the     directly observed. MO, monooxygenase; MT, methyltransferase.Downloaded


         de Jonge et al.                                                                                     PNAS   |  vol. 115   |  no. 24   |  E5463


[PDF physical page 6]
         production of a red cercosporinlike compound. To characterize   We also attempted to isolate cercosporin from C. higginsia-
           this red metabolite, mycelia from both C. fioriniae strains were   num-infected Arabidopsis leaves, since previous studies indicated
          extracted with ethyl acetate. Reverse-phase HPLC analysis of   the distinct induction of this cluster from in planta appressoria
           extracts of both strains revealed a peak with a retention time and   [22 h postinoculation (hpi)] and the biotrophic phase of infection
        UV-Vis spectrum consistent with cercosporin in both extracts   (40 hpi) but indicated repression during in vitro growth and the
           (Fig. 7 A and B). The presence of cercosporin was confirmed by   necrotrophic phase of infection (60 hpi) (43). Again, we were
                                                                      unable to detect cercosporin from infected Arabidopsis leaves         ultra-performance LC (UPLC) electrospray ionization (ESI)-MS
                                                                              regardless of the extraction methodology or time point after           (Fig. 7C). Moreover, complementary resequencing of both iso-
                                                                               inoculation. Given the relatively low amount of fungal biomass           lates on the Illumina platform followed by automated genome
                                                                            associated with the early time points when the CTB cluster is
         assembly and gene prediction confirmed the presence of a CTB
                                                                     induced during Arabidopsis infection, we hypothesize that the
           cluster in both genomes (SI Appendix, Fig. S11 and Table S8).
                                                             amount of cercosporin produced in planta is below our current
         To assess whether C. fioriniae produces cercosporin during
                                                                                      limits of detection.
         apple infection, apples were inoculated with the pathogen, and
           tissue samples were collected every other day from 1 to 14 d   Discussion
          postinoculation. Regardless of time point or extraction meth-                                                                           Several hypotheses exist for the maintenance of SM biosynthetic
         odology, we were unable to detect cercosporin from infected   genes as clusters. In one, unlinked SM pathway genes are at a
          apple. However, by infiltrating apples with defined amounts of   greater risk for dissociation during meiotic recombination (52) or
          cercosporin, we determined that the isolation efficiency is ∼5%   chromosomal rearrangements (53). Additionally, clustering may
          (SI Appendix, Figs. S12 and S13). Consequently, any cercosporin    facilitate strict coordination of gene expression, which may be
         produced by C. fioriniae during infection is likely rapidly bound    particularly important during the biosynthesis of SMs that have
         or modified by apple tissue such that its recovery by extraction    potentially toxic or chemically unstable intermediates to ensure
             is poor and below our level of detection by HPLC or ESI-MS.    their efficient conversion to final end products (54). Horizontal
       To provide additional support for the involvement of cercosporin    transfer and maintenance of the CTB cluster specifically among
           in C. fioriniae infection, we infiltrated cercosporin into apple   plant pathogens suggests that it was critical for disease devel-
            fruit and visually compared the phenotype of the infiltrated area   opment in diverse pathosystems, including rice blast caused by
          to C. fioriniae-infected apple. At 5 d postinfiltration/inoculation,   M. oryzae and various anthracnose diseases caused by Colleto-
                                                                         trichum spp. on many different crops. The CTB clusters in C.          cercosporin-infiltrated apple exhibited similar symptomology as
                                                                         higginsianum and C. graminicola were reported as one of the few         C. fioriniae-infected apple (SI Appendix, Fig. S14). We also
                                             SM clusters between these species that are microsyntenic (43).          quantified expression of CTB1 using qRT-PCR since it is highly
                                                                   Moreover, O’Connell et al. (43) detected specific up-regulation
         expressed during cercosporin biosynthesis and is the first com-
                                                                             of the CTB cluster in C. higginsianum during colonization of
         mitted step in the pathway (21). In concordance with earlier
                                                                               Arabidopsis. Indeed, 9 of 14 C. higginsianum CTB genes were
           results where no cercosporin was detected from cultures grown211.64.141.217.                                                        among the top 100 most highly expressed genes in planta. Recent
           in vitro in the absence of TSA, we likewise did not detect CTB1                                                                                  analysis of natural selection processes in C. graminicola identi-
          expression from this source (SI Appendix, Fig. S15). However,                                                                                   fied orthologs of CTB genes CTB1 and CFP among the ∼80 genesaddress     CTB1 was found to be induced ∼11.9-fold in in vitro cultures with   undergoing significant positive selection (55), further suggesting a
IP     TSA and 2.5-fold in apple samples harvested 14 d postinoculation (SI    role in pathogenicity. Interestingly, the CTB clusters of Colleto-
          Appendix, Fig. S15). Because amplification products were designed   trichum spp. and M. oryzae contain additional genes: two short-from
          to span introns, amplicons were sequenced and verified to be   chain dehydrogenases, an additional desaturase, a ferric-chelate
2024       derived from cDNA.                                               reductase, and an NmrA-like family protein, which has been
8,                                                                       reported (56) to act as negative transcriptional regulator.
                                                             The identification of cercosporin production in two isolates of
                                                                      C.  fioriniae may have  significant implications  for the appleDecember                                                                         packing, storage, and processing industries. Bitter rot, caused by
on                                                                         Colletotrichum  spp.,  is one of the top pre- and postharvest
                                                                     pathogens of apple (57). This disease is a major problem for the
                                                                       apple industry because it limits fresh fruit in the field and during
                                                                           storage and has a quiescent stage, allowing decay to occur onUniversity                                                                     seemingly high-quality apples, only to come out of storage rotten
Ocean                                                                               (57,cercosporin58). Hence,couldcontaminationbe a significantof processedhealth hazard.apple productsFor example,with
China                                                                      otheracid) fungal-producedcan contaminate toxinsprocessed(e.g., applepatulin,productscitrinin, (59).and penicillicPatulin,
by                                                                produced by Penicillium spp., is the most troubling because it is
                                                                             carcinogenic; consequently, the United States and Europe have
                                                                                               strict patulin  limits in  fruit juices and processed pome-fruit
                                                                        products (59, 60). It may be necessary to will focus on the role
                                                                             of cercosporin production during the Colletotrichum-apple fruit
                                                                                interactions in addition to assaying processed  fruit products
                                                         made from apples with bitter rot symptoms to determine levels
             Fig. 7.  HPLC and UPLC-ESI-MS analysis of C. fioriniae strains. (A) HPLC   of the toxin in fruit. Although only C. fioriniae and C. higgin-https://www.pnas.org       chromatograms at 280 nm of wild-type C. beticola and C. fioriniae strains
                                                                  sianum strains were analyzed for the ability to produce cerco-
                                                                                sporin, the identification of highly similar CTB clusters in otherfrom       HC89min retentionand HC91.time)(Scaleextractedbar, 100 mAu.)from C.(B)fioriniaeUV-Vis spectraHC89 (shownof cercosporinin blue)(7.25-and
         HC91  (in purple). Wavelengths of relevant UV maxima are indicated.   Colletotrichum spp. (SI Appendix, Figs. S10 and S11 and Table
            (C) Extracted-ion chromatograms (m/z 535.1604) obtained by UPLC-ESI-MS,   S8) suggests that cercosporin production may be widespread in
          demonstrating  cercosporin production  in  C.  beticola and  C.  fioriniae    this genus. Future studies directed toward  analysis of CTB
         HC89 and HC91.                                                         cluster expression among various C. fioriniae isolates and appleDownloaded


           E5464   |  www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1712798115                                                                            de Jonge et al.


[PDF physical page 7]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PLUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PNAS
          cultivars will be necessary to confirm whether cercosporin  is   Our data have shed light on cercosporin biology and will have
        necessary for virulence of this pathogen.                             significant impact on cercosporin research in particular and on
         The microsynteny outside the established CTB cluster prompted   perylenequinone research in general. The finding that at least
        us to test whether the flanking genes in C. beticola are also re-   one species in the important plant pathogenic genus Colleto-
        quired for cercosporin biosynthesis. Notably, we observed that   trichum can produce cercosporin has significant implications for
         these flanking genes, similar to the established CTB genes, were   disease management. Moreover, since C. fioriniae may secrete
        up-regulated under cercosporin-inducing conditions. Further-   cercosporin into apple food products that may be directly con-
       more, targeted gene replacement of CTB9, CTB10, CTB11,   sumed by humans, the toxic effects of cercosporin on human
       and CTB12 completely abolished cercosporin biosynthesis, while   health may need to be considered.
        replacement of CTB9 and CTB10 resulted in the accumulation of
                                                                       Materials and Methods        a red metabolite, defined here as precercosporin. We thus con-
        clude that the CTB cluster is significantly larger than previously    For further information, see SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods and
        described (19).                                                              figshare under DOI: 10.6084/m9.figshare.4056522. Custom code is perma-
        The isolation and characterization of an intermediate in the    nently archived at Zenodo under DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.1156551.
        cercosporin biosynthetic pathway (precercosporin) strongly sug-      Fungal genomic DNA was isolated from mycelia scraped from the surface
         gests that formation of the unique seven-membered methyl-    of agar Petri plates. Library preparations and sequencing on the Illumina
        enedioxy bridge in the final product is the result of a two-step process    platform was performed by BGI Americas Corp. For C. beticola, three ge-
         requiring three genes. First, one of two precursor aryl methoxyl   nomic libraries with increasing insert size (500 bp, 5 Kbp, and 10 Kbp) were
                                                                                 sequenced. For C. berteroae, C. nicotianae, and C. fioriniae strains HC89 and
        groups of ent (+)-calphostin D (Fig. 6) is removed, followed by
                                                                              HC91, single, short insert libraries (500 bp) were sequenced. For C. beticola
         oxidative ring closure by CTB9, an apparent α-ketoglutarate–     specifically, optical maps were prepared using the Argus (OpGen) and
        dependent dioxygenase, in collaboration with CTB10. The pre-   BioNano Genomics platforms and subsequently used to scaffold contigs into
          cise role of CTB10, a putative dehydratase, in ring closure is    large supercontigs. A combination of ab initio gene prediction, homologous
         unclear, but it could serve to facilitate closure of the unfavorable    protein alignment, and transcript alignment followed by extensive manual
       seven-membered methylenedioxy ring. In contrast, a single cy-    curation was used to prepare draft gene models for C. beticola. C. beticola-
       tochrome P450  is known to convert two aryl ortho-methoxyl    trained Augustus parameters were used for automated protein-coding gene
        groups into the relatively more common five-membered meth-    modeling in the case of C. berteroae, C. canescens, and C. nicotianae. Ge-
        ylenedioxy group in alkaloid biosynthesis (61). We attribute the   nome assemblies and annotations, if applicable, are deposited in the NCBI
         single demethylation to an oxidative process possibly carried out   GenBank database and  listed under BioProject PRJA270309. Accession
                                                                         numbers for C. beticola, C. berteroae, C. nicotianae, and C. fioriniae strains
        by the flavin-dependent enzymes CTB5 or CTB7. CTB6 correlates
                                                                     HC89 and HC91 are LKMD00000000, PNEN00000000, POSS00000000, and
         to the SDR NAD(P)H-binding superfamily of oxidoreductases   PNFH00000000, and PNFI00000000, respectively.
       and could install the side-chain hydroxyl groups stereospecifically.       Mycelial plugs of wild-type and mutant C. beticola were placed on top of
       Owing to the extreme instability of most pathway intermediates    eight “thin” PDA (Difco) plates (3.0 mL of PDA per 50-mm Petri plate).
       and the role feedback inhibition in response to these metabolites    Cultures were incubated at 22 °C for 1 wk under continuous light. PDA and211.64.141.217.     could play, our experience dictates that analysis of pathway    mycelia were ground under liquid nitrogen and lyophilized to dryness twice.
        knockouts alone will not lead to the full determination of cerco-   The resulting powder was resuspended in water acidified with HCl (pH <1),
         sporin biosynthesis. Biochemical evaluation of the individual en-    allowed to sit 10 min, and filtered. The filtrate was extracted thrice withaddress
        zymes, as has been done with CTB3 (21) with synthetic substrates    ethyl acetate. These extracts were pooled, washed with brine, and evapo-
IP                                                                                 rated to dryness. The extracted metabolites were resuspended in 500 μL of       and product standards, will be necessary to accomplish this task.
from     A  tentative cercosporin  biosynthesis scheme was  recently   methanolXB-C18 columnand analyzed(4.6 × 75 bymm,HPLC2.6 μm;on anPhenomenex).Agilent 1200Injectionsfitted withof 1a μLKinetexwere
                                                                               run                                                                                              at                                                                                              1.25                                                                                   mL/min                                                                                                   with                                                                                                 a linear                                                                                                                     gradient                                                                                                                             of 5% A/95%                                                                                                                  B                                                                                                                                             to 95%                                                                                                                    A/5%                                                                                                                               B2024     proposedHowever, (21)in lightwithoutof theknowledgeidentificationof theof precercosporinexpanded CTB andcluster.the                                                                                  over                                                                                            10.8                                                                                            min,                                                                                     where                                                                                                                solvent                                                                               A was                                                                                                                                        acetonitrile                                                                                                 + 0.1%                                                                                                                                             formic                                                                                                                                                             acid                                                                                                                                and8,      potential functions of the other CTB genes, the previously pro-    solvent B was 0.1% formic acid. Chromatograms were monitored at 436,                                SCIENCES        posed biosynthetic pathway (21) will have to be revised. While    280, and 210 nm, and UV-Vis spectra were recorded over a range of 210 to                                 AGRICULTURAL
         these investigations will be reported in due course, we suspect    800 nm. High-resolution mass data were obtained from a Waters Acquity/
                                                                           Xevo-G2 UPLC-ESI-MS in positive-ion mode.December      the fasciclin/laccase pair (CTB11/12) may act early in the path-
on     way to dimerize the product of CTB3 (21) to the  first per-
        ylenequinone  intermediate, which would have precedent  in   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank W. Underwood and T.  L. Friesen [US
         synthetic chemistry (62) and in simpler laccase-mediated aryl–   Department of Agriculture (USDA) Agricultural Research Service (ARS)] for
                                                                                  review of the manuscript, A. G. Newman for helpful discussions and a
          aryl dimerizations (35, 63, 64) (Fig. 6). CTB1 is an iterative,    reference sample of cercosporin, and N. Metz (USDA–ARS) for excellentUniversity     nonreducing PKS whose product is nor-toralactone (20). CTB3 is    technical assistance. Prof. M. Muller and L. Fürtges (University of Freiburg)

                                                                                           project was supported by a Long-Term Fellowship of the European Molecu-Ocean     amonooxygenase)bifunctional enzymethat(ancarriesO-methyltransferaseout sequential O-methylationand FAD-dependentin the    are thanked for discussion of fungal laccases and unpublished results. This                                                                                                        lar Biology Organization (ALTF 359-2013) and a postdoctoral fellowship of
China      topresencecercoquinoneof S-adenosylmethionineC (21). We hypothesizeand oxidativethat intermediatedecarboxylationsteps    theCurrentResearchResearchFoundationInformationFlandersSystem(FWOProject12B8116N)3060-22000-049(to R.d.J.); the(toUSDA-ARSM.D.B.);
by      of O-dimethylation and side-chain ketone reduction, in unspec-    National Institutes of Health Grants R01 ES001670 (to C.A.T.) and T32
          ified order, are mediated by CTB2 and potentially CTB6, re-   GM080189 (to C.R.H.-R.); and Netherlands Organization for Scientific Re-
          spectively, as noted above.                                              search Grant 833.13.007 (to M.K.E.). Mention of trade names or commercial                                                                                products in this publication is solely for the purpose of providing spe-
          Despite sustained research on cercosporin for several decades,     cific information and does not imply recommendation or endorsement by
         there are significant knowledge gaps in cercosporin biosynthesis.    the USDA.



               1. Groenewald M, Groenewald JZ, Braun U, Crous PW (2006) Host range of Cercospora       5. Ward JMJ, Stromberg EL, Nowell DC, Nutter FW (1999) Gray leaf spot: A disease ofhttps://www.pnas.org             apii and C. beticola and description of C. apiicola, a novel species from celery.        global importance in maize production. Plant Dis 83:884–895.
              Mycologia 98:275–285.                                                                            6. Mani KK, Hollier CA, Groth DE (2017) Effect of cultivar susceptibility and planting date
               2. Fuckel K (1863) Fungi Rhenani exsiccati, Fasc. I–IV. Hedwigia 2:132–136.                 on narrow brown leaf spot progression in rice. Crop Prot 102:88–93.from
               3. Secor GA, Rivera VV, Khan MFR, Gudmestad NC (2010) Monitoring fungicide sensi-       7. Uppala S, Zhou XG (2018) Field efficacy of fungicides for management of sheath
                   tivity of Cercospora beticola of sugar beet for disease management decisions. Plant         blight and narrow brown leaf spot of rice. Crop Prot 104:72–77.
                Dis 94:1272–1282.                                                                                  8. Olatinwo RO, Prabha TV, Paz JO, Hoogenboom G (2012) Predicting favorable condi-
               4. Wrather A, et al. (2010) Effect of diseases on soybean yield in the top eight producing         tions for early leaf spot of peanut using output from the weather research and
                countries in 2006. Plant Health Prog 10:1094.                                               forecasting (WRF) model. Int J Biometeorol 56:259–268.Downloaded


         de Jonge et al.                                                                                     PNAS   |  vol. 115   |  no. 24   |  E5465


[PDF physical page 8]
                 9. Stergiopoulos I, Collemare J, Mehrabi R, De Wit PJGM (2013) Phytotoxic secondary     36. Gao Q, et al. (2011) Genome sequencing and comparative transcriptomics of the
                 metabolites and peptides produced by plant pathogenic Dothideomycete fungi.       model entomopathogenic fungi Metarhizium anisopliae and M. acridum. PLoS Genet
             FEMS Microbiol Rev 37:67–93.                                                           7:e1001264.
              10. Goodwin SB, Dunkle LD (2010) Cercosporin production in Cercospora and related     37. Shimodaira H (2002) An approximately unbiased test of phylogenetic tree selection.
              anamorphs of Mycosphaerella. Cercospora Leaf Spot of Sugar Beet and Related         Syst Biol 51:492–508.
                   Species, eds Lartey RT, Weiland JJ, Panella L, Crous PW, Windels CE (Am Phytopathol     38. Shimodaira H, Hasegawa M (2001) CONSEL: For assessing the confidence of phylo-
                  Soc, St. Paul), pp 97–108.                                                                 genetic tree selection. Bioinformatics 17:1246–1247.
              11. Daub ME, Ehrenshaft M (2000) The photoactivated Cercospora toxin cercosporin:     39. Wisecaver JH, Rokas A (2015) Fungal metabolic gene clusters—caravans traveling
                 Contributions to plant disease and fundamental biology. Annu Rev Phytopathol 38:         across genomes and environments. Front Microbiol 6:161.
                461–490.                                                                                 40. Velho AC, Stadnik MJ, Casanova L, Mondino P, Alaniz S (2013) First report of Colle-
              12. Daub ME, Hangarter RP (1983) Light-induced production of singlet oxygen and su-        totrichum nymphaeae causing apple bitter rot in southern Brazil. Plant Dis 98:567.
                peroxide by the fungal toxin, cercosporin. Plant Physiol 73:855–857.                      41. Víchová J, Vejra zka K, Cholastová T, Pokorný R, Hrudová E (2010) Colletotrichum
              13. Dobrowolski DC, Foote CS (1983) Cercosporin, a singlet oxygen generator. Angew        simmondsii causing anthracnose on safflower in the Czech Republic. Plant Dis 95:79.
             Chem Int Ed Engl 22:720–721.                                                            42. Cannon PF, Damm U, Johnston PR, Weir BS (2012) Colletotrichum–Current status and
              14. Daub ME (1982) Cercosporin, a photosensitizing toxin from Cercospora species.        future directions. Stud Mycol 73:181–213.
                Phytopathology 72:370–374.                                                              43. O’Connell RJ, et al. (2012) Lifestyle transitions in plant pathogenic Colletotrichum
              15. Gunasinghe N, You MP, Cawthray GR, Barbetti MJ (2016) Cercosporin from Pseudo-        fungi deciphered by genome and transcriptome analyses. Nat Genet 44:1060–1065.
                  cercosporella capsellae and its critical role in white leaf spot development. Plant Dis     44. Sukno SA, García VM, Shaw BD, Thon MR (2008) Root infection and systemic colo-
                100:1521–1531.                                                                            nization of maize by Colletotrichum graminicola. Appl Environ Microbiol 74:823–832.
              16. Crous PW, et al. (2013) Phylogenetic lineages in Pseudocercospora. Stud Mycol 75:     45. Weir BS, Johnston PR, Damm U (2012) The Colletotrichum gloeosporioides species
                37–114.                                                                             complex. Stud Mycol 73:115–180.
              17. Daub ME (1981) Destruction of tobacco cell-membranes by the photosensitizing     46. Damm U, et al. (2013) The Colletotrichum orbiculare species complex: Important
                   toxin, cercosporin. Phytopathology 71:869.                                           pathogens of field crops and weeds. Fungal Divers 61:29–59.
              18. Daub ME (1987) Resistance of fungi to the photosensitizing toxin, cercosporin.     47. Damm U, Cannon PF, Woudenberg JHC, Crous PW (2012) The Colletotrichum acuta-
                Phytopathology 77:1515–1520.                                              tum species complex. Stud Mycol 73:37–113.
              19. Chen H, Lee MH, Daub ME, Chung KR (2007) Molecular analysis of the cercosporin     48. Kasson MT, Pollok JR, Benhase EB, Jelesko JG (2014) First report of seedling blight of
                  biosynthetic gene cluster in Cercospora nicotianae. Mol Microbiol 64:755–770.              eastern poison ivy (Toxicodendron radicans) by Colletotrichum fioriniae in Virginia.
              20. Newman AG, Vagstad AL, Belecki K, Scheerer JR, Townsend CA (2012) Analysis of the
                                                                                                             Plant Dis 98:995.
                 cercosporin polyketide synthase CTB1 reveals a new fungal thioesterase function.
                                                                                                            49. Choquer M, et al. (2005) The CTB1 gene encoding a fungal polyketide synthase is
             Chem Commun (Camb) 48:11772–11774.
                                                                                                        required for cercosporin biosynthesis and fungal virulence of Cercospora nicotianae.
              21. Newman AG, Townsend CA (2016) Molecular characterization of the cercosporin
                                                                                     Mol Plant Microbe Interact 18:468–476.
                  biosynthetic pathway in the fungal plant pathogen Cercospora nicotianae. J Am
                                                                                                            50. Shwab EK, et al. (2007) Histone deacetylase activity regulates chemical diversity in
             Chem Soc 138:4219–4228.
                                                                                                                    Aspergillus. Eukaryot Cell 6:1656–1664.
              22. Choquer M, Lee MH, Bau HJ, Chung KR (2007) Deletion of a MFS transporter-like gene
                                                                                                            51. Williams RB, Henrikson JC, Hoover AR, Lee AE, Cichewicz RH (2008) Epigenetic re-
                   in Cercospora nicotianae reduces cercosporin toxin accumulation and fungal viru-
                                                                                              modeling of the fungal secondary metabolome. Org Biomol Chem 6:1895–1897.
                  lence. FEBS Lett 581:489–494.
                                                                                                            52. Galazka JM, Freitag M (2014) Variability of chromosome structure in pathogenic
              23. Callahan TM, Rose MS, Meade MJ, Ehrenshaft M, Upchurch RG (1999) CFP, the pu-
                                                                                                        fungi–of ‘ends and odds’. Curr Opin Microbiol 20:19–26.
                   tative cercosporin transporter of Cercospora kikuchii, is required for wild type cer-
                                                                                                            53. de Jonge R, et al. (2013) Extensive chromosomal reshuffling drives evolution of vir-
                 cosporin production, resistance, and virulence on soybean. Mol Plant Microbe Interact
                                                                                                      ulence in an asexual pathogen. Genome Res 23:1271–1282.
                 12:901–910.
                                                                                                            54. McGary KL, Slot JC, Rokas A (2013) Physical linkage of metabolic genes in fungi is an
              24. Chand R, et al. (2015) Draft genome sequence of Cercospora canescens: A leaf spot
                                                                                                     adaptation against the accumulation of toxic intermediate compounds. Proc Natl
                 causing pathogen. Curr Sci 109:2103–2110.211.64.141.217.                                                                                      Acad Sci USA 110:11481–11486.
              25. Blin K, et al. (2013) antiSMASH 2.0–A versatile platform for genome mining of sec-
                                                                                                            55. Rech GE, Sanz-Martín JM, Anisimova M, Sukno SA, Thon MR (2014) Natural selection
               ondary metabolite producers. Nucleic Acids Res 41:W204–W212.
                                                                                     on coding and noncoding DNA sequences is associated with virulence genes in a plant
              26. Ohm RA, et al. (2012) Diverse lifestyles and strategies of plant pathogenesis encodedaddress               in the genomes of eighteen Dothideomycetes fungi. PLoS Pathog 8:e1003037.             pathogenic fungus. Genome Biol Evol 6:2368–2379.
IP          27. Collemare J, et al. (2014) Secondary metabolism and biotrophic lifestyle in the tomato     56. Stammers DK, et al. (2001) The structure of the negative transcriptional regulator

                                                                                                               reductases. EMBO J 20:6619–6626.from          28. pathogenMedema MH,CladosporiumCimermancicfulvum.P, SaliPLoSA, OneTakano9:e85877.E, Fischbach MA (2014) A systematic      NmrA reveals a structural superfamily which includes the short-chain dehydrogenase/
                computational analysis of biosynthetic gene cluster evolution: Lessons for engineer-     57. Munir M, Amsden B, Dixon E, Vaillancourt L, Gauthier NAW (2016) Characterization
                                                                                                        of Colletotrichum species causing bitter rot of apple in Kentucky orchards. Plant Dis2024             ing biosynthesis. PLOS Comput Biol 10:e1004016.
8,          29. Chooi Y-H, Muria-Gonzalez MJ, Solomon PS (2014) A genome-wide survey of the        100:2194–2203.
                secondary metabolite biosynthesis genes in the wheat pathogen Parastagonospora     58. Kou LP, Gaskins V, Luo YG, Jurick WM (2013) First report of Colletotrichum fioriniae
               nodorum. Mycology 5:192–206.                                                          causing postharvest decay on ‘Nittany’ apple fruit in the United States. Plant Dis 98:
              30. Koczyk G, Dawidziuk A, Popiel D (2015) The distant siblings—A phylogenomic         993.
              roadmap illuminates the origins of extant diversity in fungal aromatic polyketide     59. Wright SAI (2015) Patulin in food. Curr Opin Food Sci 5:105–109.December              biosynthesis. Genome Biol Evol 7:3132–3154.                                             60. Puel O, Galtier P, Oswald IP (2010) Biosynthesis and toxicological effects of patulin.
on          31. Stolzer M, et al. (2012) Inferring duplications, losses, transfers and incomplete lineage        Toxins (Basel) 2:613–631.
                  sorting with nonbinary species trees. Bioinformatics 28:i409–i415.                        61. Díaz Chávez ML, Rolf M, Gesell A, Kutchan TM (2011) Characterization of two
              32. Tudzynski B, et al. (2003) Characterization of the final two genes of the gibberellin        methylenedioxy bridge-forming cytochrome P450-dependent enzymes of alkaloid
                  biosynthesis  gene  cluster  of  Gibberella  fujikuroi:  Des  and  P450-3  encode        formation in the Mexican prickly poppy Argemone mexicana. Arch Biochem Biophys
            GA4 desaturase and the 13-hydroxylase, respectively. J Biol Chem 278:28635–28643.         507:186–193.University
              33. Kim J-E, et al. (2005) Putative polyketide synthase and laccase genes for biosynthesis     62. Hauser FM, Sengupta D, Corlett SA (1994) Optically active total synthesis of calphostin
                 of aurofusarin in Gibberella zeae. Appl Environ Microbiol 71:1701–1708.                   D. J Org Chem 59:1967–1969.Ocean          34. Williams JS, Thomas M, Clarke DJ (2005) The gene stlA encodes a phenylalanine     63. Bode SE, Drochner D, Müller M (2007) Synthesis, biosynthesis, and absolute config-
                ammonia-lyase that is involved in the production of a stilbene antibiotic in Photo-        uration of vioxanthin. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 46:5916–5920.
               rhabdus luminescens TT01. Microbiology 151:2543–2550.                                 64. Kawaguchi M, et al. (2018) Discovery of a fungal multicopper oxidase that catalyzesChina          35. Frandsen RJN, et al. (2011) Two novel classes of enzymes are required for the bio-        the regioselective coupling of a tricyclic naphthopyranone to produce atropisomers.
by              synthesis of aurofusarin in Fusarium graminearum. J Biol Chem 286:10419–10428.        Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 57:5115–5119.
https://www.pnas.org
from
Downloaded


           E5466   |  www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1712798115                                                                            de Jonge et al.