
[PDF physical page 1]
           www.nature.com/ismej




       ARTICLE    OPEN
     Biogeographic patterns of biosynthetic potential and
     specialized metabolites in marine sediments
          Alexander B. Chase  1✉, Alexander Bogdanov2, Alyssa M. Demko   2 and Paul R. Jensen    2,3

        © The Author(s) 2023



             While the ﬁeld of microbial biogeography has largely focused on the contributions of abiotic factors to community patterns, the
               potential inﬂuence of biotic interactions in structuring microbial communities, such as those mediated by the production of
               specialized metabolites, remains largely unknown. Here, we examined the relationship between microbial community structure and
               specialized metabolism at local spatial scales in marine sediment samples collected from the Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER)
                 site in Moorea, French Polynesia. By employing a multi-omic approach to characterize the taxonomic, functional, and specialized
              metabolite composition within sediment communities, we ﬁnd that biogeographic patterns were driven by local scale processes
                   (e.g., biotic interactions) and largely independent of dispersal limitation. Speciﬁcally, we observed high variation in biosynthetic
               potential (based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarity) between samples, even within 1 m2 plots, that reﬂected uncharacterized chemical
             space associated with site-speciﬁc metabolomes. Ultimately, connecting biosynthetic potential to community metabolomes
                 facilitated the in situ detection of natural products and revealed new insights into the complex metabolic dynamics associated with
             sediment microbial communities. Our study demonstrates the potential to integrate biosynthetic genes and metabolite production1234567890();,:
               into assessments of microbial community dynamics.

             The ISME Journal (2023) 17:976–983; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-023-01410-3




        INTRODUCTION                                                    often inferred from genomic potential as estimated through the
         The biogeographic processes that generate and maintain micro-     detection of natural product biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) or
             bial  diversity, such as environmental  selection,  dispersal, and     other biosynthetic enzymes [12, 13]. These environmental surveys
           species  interactions,  offer  insights  into the mechanisms  that    have identiﬁed habitat-speciﬁc patterns of biosynthetic potential
            structure microbiomes [1]. At large (i.e., continental) spatial scales,     [14, 15], suggesting that specialized metabolites exhibit a biogeo-
         community structure  is primarily driven by dispersal limitation     graphic  signal  in  concordance  with  taxonomic  composition.
           with environmental ﬁlters selecting for speciﬁc taxa at increasingly    Although these types of analyses are valuable, the environmental
           smaller spatial scales  [2,  3]. At local spatial scales, there  is an     factors that elicit BGC expression remain largely unknown, as well as
          assumption that biotic interactions (e.g., predation, competition),    the concentrations at which compounds occur in nature and their
           including those mediated by chemical communication [4], largely     roles  in mediating community  interactions. Given the  recent
          account for the differences among communities (beta-diversity)    advancements in mass spectrometry and other analytical tools,
               [5]. The wide array of biologically active microbial specialized    the in situ detection of microbial natural products [16, 17] and their
           metabolites produced in response to both environmental cues    inﬂuence on community structure remains an essential frontier for
         and  species  interactions  likely  contribute  to  differences  in    the ﬁeld of microbial ecology.
         community composition at small spatial scales [6, 7]. However,       Here, we sought to focus on both biosynthetic potential and
          understanding how these complex chemical interactions con-     realized natural product production in the context of marine
            tribute to community dynamics has largely been ignored.           sediment microbial community structure across varying spatial
            While there  is a growing appreciation for microbial chemical     scales. To do so, we compared microbial community composition
          ecology  [8], challenges associated with the in situ detection of    from 176 marine sediment samples collected from the Long-Term
            specialized metabolites has hampered our understanding of their     Ecological Research (LTER) site in Moorea, French Polynesia. While
            effects on community dynamics. For instance, marine sediment    benthic cover, nutrient input, and microbial communities asso-
            bacteria are proliﬁc producers of small molecule natural products or     ciated with coral reefs and the surrounding seawater have been
            specialized metabolites  [9] that include potent antibiotics and     tracked at the Moorea LTER, little work has been done on the
            cytotoxins.  Yet, most  of  our knowledge  of  natural  product    sediment microbial communities. Given that shifts in sediment
           production is inferred from lab cultures, providing limited insights    microbiomes can impact above-sediment community health and
            into their ecological roles within a community context [10, 11]. Due    dynamics [18, 19], we aimed to broaden our understanding of this
           to these challenges, molecules mediating such interactions are     well-studied ecosystem.



             1Department of Earth Sciences, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX, USA. 2Center for Marine Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
               University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. 3Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. ✉email: abchase@smu.edu

           Received: 26 January 2023 Revised: 29 March 2023 Accepted: 31 March 2023
           Published online: 15 April 2023


[PDF physical page 2]
                                                                                       A.B. Chase et al.

                                                                                                         977

 Table 1.  Results from permutational analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) for the effects of site, reef type (back vs. fringing), and geographic distance
 on microbial community metrics.

                      Taxonomic composition                            Functional             Biosynthetic          Realized
                                                                       composition            potential             potential

                   ASV (Bray-     ASV          Metagenomes   Pfam              OBUs     GCFs     Metabolome
                            Curtis)           (UniFrac)

  Site (R2)                 0.18***           0.17***            0.25**             0.22                    0.19***     0.25***     0.28***

  Reef type (R2)           0.07***           0.07***            0.07**             0.07*                   0.04**      0.06**      0.09***

 Geographic distance     0.03***           0.01***          <0.0001          <0.01                    0.01**      0.01**      0.01***
  (R2)
 Percent of variance explained depicted as R2 values for each effect with level of signiﬁcance (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001).
 ASV amplicon sequence variants of the 16 S rRNA gene, Pfam protein families, OBU operational biosynthetic unit, GCF gene cluster family.


  To determine how microbial community structure and specia-
lized metabolism are linked at local spatial scales, we employed a
multi-omic approach to characterize the taxonomic composition,
functional and biosynthetic potential, and community metabo-
lomes  within  reef-associated  sediments. We  constrained our
sampling to a single LTER  site (LTER2) to minimize negative
correlations between taxonomic community similarity and geo-
graphic  distances  (“distance-decay”  effects),  thereby  limiting
environmental variation and increasing our ability to determine
if community metabolomes inﬂuence composition  [3]. Further-
more, we employed a partially nested sampling design across
eight replicate plots to provide sample comparisons ranging from
cm to km scales within this relatively homogeneous environment
(Fig. S1A). In doing so, we expected that variation in community
composition  (beta-diversity) would largely be independent of
distance effects  (i.e., high community similarity with low slope
over the distance-decay curve). Rather, we hypothesized that local
site differences could be linked to biosynthetic potential and
community metabolomes, as evidenced by low compositional
similarity in BGC composition and specialized metabolite produc-
tion. Although most compounds  detected  using  untargeted
environmental metabolomics could not be identiﬁed, correlations       Fig. 1  Biogeography of microbial community structure in reef-
between compounds and community structure were nonetheless     associated marine sediments. Solid lines denote the least squares
                                                                               linear regression across spatial scales for taxonomic, functional,established. Our paired metagenomic-metabolomic approach also
                                                                       biosynthetic potential (assessed based on both operational biosyn-
facilitated  linkages between unknown  metabolites and  their                                                                             thetic units (OBUs) of ketosynthase/condensation domains and
candidate  biosynthetic machinery, which  is  useful  for  future                                                          gene cluster families (GCFs)), and community metabolomes. Each
natural product discovery efforts.                                    point  represents  a  pairwise  comparison between community
                                                               samples with distances derived from Bray-Curtis metrics for  all
                                                           measurements except  for metabolomes, which used Euclidean
RESULTS                                                                 distances.
Community patterns in marine sediments
Sediment samples were collected from eight replicate 1 m2 plots      To assess changes in community composition across cm to km
within and around the Long-Term Ecological site LTER2 in Moorea,     scales within a more homogeneous environment, we excluded
French Polynesia (Fig. S1A). LTER2 is characterized by high nitrogen      site 6 and narrowed our focus to the reef-dominated sediment
levels (all sites = 0.5 ± 0.06 %N based on algal tissue; Fig. S1B) and    samples (inset, Fig. S1A). We found that microbial community
steady coral degradation over time (Fig. S1C). The eight collection    composition was largely structured at local scales (Fig. S3A; Bray-
sites (depth range 0.6–3.1 m) could be further deﬁned as back (n = 4)     Curtis, p < 0.001 [PERMANOVA]), with site effects accounting for
and fringing (n = 4) reef, seven of which were characterized by light    18.2% of total variation and reef type (fringing vs. back reef)
colored, relatively coarse sediments consistent with high calcium     contributing an additional 7.2% (Table 1; p < 0.001 [PERMANOVA]).
carbonate content. One fringing reef site (site 6) was dominated by     This was further supported by a distance-decay curve demonstrat-
algae and characterized by ﬁne dark sediment containing small rocks.     ing  a  signiﬁcant,  negative  slope  with community  similarity
Our nested sampling design (16 subsamples × 8 sites + 4 transects    decreasing  as  a  function  of  geographic  distance  (slope =
per site = 176) allowed for 16 S rRNA gene community composition     −0.000013, p < 0.001; pink line in Fig. 1). While a small negative
comparisons across a range of spatial scales. We observed similar    slope was observed, distance effects only explained 3.3% of the
community compositions across all sites at broad taxonomic levels     total variation in community composition (Table 1; reporting R2
with Proteobacteria and Cyanobacteria dominating the communities     [linear regression]), suggesting that factors other than dispersal
(Fig. S2A). At ﬁner-taxonomic levels, as assessed using 16 S rRNA gene     limitation are responsible  for community  differences. Indeed,
amplicon sequence variants (ASVs), we observed a distinct separation   when we corrected for ASV phylogenetic relatedness (Weighted
between the algae-dominated site (site 6) and the other reef sites     UniFrac), we observed a signiﬁcantly shallower slope (Fig. S3C;
(Fig. S2B), thus supporting previous ﬁndings that the transition     slope = −0.000003, p < 0.001) suggesting that community varia-
between reef and algae-dominated habitats is reﬂected in microbial     tion over spatial distances was largely associated with differences
community composition [20].                              among closely related taxa. Given the high correlation between


The ISME Journal (2023) 17:976 – 983


[PDF physical page 3]
                                                                      A.B. Chase et al.

978





        Fig. 2  Biosynthetic potential across marine sediment communities. A Similarity network of identiﬁed biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs)
      clustered into gene cluster families (GCFs), colored by BGC classiﬁcation. Inset pie chart depicts relative proportion of BGC classes. Black nodes
      indicate known reference BGCs from the MIBIG database. Singleton and doubleton GCFs not shown. B BGC distributions across the bacterial
     phylogeny colored by phyla. Moorea MAGs denoted in black. A subset of reference genomes/MAGs indicated in light gray.

      beta-diversity  metrics (Spearman’s ρ = 0.77, p < 0.001 [Mantel    p < 0.05 [PERMANOVA]), possibly owing to higher N input from
       test]), the distance-decay patterns indicate that most composi-    nearshore storm runoff at the fringing reef sites [21].
      tional variation was due to local scale variation driven by site      Both taxonomic and functional variation analyses indicate that
       effects.                                                                     local (within) site processes are contributing to differences among
                                                                           microbial communities. Given that specialized metabolites can
     Functional conservation and biosynthetic variation across       mediate  biotic  interactions   [8], we  further  explored  these
      sites                                                                  functional differences across sediment communities by focusing
     Given the negative, shallow distance-decay slopes for taxonomic    on biosynthetic  potential. To reduce  biases introduced from
     composition observed across small (<1 m) to large  (ca. 1 km)    assembly-based methods, we ﬁrst extracted all ketosynthase (KS)
      spatial  scales  (Fig.  S3C), we  next asked whether  functional    and condensation (C) domains from the unassembled data, which
      potential exhibited  similar  patterns. To do  so, we generated     are  integral  to  the  biosynthesis  of  polyketides  (PKs)  and
     shotgun metagenomic data from 36 samples (meandepth = 205 M    nonribosomal  peptides  (NRPs),  respectively.  After  clustering
      reads) across  all eight  sites to  initially compare algal to reef    domains into operational biosynthetic units (OBUs) at 80% amino
     samples. Due to possible sequencing biases, we ﬁrst conﬁrmed     acid similarity, based on the prediction that domains in the same
      that the taxonomic patterns derived from the metagenomic data   OBU  will encode the biosynthesis of similar natural products
      recapitulated the 16 S rRNA gene results (Table 1; Fig. S3D) and     [22,  23], we  found  high  community  dissimilarity  in OBU
      that site differences were consistent across technical replicates    composition across sites with a signiﬁcant, but shallower distance
       (Fig.  S3E). Subsequently, we investigated  functional  potential     effect compared to taxonomic composition (slope = −0.0000033,
      across communities that may indicate environmental differences    p < 0.01; blue line in Fig. 1). Distance effects only explained 1.1% of
      within  LTER2.  In  terms  of  primary  metabolic  pathways,  all   OBU compositional variation across samples while  site effects
     sediment communities were similarly enriched in nitrogen cycling    explained 19.3% of variation and reef type (fringing vs. back reef)
     and methanogenesis genes  (Fig. S4A) and common glycoside     contributing an additional 4% (Table 1; both p < 0.01 [PERMA-
     hydrolase genes related to the degradation of simple carbon    NOVA]). Thus, broad community functions (i.e., primary metabo-
      substrates like oligosaccharides and starch (Fig. S4B). To compare     lism) did not differ over geographic distances, but specialized
      functional  potential  with community  composition, we  again     microbial functions  (i.e., specialized metabolism) exhibited ﬁne-
     excluded the algae-dominated site 6 and found that 21.9% of     scale local differences among sediment communities.
     the variation in total functional composition, based on protein      From the assembled metagenomes, we reconstructed 3,137
      family (Pfam) abundances, was explained by local site effects. This     biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) across  all samples (Fig. S5B).
      relationship did not  signiﬁcantly  differ across  sites  (Table  1;    These were predominantly associated with NRP and terpene
     p > 0.05 [PERMANOVA]), as we observed high functional redun-     biosynthesis. After clustering these BGCs into 1147 gene cluster
     dancy across the reef sediment communities that was indepen-     families (GCFs; Fig. 2A), we found that only 14 were related to
     dent of distance effects:  i.e., geographic distance accounted for     experimentally characterized BGCs [24], the products of which
     only 0.3% of functional variation (orange line in Fig. 1; reporting R2     include peptins, carotenoids, and heterocyst glycolipids (Fig. S5A).
       [linear  regression]:  slope = −0.0000011,  p > 0.05).  Similar  to    The  remaining  GCFs  represent  uncharacterized  biosynthetic
     taxonomic composition, 7.4% of the total functional variation     potential. We observed minimal GCF overlap among samples
     was signiﬁcantly associated with reef type (back vs. fringing reef;    with only two shared across all eight sites. Both could be assigned



                                                                                                    The ISME Journal (2023) 17:976 – 983


[PDF physical page 4]
                                                                                       A.B. Chase et al.

                                                                                                         979





Fig. 3  Community metabolomes and candidate producers. A Principal Component Analysis (PCA) showing differences in community
metabolomes. Colored ellipses represent 75% conﬁdence intervals around each site. Inset depicts contributions of the top molecular features
to the principal dimensions with black lines denoting features with predicted molecular formulas shown above. B MS2 fragmentation of
feature772 with diagnostic bromination signature, calculated mass, and probable molecular structure. C Abundance of feature772 across sites
based on feature intensity in MS1 chromatograms. Black bars represent medians, diamonds represent means. D Linear regression of
feature772 with the abundance of Myxococcota MAG082.26 (assessed by reads per kilobase mapped, RPKM). E Candidate BGC for feature772.
Arrows represent individual genes and colored by predicted function.

to alphaproteobacterium based on metagenome-assembled gen-     particular,  we  assembled  a   high-quality   Acidobacteriota
ome (MAG)  classiﬁcations  (order:  Kiloniellales; abundance16S =    MAG135.14 (91% complete, 4% contamination, genome size =
0.38 ± 0.45%). These ubiquitous GCFs were predicted to encode     11.6 Mbp) from a single sample that encoded 76 BGCs (2.2 Mbp
an unknown thioaminidated ribosomal peptide (TfuA-related BGC)     or 18.7% of the genome, average BGC length = 28.6 kbp), a
and a hopene-like terpene (GCF868 and GCF452  in  Fig. 2A,    number that surpasses any known MAG or genome including
respectively). Only one GCF was found in all reef-associated sites    those documented across a global metagenomic dataset [25].
but absent in the algae-dominated samples  (site  6). This GCF    While the fragmentation of many BGCs likely skews BGC content,
encoded a hybrid terpene-bacteriocin, with some similarity to the    these approaches offer insights into unexplored chemical space
BGC associated with the common carotenoid zeaxanthin (Fig. 2A),    and taxa. Together, both OBU and GCF metrics demonstrate
and was observed in a group of Desulfobacterota MAGs (order:    high  levels  of  variability  in  the  biosynthetic  potential  of
Desulfobacterales; abundance16S = 5.95 ± 2.6%). Most of the GCFs    sediment microbial communities, even within 1 m2 sites. This
(accounting for 679 of the 3137 BGCs) shared no similarity with      likely reﬂects a wealth of uncharacterized biosynthetic potential
other GCFs within or across sites and thus were represented as     that was not previously documented in global databases.
unconnected nodes in the network. This lack of GCF overlap
resulted in low compositional similarity with high GCF composi-    Connecting biosynthetic potential to community
tional differences across geographic distances (Table 1; slope =    metabolomes
−0.0000097, p < 0.01; green line in Fig. 1), thus indicating unique    While gene-based surveys are indicative of biosynthetic potential,
biosynthetic gene assemblages within each sample.             many BGCs are dependent on speciﬁc environmental triggers for
  To  further  explore  primary  and  specialized  taxonomic     expression [26] and thus remain silent under laboratory conditions
distributions, we examined  the metabolic and  biosynthetic      [27]. Therefore, to investigate how biosynthetic potential trans-
potential of the 789 MAGs (Table  S1), which accounted for     lated to compound production, we  utilized untargeted liquid
84% (2635 of 3137) of all assembled BGCs. These MAGs were    chromatography–high-resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS) to
predominantly identiﬁed as Cyanobacteria and Proteobacteria,    analyze extracts from the sediment samples (n = 36) used for the
mirroring our community composition results (Fig. S2A). We ﬁrst    metagenomic  analyses.  In  total, we  identiﬁed 2164 unique
analyzed our medium- (n = 80; completeness > 70%, contam-    molecular features and show that the major taxonomic differences
ination < 10%) and high-quality (n = 88; completeness > 85%,    between the reef and algae-dominated communities (Fig. S2B)
contamination < 10%) MAGs  (dereplicated  to n = 104)  for     translated to the metabolomes (Fig. S6A). After removing controls
primary metabolic potential. In terms of the dominant primary    and features from the algae-dominated site 6, the reef-associated
metabolic pathways across communities (Fig. S4A), Gammapro-    sediment metabolomes displayed clear site-speciﬁc signatures
teobacteria MAGs encoded genes for the (de)nitriﬁcation and N      (Fig. 3A; Euclidean distance). Indeed, the community metabolome
ﬁxation  pathways  while  Desulfobacterota MAGs  converted     strongly reﬂected local site and reef type (fringing vs. back reef),
methylamine to ammonia as part of methanogenesis. In terms    accounting for 27.5% and 9.4% of the total variation, respectively
of  biosynthetic  potential, we  compared  our  dereplicated     (Table 1; both p < 0.001 [PERMANOVA]). The site-speciﬁc metabo-
medium- and high-quality MAGs to a variety of closely related    lome signatures were strongly reﬂected in our distance-decay
genomes/MAGs from taxa that are known for high abundances    curves (purple line in  Fig. 1) where metabolite similarity was
of BGCs and specialized metabolite production  (Fig.  2B).  In     greatest within sites.


The ISME Journal (2023) 17:976 – 983


[PDF physical page 5]
                                                                      A.B. Chase et al.

980
       While local site effects accounted for an increasing percent of    Linking metabolites to producers
      variation explained when moving from taxonomy (16 S rRNA     Pairing metagenomic and metabolomic datasets provides oppor-
     gene) to biosynthetic potential (GCF) to metabolomes (Table 1),     tunities to  link compounds to  their cognate BGCs based on
    we did not observe strong correlations across these metrics. For     correlations in relative abundances and predicted biochemistry.
      instance, metabolite composition did not correlate with either 16 S    While most molecular features provided only minimal structural
     rRNA gene ASV (Spearman’s ρ = −0.02, p > 0.05 [Mantel test]) or     information, we identiﬁed one with the diagnostic MS isotopic
    OBU compositions (Spearman’s ρ = 0.16, p > 0.05 [Mantel test]).     pattern of a dibrominated compound with the most intensive
      Rather,  these  compositional  metrics may  indicate  that ﬁner    peak m/z = 452.9857 [M+H]+ and the lowest m/z = 450.9876 [M
      resolution  is needed to correlate taxa, biosynthetic genes, and    +H]+ (Fig. 3B). The calculated molecular formula (C15H20Br2N2O4)
     compounds. When we assessed the correlation between meta-    had no matches in the MarinLit database [31] and likely represents
     bolomes and ﬁne-scale taxonomic marker genes  (i.e., diversity    a new natural product. Extracts containing the highest amounts of
     below the 16 S rRNA gene) derived from metagenomic data [28],     this compound were pooled (Fig. S7A) and fractionated for LC-
    we found higher congruence between metabolomes and taxa   HRMS  (Fig. S7B). The spectra suggested an alkaloid (Fig. S7C)
     (Spearman’s ρ = 0.37, p < 0.01 [Mantel test]). These results suggest     consisting of a decarboxylated dibromotyrosine (high intensity
      that ﬁner levels of taxonomic resolution are needed to resolve    peak m/z = 291.8975 [36], Fig. S7D) fused over an amide bond to
      relationships between specialized metabolites and their produ-    an  aspartic  acid derived  betaine, which corresponds  to the
       cers.  Finally,  these  results  indicate  that deep metagenomic    observed mass loss of 159.089 Da and the high polarity (water
     sequencing,  as  performed  here,  can  promote  connections     soluble) of the compound  (Fig. S7B). This new compound  is
     between the inherently complex multi-omic datasets generated     structurally related to sponge-derived alkaloids [37]. However, due
     from environmental samples.                                        to the low compound  yield, we were unable to explore  its
       To  determine how  microbial community metabolomes  are    molecular structure further using nuclear magnetic resonance
      structured at local scales, we applied machine learning approaches    (NMR). This compound was observed at all sites except the algae-
      to identify molecular features driving metabolomic variation across    dominated site 6 with its highest abundance at site 3 (Fig. 3C).
      samples. Cheminformatic tools associated with the GNPS online     After correlating MAG abundances with the  intensity of  this
      platform facilitated the analysis of our large LC-MS datasets and the    dibrominated  compound,  we  identiﬁed  the  Myxococcota
      identiﬁcation of molecules based on the comparison of MS/MS    MAG082.26 as a possible producing organism and a group of
      fragmentation spectra with over 580,000 library spectra [29]. We     Desulfobacterota MAGs  that have  the  potential  to use  this
      visualized the chemical space present in the sediment metabolomes    dibrominated molecule as an oxidant during respiration.
      using feature-based molecular networking [30] (Fig. S6B). Comparable      The high-quality Myxococcota MAG082.26 (93% complete) has a
      with the biosynthetic potential encoded in the metagenomes, we   genome size of 7.7 Mbp and is distantly related to all reported
     observed a large proportion of singleton nodes in the network (1770,   genome or MAG sequences in this phylum, with its closest relative
     81.8%) indicating the detection of large numbers of structurally    (77.4% average nucleotide identity [ANI]) belonging to the MAG-
      unrelated compounds. In addition, 357 features (16.5% of the total)     associated UBA9160 family. MAG082.26 was assembled from site
     were observed at one site and 185 (8.5%) were shared between two      3, which contained the highest concentrations of the dibromi-
        sites,  further  highlighting  the  ﬁne-scale  spatial  differences  in    nated aromatic metabolite, and was positively correlated with the
     community metabolomes. Further multivariate and random forest    mass of this compound across  all samples  (Fig. 3D; R2 = 0.21
      analyses revealed unidentiﬁed molecular features that were respon-     [linear regression]). The biosynthesis of this molecule requires the
       sible for sample and site differences (inset in Fig. 3A).                 halogenation of the aromatic phenyl ring (i.e., dibromotyrosine),
       While a majority  of the compounds associated with the    which  has been  previously shown  in marine  myxobacterial
     metabolomic differences among sites could not be identiﬁed,    metabolites   such   as   salimabromide    [38].   Myxococcota
     even after manual inspection, database searches [31], and other    MAG082.26  harbors  nine BGCs  of which one  contains two
     cheminformatic predictions [32], we were nonetheless successful     tetracycline 7-halogenase genes that share homology to bromi-
      in the identiﬁcation of several natural products in the marine    nases involved in the biosynthesis of the 2-arrylpyrrole moiety in
     sediment extracts. The initial structural predictions based on MS/    pentabromopseudilins  (MIBIG: BGC0000890/1) and bromopyr-
    MS  spectra comparisons with GNPS suggested 388 known    roles/bromophenols (MIBIG: BGC0001465). While the gene archi-
      features (Fig. S6B); however, many of these annotations proved     tecture  of  this BGC  is unique (Table  S2),  it  lacks the NRPS
     spurious after manual inspection of their MS/MS mirror plots to    component (i.e., adenylation domain) expected for the biosynth-
     reference spectra. Among the conﬁdently identiﬁed features,     esis of compound m/z = 452.9857 (Fig. 3E). While this remains the
     most could be  described  as  lipids,  chlorophyll breakdown    best candidate BGC assembled from our metagenomic data, more
     products  (e.g., pheophorbide), and carotenoids  (e.g.,  fucox-    work is needed to conﬁrm this connection.
      anthin). We also conﬁdently identiﬁed several microbial specia-      While investigating linkages between MAGs, BGCs, and the
      lized  metabolites  including  coumarin  derivatives  and  the    dibrominated metabolite, we identiﬁed a group of ﬁve related
      cyanobacterial derived cyclic depsipeptides hantupeptins A-C   MAGs (ANI ranges 77.2–98.5%) belonging to two bacterial families
      [33, 34], which were only detected at site 8 (Fig. S6B). The latter     within the order Desulfobacterales that were highly correlated with
      of these features were initially annotated by GNPS as the closely    the presence of this compound (R2 = 0.46 ± 0.01 [linear regression]).
      related antanapeptins A-C [35], but manual inspection of the    While  these  Desulfobacterota MAGs  lacked  the  biosynthetic
    MS/MS spectra revealed peaks corresponding to m/z = 228.1033    machinery to produce compound m/z = 452.9857, they encode a
     and 246.1112 (Fig. S6C), which are diagnostic for the proline-3-     reductive dehalogenase (rdh) operon (Fig. S8A/B) along with genes
      phenyllactic acid fragments in the hantupeptins [33]. While the     for cobalamin biosynthesis, a key cofactor associated with reductive
    BGC  for  hantupeptins  is unknown, we  identiﬁed  a  highly    dehalogenation [39]. Moreover, the rdh operon is co-localized with
     fragmented NRPS BGC from  the  site 8 metagenome  with     several genes encoding electron transport proteins (i.e., ferredoxins
    homology  to  the  distantly  related  anabaenopeptin  BGC    and NADH-quinone reductase complexes;  Fig.  S8A), providing
       (Fig.  S6D).  This  partial BGC included an LCL condensation    evidence that these microorganisms have the potential to use
     domain and an adenylation domain selecting for valine (Fig. S6E),    dibromophenol as a terminal electron acceptor during respiration.
     both  of which  are  predicted  for  hantupeptin  biosynthesis    These ﬁndings add to the complex functional roles of natural
      [33, 34]. Nevertheless, most molecular features could not be    products and support growing evidence that community metabo-
     annotated and represent unexplored chemical space associated    lomes are shaped both by compound production and subsequent
     with sediment metabolomes.                                    modiﬁcation by other members of the community [26, 40].


                                                                                                    The ISME Journal (2023) 17:976 – 983


[PDF physical page 6]
                                                                                       A.B. Chase et al.

                                                                                                         981
DISCUSSION                                                         microbial chemical ecology. The complex chemical landscapes
While the ﬁeld of microbial biogeography has largely focused on     associated with sediment microbial communities (Fig. 3A) coupled
the role of abiotic variables in structuring microbial distributions,    with the unprecedented biosynthetic potential of sediment MAGs
there  is growing appreciation for the role of microbial natural      (Fig. 2B) supports recent evidence that poorly studied phyla such as
products in mediating biotic interactions within microbiomes [8].     Acidobacteriota [57] and Myxococcota hold promise for future natural
The  ability  to  assess environmental metabolomes  is  rapidly    product discovery efforts. While this approach can facilitate the
improving [16, 41], providing opportunities to transcend culture-     prioritization of BGCs for heterologous expression based on the
based and synthetic community approaches or biosynthetic infer-     predicted novelty of their biosynthetic products (Fig. 2A), it remains
ences  derived  from  co-occurrence  networks  [42].  Here, we     difﬁcult to connect molecules with their cognate BGCs when dealing
assessed the  relationships between community metabolomes    with complex microbial communities [58], as we have attempted to
and composition at varying spatial scales by minimizing environ-    do with the hantupeptins (Fig. S6). Furthermore, the dynamics of
mental variation through extensive sampling within a relatively     specialized metabolism are complex, with molecules not only
homogeneous environment. We observed distinct biogeographic    produced but also degraded or metabolized. Our detection of a
patterns  associated  with  taxonomic  composition,  functional    dibrominated tyrosine metabolite (Fig. 3B) and a MAG containing
genes, biosynthetic potential, and the environmental detection    the  genetic  potential  to  metabolize  this compound  provide
of natural products. Finally, our multi-omics approach facilitated    examples of the interplay between these processes. Ultimately, a
potential connections between metabolites, producing organisms,    major goal remains to better understand the roles of environmental
and those that may beneﬁt from their production.                metabolomes in shaping microbial community composition.
  By reducing environmental variation through sampling within a
single LTER site, we found evidence for biogeographic patterns
that were largely independent of dispersal limitation. For example,   CONCLUSION
geographic distance did not explain a large portion of community    Recent methodological advancements have enabled the incorpora-
variance  across  all community measurements (<4%  of  total     tion of metabolomics into assessments of microbial diversity. Multi-
variance explained; Table  1), indicating that  local, within  site    omic studies of this type can begin to reveal the potential roles of
processes   (e.g.,  biotic  mechanisms)  are  driving  community     specialized metabolites  in  structuring microbial communities  in
differences. This was evidenced from broad inter-habitat differ-    complex environmental biomes. These molecules likely mediate a
ences between the reef- and algae-dominated sites (Fig. S2C) and    myriad of largely undeﬁned interactions among community mem-
the high community similarity across spatial distances (Fig. 1), a     bers and the environment. A better understanding of environmental
pattern that was accentuated after correcting for phylogenetic    metabolomes and their functional roles will provide a new dimension
relatedness (Fig. S3C). While ecological drift can account for local     to assessments of microbial diversity and distributions.
scale differences [43], our results suggest that biotic interactions,
as measured by biosynthetic potential and specialized metabolite
production, are linked to local biogeographic patterns. In both   METHODS AND MATERIALS
cases, we observed high community dissimilarity in biosynthetic     Field site and sample collection
potential (Fig. 1) and pronounced local site effects in community     Sediment samples were collected from the barrier reef lagoon surrounding
metabolome composition (Fig. 3A; Table 1). These patterns are     the island of Moorea, French Polynesia. We collected samples adjacent to
                                                                         the back and fringing reefs within eight replicate 1 m2 plots in and aroundlargely congruent with observations of soil fungal communities,
                                                                         the Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) Site 2 (Fig. S1A). Plot locationswhere local scale patterns were driven by extracellular enzyme
                                                                 were selected based on proximity to either the fringing reef (n = 4) or the
production [44] that was not reﬂected in community composition.                                                                    back reef (n = 4). Sites 1–4 were designated as back reef sites with a depth
  Given the  increasing awareness  that  natural products  play     range of 1.83–3.05 m. Site 5–8 were initially designated as fringing reef
important roles in structuring microbial communities, connecting      sites (<150 m from shore) that ranged in depth from 0.61–1.83 m, while
chemical compounds with their producers (and associated biosyn-      site 6 was further designated as algae-dominated on the predominance of
thetic machinery) and ultimately to ecological interactions remains a    seaweeds and lack of living coral.
priority  [45]. Despite major methodological advances, <5%  of       Within each 1 m2 plot, 16 subsamples were taken using a gridded
metabolites detected in marine systems can be identiﬁed [46] and     design (Fig. S1A; n = 128). Additionally, sediments were sampled every
                                                                   meter along a 4 m transect in each cardinal direction away from the 1m2fewer could be linked to ecological functions. Our results further
                                                                                 plots (n = 256, 128 from plots, 128 from transects). All sediments samplesdemonstrate  the  limitations  of  cheminformatic  tools  for  the
                                                                      (~80 g each) were collected in sterile Whirl-Pak bags and transferred on ice
identiﬁcation of environmental specialized metabolites and the                                                                    back to the ﬁeld  station  for processing. Approximately 7 g  of each
importance of stringent manual curation. In addition, untargeted     sediment sample was transferred to a 15 mL Falcon tube with 7 mL of
metabolomics may miss low concentration compounds produced     RNALater for subsequent community analyses. All tubes and the remaining
by members of the “rare biosphere” that are important contributors     sediment were stored at −20 °C until processing except when in transit to
to the specialized metabolite pools in marine sediments [47]. Finally,     Scripps Institution of Oceanography when dry ice was used.
correlation analyses built from co-occurrence networks of taxonomy       LTER data related to N content, heat stress, and coral degradation were
and metabolites typically rely on coarse taxonomic markers, such as     sourced from publicly available data (see [21, 59]). Brieﬂy, in R, public
the 16 S rRNA gene. Given the lack of concordance between these     geospatial data from LTER monitoring was interpolated by converting
                                                                       geographic coordinates  for our  collection  sites to geospatial vectorsparameters in our results, combined with evidence of high trait
                                                                                    (st_as_sf in  ‘sf’ package) and applying a kriging algorithm (kriging in
variation within 16S-deﬁned taxa [48, 49],  it appears that more                                                                                           ‘kriging’ package) to predict environmental values at our sites.
highly resolved taxonomic marker are needed to assess relation-
ships between metabolomes and the structure of complex microbial
communities at ﬁne  spatial  scales. A  likely contributor to  this    16S rRNA gene sequencing and analysis
                                                                                              All quadrat samples (n = 128) and transect tips (n = 32) were processed forobservation is the ﬁne-scale phylogenetic conservation in specia-
                                                    DNA extraction. Mid-point transect samples (n = 4) were also processed for
lized metabolite production and BGC composition within taxa                                                                                            site 3, which was qualitatively identiﬁed as having the highest coral cover.
[50–53]. Nonetheless, at large spatial scales and across disparate      All remaining transect samples from site 6 were also processed to increase
environments,   broad   patterns   of   biosynthetic   potential      spatial comparisons among the algae-dominated site (n = 12). In total,
[14, 15, 54, 55] and the abundance of microbially-related metabolites    176 samples were processed for 16 S rRNA gene sequencing. For DNA
have been shown to vary in a habitat-speciﬁc manner [56].               extraction, ~2 g of sediment in RNALater was processed by the Center for
  The integration of environmental metabolomes into microbiome     Microbiome Innovation (CMI) at UC San Diego using the MagAttract
research provides a new framework  to address  questions  in     PowerSoil DNA KF kit (Qiagen). Samples were subsequently sequenced


The ISME Journal (2023) 17:976 – 983


[PDF physical page 7]
                                                                      A.B. Chase et al.

982
      with the MiSeq System PE150 platform (Illumina) using the V4 region 515         9. Fenical W, Jensen PR. Developing a new resource for drug discovery: marine
      forward primer (GTGYCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA) and the updated 806 reverse         actinomycete bacteria. Nat Chem Biol. 2006;2:666–73.
      primer (GGACTACNVGGGTWTCTAAT) recommended by the Earth Micro-      10. Palmer JD, Foster KR. Bacterial species rarely work together. Science. 2022;376:581–2.
     biome Project [60]. For increased sequencing depth to capture the rare      11. Rodríguez-Verdugo A, Ackermann M. Rapid evolution destabilizes species inter-
      biosphere, two separate sequencing runs were performed for community          actions in a ﬂuctuating environment. ISME J. 2021;15:450–60.
      analyses (see Supplemental Materials).                                                12. Sharrar AM, Crits-Christoph A, Méheust R, Diamond  S, Starr EP, Banﬁeld  JF.
                                                                                                             Bacterial secondary metabolite biosynthetic potential in soil varies with phylum,
                                                                                               depth, and vegetation type. mBio. 2020;11:1–17.
    Metagenomic sequencing and analysis                                                                                                      13. Reddy BVB, Kalliﬁdas D, Kim JH, Charlop-Powers Z, Feng Z, Brady SF. Natural
      For a subset of samples (n = 36) representing  all eight  sites, shotgun
                                                                                           product biosynthetic gene diversity in geographically distinct soil microbiomes.
     metagenomic libraries were constructed using a Nextera XT DNA library
                                                                                        Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012;78:3744–52.
      preparation kit (Illumina) at the CMI. To reduce sequencing biases, 20 of
                                                                                                      14. Charlop-Powers  Z, Owen  JG, Reddy BVB, Ternei MA, Brady  SF. Chemical-
     36 samples were sequenced in triplicate on a HiSeq system (Illumina) with
                                                                                            biogeographic survey of secondary metabolism in soil. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
      150-bp paired end reads. Technical replicates were initially processed as
                                                                                              2014;111:3757–62.
      independent samples and assessed for variance in taxonomic composition
                                                                                                      15. Singh HW, Creamer KE, Chase AB, Klau LJ, Podell S, Jensen PR. Metagenomic data
       (see below). Upon validation, technical replicates were combined for all
                                                                                                       reveal  type    I  polyketide  synthase  distributions  across  biomes.  bioRxiv
     downstream analyses. The remaining samples were sequenced on a
                                                                                                 2023.01.09.523365. 2023. https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.09.523365.
     NovaSeq 6000 System (Illumina) with 150-bp paired end reads to achieve
                                                                                                      16. Tuttle RN, Demko AM, Patin N V., Kapono CA, Donia MS, Dorrestein P, et  al.
       similar sequencing depth (meandepth = 205 M reads). Raw reads were         Detection of natural products and their producers in ocean sediments. Appl
       quality  trimmed  with  adapters removed  using  the BBMap  toolkit
                                                                                               Environ Microbiol. 2019;85:e02830-18.
      (bbduk.sh) [61]. Processed reads were then analyzed using both a read-
                                                                                                      17. Roach TNF, Little M, Arts MGI, Huckeba J, Haas AF, George EE, et al. A multiomic
     based (for taxonomic, functional, and KS/C biosynthetic potential) and
                                                                                                          analysis  of  in  situ  coral–turf  algal  interactions.  Proc  Natl Acad  Sci USA.
      assembly-based approaches (see Supplemental Materials).
                                                                                              2020;117:13588–95.
                                                                                                      18. Gribben PE, Nielsen S, Seymour JR, Bradley DJ, West MN, Thomas T. Microbial
     Sediment metabolomics and mass spectrometry                        communities in marine sediments modify success of an invasive macrophyte. Sci
      For  the same samples used  to  construct shotgun metagenomes, we          Rep. 2017;7:9845.
       partitioned sediments (wet weight 50 g)  for chemical  extractions with      19. Studivan MS, Rossin AM, Rubin E, Soderberg N, Holstein DM, Enochs IC. Reef
      100 mL 1:1 methanol dichloromethane mixture. The solvent was ﬁltered and         sediments can act as a stony coral tissue loss disease vector. Front Mar Sci.
      evaporated under reduced pressure. The extracts were resuspended in HPLC          2022;8:2046.
      grade methanol with the supernatant removed and diluted to 1 mg/mL for LC-      20. Kelly LW, Williams GJ, Barott KL, Carlson CA, Dinsdale EA, Edwards RA, et al. Local
     HRMS analysis. Process controls were prepared analogously using the same        genomic adaptation of coral reef-associated microbiomes to gradients of natural
       glassware. LC-HRMS analysis was performed on a 6530 Accurate-Mass QToF            variability and anthropogenic stressors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014;111:10227–32.
      with ESI-source (Agilent) coupled with a 1260 Inﬁnity HPLC (Agilent) equipped      21. Donovan MK, Adam TC, Shantz AA, Speare KE, Munsterman KS, Rice MM, et al.
      with a 150×4.6 mm Kinetex C18 5 µm column (Phenomenex, USA). HPLC was         Nitrogen pollution interacts with heat stress to increase coral bleaching across
      run starting at 20:80 acetonitrile: water with 0.1 % formic acid (FA) for 2 min         the seascape. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2020;117:5351–7.
      followed by an 18 min gradient until 95 % acetonitrile (0.1 % FA), which we      22. Klau LJ, Podell S, Creamer KE, Demko AM, Singh HW, Allen EE, et al. The Natural
      held for 2 min and increased to 100 % acetonitrile over 1 min and held for         Product Domain Seeker version 2 (NaPDoS2) webtool  relates ketosynthase
     2 min. We injected 5 µL of a 1 mg/mL sample solution (MeOH) at a ﬂow of         phylogeny to biosynthetic function. J Biol Chem. 2022;298:102480.
     1 mL/min. MS data were acquired over a range 135–1700 m/z in positive mode.      23. Ziemert N, Lechner A, Wietz M, Millán-Aguiñaga N, Chavarria KL, Jensen PR.
        All solvents were LCMS grade. Paired metagenomic and metabolomic datasets           Diversity and evolution of secondary metabolism in the marine actinomycete
       for each sample are available on the Paired Omics Data Platform  [62].        genus Salinispora. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014;111:E1130–9.
      Chemoinformatic analyses are detailed in Supplementary Materials.                  24. Kautsar SA, Blin K, Shaw S, Navarro-Muñoz JC, Terlouw BR, van der Hooft JJJ, et al.
                                                                                        MIBiG 2.0: a repository for biosynthetic gene clusters of known function. Nucleic
                                                                                                Acids Res. 2020;48:D454–8.
    DATA AVAILABILITY                                                                 25. Nayfach S, Roux S, Seshadri R, Udwary D, Varghese N, Schulz F, et al. A genomic
                                                                                                  catalog of Earth’s microbiomes. Nat Biotechnol. 2020;39:499–509.
       Paired-end shotgun metagenomic and 16 S rRNA amplicon data were deposited in
                                                                                                      26. Chevrette MG, Thomas CS, Hurley A, Rosario-Melendez N, Sankaran K, Tu Y, et al.
       the NCBI Sequence Read Archive under the BioProject PRJNA611818. Public datasets
                                                                                      Microbiome composition modulates secondary metabolism in a multispecies
        for all metabolomic spectra ﬁles are available at massive.ucsd.edu (MSV000091150).
                                                                                                            bacterial community. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2022;119:e2212930119.
         All other data, including genomes, and relevant code used can be found at https://
                                                                                                      27. Chevrette MG, Gavrilidou A, Mantri S, Selem-Mojica N, Ziemert N, Barona-Gómez
       github.com/alex-b-chase/mooreaMS.
                                                                                                                               F. The conﬂuence of big data and evolutionary genome mining for the discovery
                                                                                                       of natural products. Nat Prod Rep. 2021;38:2024–0.
                                                                                                      28. Chase AB, Karaoz U, Brodie  EL, Gomez-Lunar  Z, Martiny AC, Martiny JBH.
    REFERENCES
                                                                                                       Microdiversity of an abundant terrestrial bacterium encompasses extensive var-
          1. Martiny JBH, Bohannan BJM, Brown JH, Colwell RK, Fuhrman JA, Green JL, et al.           iation in ecologically relevant traits. mBio. 2017;8:e01809–17.
           Microbial biogeography: putting microorganisms on the map. Nat Rev Microbiol.      29. Wang M, Carver JJ, Phelan VV, Sanchez LM, Garg N, Peng Y, et al. Sharing and
           2006;4:102–12.                                                            community curation of mass spectrometry data with Global Natural Products
          2. Hanson CA, Fuhrman JA, Horner-Devine MC, Martiny JBH. Beyond biogeographic           Social Molecular Networking. Nat Biotechnol. 2016;34:828–37.
            patterns:  processes  shaping  the  microbial  landscape.  Nat  Rev  Microbiol.      30. Nothias LF, Petras D, Schmid R, Dührkop K, Rainer J, Sarvepalli A, et al. Feature-
           2012;10:497–506.                                                              based molecular networking in the GNPS analysis environment. Nat Methods.
          3. Martiny JBH, Eisen JA, Penn K, Allison SD, Horner-Devine MC. Drivers of bacterial          2020;17:905–8.
            β-diversity depend on spatial scale. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011;108:7850–4.         31. Blunt JW, Copp BR, Keyzers RA, Munro MHG, Prinsep MR. Marine natural products.
          4. Atkinson S, Williams P. Quorum sensing and social networking in the microbial         Nat Prod Rep. 2015;32:116–11.
           world. J R Soc Interface. 2009;6:959–78.                                                 32. Mohimani H, Gurevich A, Shlemov A, Mikheenko A, Korobeynikov A, Cao L, et al.
          5. Milke F, Wagner-Doebler  I, Wienhausen G, Simon M. Selection, drift and com-          Dereplication of microbial metabolites through database search of mass spectra.
          munity interactions shape microbial biogeographic patterns in the Paciﬁc Ocean.         Nat Commun. 2018;9:4035.
          ISME J. 2022;16:2653–65.                                                                33. Tripathi A, Puddick J, Prinsep MR, Lee PPF, Tan LT. Hantupeptin A, a cytotoxic
          6. Tyc O, Song C, Dickschat JS, Vos M, Garbeva P. The ecological role of volatile and           cyclic depsipeptide from a Singapore collection of Lyngbya majuscula. J Nat Prod.
           soluble secondary metabolites produced by  soil bacteria. Trends Microbiol.          2009;72:29–32.
           2017;25:280–92.                                                                         34. Tripathi A, Puddick J, Prinsep MR, Lee PPF, Tan LT. Hantupeptins B and C, cyto-
          7. Uchimiya M, Schroer W, Olofsson M, Edison AS, Moran MA. Diel investments in           toxic cyclodepsipeptides from the marine cyanobacterium Lyngbya majuscula.
           metabolite production and consumption in a model microbial system. ISME J.          Phytochemistry. 2010;71:307–11.
           2021;16:1306–17.                                                                        35. Nogle LM, Gerwick WH. Isolation of four new cyclic depsipeptides, Antanapeptins
          8. Schmidt R, Ulanova D, Wick LY, Bode HB, Garbeva P. Microbe-driven chemical        A−D, and Dolastatin 16 from a Madagascan collection of Lyngbya majuscula. J
           ecology: past, present and future. ISME J. 2019;13:2656–63.                           Nat Prod. 2002;65:21–24.



                                                                                                    The ISME Journal (2023) 17:976 – 983


[PDF physical page 8]
                                                                                       A.B. Chase et al.

                                                                                                         983

36. Mohanty I, Tapadar S, Moore SG, Biggs JS, Freeman CJ, Gaul DA, et al. Presence of      62. Schorn MA, Verhoeven S, Ridder L, Huber F, Acharya DD, Aksenov AA, et al. A
    bromotyrosine alkaloids in marine sponges is independent of metabolomic and        community resource for paired genomic and metabolomic data mining. Nat
   microbiome architectures. mSystems. 2021;6:e01387–20.                       Chem Biol. 2021;17:363–8.
37. Peng J, Li J, Hamann MT. The marine bromotyrosine derivatives. Alkaloids Chem
     Biol. 2005;61:59–262.
38. Felder S, Dreisigacker S, Kehraus S, Neu E, Bierbaum G, Wright PR, et al. Sali-   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
   mabromide: unexpected chemistry from the obligate marine Myxobacterium                                                                                             This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (R01GM085770) to
   Enhygromyxa salina. Chem - A Eur J. 2013;19:9319–24.                                                                                               PRJ, a University of California Academic Senate seed grant to PRJ/ABC/AB, a Scripps
39. Liu J, Lopez N, Ahn Y, Goldberg T, Bromberg Y, Kerkhof LJ, et al. Novel reductive                                                                                         Postdoctoral Scholar Fellowship to ABC, a Marine Science Research Award from the
    dehalogenases from  the marine sponge  associated bacterium  Desulfoluna                                                                                             University of California San Diego (UCSD) Academic Senate to PRJ/AMD, and a National
    spongiiphila. Environ Microbiol Rep. 2017;9:537–49.                                 Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship to AMD (DGE-1650112). We thank
40. Stallforth P, Mittag M, Brakhage AA, Hertweck C, Hellmich UA. Functional mod-      Mitchell Muskat for assistance in sample processing, April Lukowski, Bradley Moore,
    ulation of chemical mediators in microbial communities. Trends Biochem Sci.                                                                                Douglas Sweeney, and Jennifer Martiny for helpful discussions and comments, Xiao
    2023;48:71–81                                                                         Yang for assistance with geospatial data, members of the Jensen Lab for feedback on
41. Wegley Kelly  L, Nelson CE, Petras D, Koester  I, Quinlan ZA, Arts MGI, et  al.                                                                                     experimental design and assistance with ﬁeld preparations, Rebecca Vega Thurber and
    Distinguishing the molecular diversity, nutrient content, and energetic potential                                                                       Andrew Thurber for constructive discussions and ﬁeld assistance, and all associated
    of exometabolomes produced by macroalgae and reef-building corals. Proc Natl      with the Richard B. Gump South Paciﬁc Research Station for assistance with ﬁeldwork.
   Acad Sci USA. 2022;119:e2110283119.                                                          Finally, the authors thank the Center for Microbiome Innovation for sample processing
42. Lima-Mendez G, Faust K, Henry N, Decelle J, Colin S, Carcillo F, et al. Determinants of                                                                        and 16S rRNA gene sequencing (through a seed grant to AMD), the DNA Technologies
   community structure in the global plankton interactome. Science. 2015;348:1262073.                                                                        and Expression Analysis Core at the UC Davis Genome Center (1S10OD010786-01) for
43. Ruokolainen L, Ranta E, Kaitala V, Fowler MS. When can we distinguish between                                                                              shotgun metagenomic sequencing, and the San Diego Supercomputer Center at UCSD
    neutral and non-neutral processes in community dynamics under ecological                                                                                                     for computational resources. The authors declare that there is no conﬂict of interest
     drift? Ecol Lett. 2009;12:909–19.                                                                                      regarding the publication of this article.
44. Talbot JM, Bruns TD, Taylor JW, Smith DP, Branco S, Glassman SI, et al. Endemism
   and functional convergence across the North American soil mycobiome. Proc
    Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014;111:6341–6.
                                              AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
45. Moran MA, Kujawinski EB, Schroer WF, Amin SA, Bates NR, Bertrand EM, et al.
                                                                                ABC, AMD, and PRJ designed and conceptualized the research project. AMD and PRJ
    Microbial metabolites  in the marine carbon  cycle. Nat Microbiol. 2022;7:
                                                                             performed ﬁeldwork and sample collection. ABC and AB performed DNA extractions
    508–23.
                                                                                                   for metagenomes. AB performed metabolomic extractions, acquired and analyzed
46. Bouslimani  A, Sanchez LM, Garg  N,  Dorrestein  PC. Mass spectrometry  of
                                                                            metabolomic data. ABC analyzed amplicon and metagenomic data and conducted
    natural products: current, emerging and future technologies. Nat Prod Rep.
                                                                                                             statistical analyses with input from AB. ABC and PRJ wrote manuscript with input
    2014;31:718–29.
                                                                             from all authors.
47. Sogin ML, Morrison HG, Huber JA, Welch DM, Huse SM, Neal PR, et al. Microbial
    diversity in the deep sea and the underexplored “rare biosphere”. Proc Natl Acad
    Sci USA. 2006;103:12115–20.
48. Chase AB, Martiny JBH. The importance of resolving biogeographic patterns of   FUNDING
                                                                  Open access funding provided by SCELC, Statewide California Electronic Library    microbial microdiversity. Microbiol Aust. 2018;39:5–8.
                                                                                   Consortium.49. Larkin AA, Martiny AC. Microdiversity shapes the traits, niche space, and bio-
   geography of microbial taxa. Environ Microbiol Rep. 2017;9:55–70.
50. Chase AB, Sweeney D, Muskat MN, Guillén-Matus DG, Jensen  PR.  Vertical
    inheritance facilitates interspecies diversiﬁcation in biosynthetic gene clusters   COMPETING INTERESTS
   and specialized metabolites. mBio. 2021;12:e02700–21.                          The authors declare no competing interests.
51. Chevrette MG, Currie CR. Emerging evolutionary paradigms in antibiotic dis-
    covery. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2019;46:257–71.
52. Choudoir M, Rossabi S, Gebert M, Helmig D, Fierer N. A phylogenetic and func-    ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
    tional perspective on volatile organic compound production by Actinobacteria.     Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
   mSystems. 2019;4:e00295-18.                                                           available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-023-01410-3.
53. Chevrette MG, Carlos-Shanley C, Louie KB, Bowen BP, Northen TR, Currie CR.
   Taxonomic and metabolic incongruence in the ancient genus Streptomyces. Front     Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Alexander B.
    Microbiol. 2019;10:2170.                                                           Chase.
54. Lemetre  C, Maniko  J, Charlop-Powers  Z, Sparrow  B, Lowe  AJ, Brady  SF.
    Bacterial natural product biosynthetic domain composition in  soil correlates      Reprints and permission information  is  available  at http://www.nature.com/
    with changes in latitude on a continent-wide scale. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.      reprints
    2017;114:11615–20.
55. Geers AU, Strube ML, Bentzon-Tilia M. Small spatial scale drivers of secondary      Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
    metabolite biosynthetic  diversity  in environmental microbiomes. mSystems.       in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
    2023;e00724-22. https://doi.org/10.1128/msystems.00724-22.
56. Shaffer JP, Nothias L-F, Thompson LR, Sanders JG, Salido RA, Couvillion SP, et al.
    Standardized multi-omics of Earth’s microbiomes reveals microbial and meta-
    bolite diversity. Nat Microbiol. 2022;7:2128–50.
57. Crits-Christoph A, Diamond S, Butterﬁeld CN, Thomas BC, Banﬁeld JF. Novel soil                Open Access This article  is licensed under a Creative Commons
    bacteria possess diverse genes for secondary metabolite biosynthesis. Nature.                       Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
    2018;558:440–4.                                                                     adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
58. Bogdanov A, Salib MN, Chase AB, Hammerlindl H, Muskat MN, Luedtke S, et al.      appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
    Small molecule in situ resin capture-an organism independent strategy for nat-    Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
    ural product discovery. bioRxiv. 2023;2023:03.02.530684. https://doi.org/10.1101/      material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
    2023.03.02.530684.                                                                  indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material.  If material is not included in
59. Adam TC, Burkepile DE, Holbrook SJ, Carpenter RC, Claudet J, Loiseau C, et al.      the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
    Landscape-scale patterns of nutrient enrichment in a coral reef ecosystem:      statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
    implications for coral to algae phase shifts. Ecol Appl. 2021;31:e2227.                  directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license,  visit http://
60. Thompson LR, Sanders JG, McDonald D, Amir A, Ladau J, Locey KJ, et al. A communal      creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
    catalogue reveals Earth’s multiscale microbial diversity. Nature. 2017;551:457–63.
61. Bushnell B. BBMap: a fast, accurate, splice-aware aligner. Berkeley, CA (United
     States): Lawrence Berkeley National Lab. (LBNL); 2014.                    © The Author(s) 2023




The ISME Journal (2023) 17:976 – 983