W364  Nucleic Acids Research, 2011, Vol. 39, Web Server issue


(xi, yi) is needed where xi is from Rn and the labels yi are in    data set to get a more robust average of the predictor
(+1,   1) for two-class problems.                          performance on new test data.

TSVMs
                                                                 Applicability domainTSVMs extend classical SVMs by the property of making
use of unlabeled data to train more robust classiﬁers, es-    The applicability domain of a predictor is a concept that
pecially in the case of scarce labeled training data (18).     helps to give for each predictor query a feedback whether
TSVMs try to determine a separating hyperplane that     that query  is too far away from the data used during
does not cut clusters of data by forcing the hyperplane     training or whether that instance  lies within the, say,
to go through low data density regions. This is enforced   95% support volume of the training data. Predictions
by keeping the margin clear of unlabeled data points.     for  queries  that do  not  lie  within  the  applicability
However, the objective function of TSVMs  is not that    domain of the model should be handled with more care.
easily optimized as the classical SVM objective, hence   To model the applicability domain of our model we made
heuristics have to be used to optimize the objective. For    use of the 1-Class SVM concept as described by Scho¨ lkopfNRPSpredictor2 we make use of the SVMlight package     et al. (19). Therefore, we modelled the 95% support of our                                        Downloaded
that offers such an heuristic to train TSVM classiﬁers (18).    data using the 1-Class SVM functionality of LIBSVM. We                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 from                                                                 selected values for g and n in such a way as to achieve a
Prediction levels and predictor quality                                                                      recall of  95% on left out data and then trained a 1-class
NRPSpredictor2 was designed to predict the putative   SVM for the whole data set using these parameters to
substrate speciﬁcity on four different hierarchical levels     describe the 95% support volume in feature space of our
for  bacterial A-domains and on one  level for fungal     data.
A-domains. The  bacterial  levels  are:  gross  physico-
chemical  properties  of  the  substrate  (hydrophobic–
aromatic, hydrophobic–aliphatic and hydrophilic), large
clusters, small clusters and on a single amino acid level   RESULTS
(Table  1). The fungal predictor predicts only on the     Predictor quality
gross  physico-chemical  properties  level  (hydrophobic-
                                                 The quality of each bacterial predictor as determined byaromatic, hydrophobic-aliphatic and hydrophilic) due to
                                                      our model validation  is given  in Table  1.  It can bethe lack of sufﬁcient fungal training data to allow further
                                                        observed that the predictors at the highest hierarchicalsubdivision of substrate clusters. However, within the web
                                                                      level are the best-performing ones. At the level of grossserver we trigger the bacterial models to give also more
ﬁne grained predictions for fungal signatures. An overview    physico-chemical   properties  we  have  an  average
of the set of bacterial prediction levels is given in Table 1.    F-measure of F = 0.94, whereas the average F-measure at
For many substrates there are only very few labeled     the most ﬁne-grained level (single substrates) is F = 0.80.
A-domains, like the 2-amino-butyric acid (Abu) speciﬁcity     Generally, the average performance as quantiﬁed by the
with less than ﬁve known A-domain sequences. For these    F-measure is F = 0.94 for the three class level, F = 0.93
speciﬁcities  no  SVM-model  was  built.  Instead,  we     for the large clusters level, F = 0.89 for the small clusters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/39/suppl_2/W362/2506164
make use of the Nearest-Neighbor Rule to get a speciﬁcity     level and F = 0.80 for the single substrate level. The fungal
                                                                                                                                        by
prediction, by reporting for each query the substrate     predictor has an average F-measure of F = 0.84 at the
speciﬁcity of the most similar active-site signature (based     three class level. Table 1 also gives for each prediction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     guest
on the Stachelhaus code) in our database, along with the     task the best performing kernel, feature encoding and                                                                                                                                        on
sequence identity.                         SVM type (classic or TSVM).                                                                                                                                        31
                                    A general trend is that, except from the more exotic
Predictor validation                                       aromatic substrates, like the hydroxy-benzoic derivatives                                                              that can be predicted very well, the other more common                            OctoberTo quantify the performance of the NRPSpredictor2 we
                                                        aromatic substrates are predicted less reliably. One reasonused the F-measure as quality criterion, which is deﬁned as                                                      might be the observed promiscuity of the A-domains                2025the harmonic mean of precision and recall. The precision
is deﬁned by prec = tp/(tp+fp) and the recall (or sensitiv-     utilizing these substrates (10). When compared with the
ity) is deﬁned by rec = tp/(tp+fn), where tp, fp and fn are     original version of the NRPSpredictor (Table 1) the new
the number of true positives, false positives and false nega-     version could improve the performance (F-measure) on
tives, respectively. The precision (or positive predictive     the large cluster level and on the small clusters level by
value) measures how reliable a positive prediction of a    roughly  one  percentage  point.  While  the  original
substrate speciﬁcity detector  is and the recall measures    NRPSpredictor was able to predict the membership to
how good the detector is in ﬁnding the true positives. To     clusters of amino acids only, NRPSpredictor2 also can
determine the performance on new test data we applied a     predict  single  amino  acid  speciﬁcities.  The  newly
repeated external validation scheme. We split the whole    introduced applicability domain gives further information
data set into half, selected and trained a SVM model on    on the quality of the speciﬁcity prediction. Upon request
one half of the data and evaluated the predictor perform-     of many colleagues working on fungal NRPSs, a predictor
ance on the other half, the independent test set. This pro-     speciﬁc  for  fungal NRPS sequences was  included  in
cedure was repeated on 10 shufﬂed versions of the whole    NRPSpredictor2.