W366  Nucleic Acids Research, 2011, Vol. 39, Web Server issue





Figure 1. NRPSpredictor2 prediction report for one extracted A-domain. On top, the ID of the parent sequence, location of the A-domain within
the sequence and the bit score of the PFAM-HMM are given. The green checkmark signals that the signature sequence lies within the applicability
domain of the model. The extracted 8 A˚ signature and Stachelhaus code are given directly below. Subsequently, the list of predictions is given along
with the score of the respective SVM predictors. For each predictor we also report the reliability of that predictor as determined during model
validation. The last row gives the nearest sequence neighbor in the NRPSpredictor2 database (based on Stachelhaus code) and the respective
sequence identity.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 from


Web server                                                   prediction performance over the previous version and
                                                               also with two new prediction levels, namely the gross
Users of the NRPSpredictor2 web server can submit their
                                                           physico-chemical properties level and the detailed predic-data as full NRPS sequences in multi-FASTA format and
                                                               tion level, which predicts the single amino acid likely to bethe signatures will be extracted automatically. Another
                                                              activated by the given A-domain. The performance im-option is to directly supply the extracted signatures and
                                                     provement was mainly due to the additional  labeledrequest a prediction from the predictor, thus users are not
                                                                training  data  as  well  as  the  use  of an  additionalrequired to disclose the full NRPS sequence. After short
                                                        encoding of A-domain signatures (Wold encoding). Theextraction and prediction phases the user receives a list of
                                                             transductive SVM method, which makes use of unlabeleddetected  A-domains  along  with  the  predictions  of
                                                              data, is very important in the settings with scarce trainingNRPSpredictor2 at each hierarchical level. For user con-
                                                         data per class, as can be seen in the most detailed predic-venience we report the predictions of the original version
                                                               tion tasks (single amino acid level) where the transductiveof the NRPSpredictor. A typical report for one particular
                                    SVM is the best performing type of SVM. In the upperextracted A-domain  is given in Figure 1. For each ex-
                                                              prediction levels classical SVMs quite often sufﬁce to buildtracted A-domain the ID of the parent sequence is given
                                                      a well-performing predictive model. In some of these caseswith the number of the A-domain added as sufﬁx. The
                                                             the use of a transductive SVM might even hurt perform-exact  location  of  the  A-domain  within  the  parent
                                                        ance due to the heuristic training procedure that may yieldsequence is also reported, along with the bit score of the
                                                        suboptimal models, when compared to the classical SVMPfam HMM that extracted this domain. The result of the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/39/suppl_2/W362/2506164                                                         models, which use only labeled training data. We alsoapplicability check is given by either a green checkmark                                                                                                                                        by                                                             created a new web interface for the predictor, allowing(as shown in Figure 1) if the query signatures lies within
the applicability domain of our predictor or as red X if the     prediction of either bacterial or fungal sequences based                    guest
signature is most likely outside the applicability domain of    on full NRPS sequences or already extracted signatures.                                                                                                                                        on
the model. In this case the prediction should be taken    For comparison purposes the web server also reports the                                                                                                                                        31
with caution. Finally, the speciﬁcity predictors that give     predictions  of  the  original  NRPSpredictor.  Finally,
positive predictions for this signature are listed for each    NRPSpredictor2  has  also  been  incorporated  intohierarchical level. The scores of the SVMs along with the    antiSMASH, a new comprehensive pipeline for secondary                            October
precision of the SVM predictors, determined during model    metabolite gene cluster detection and annotation, which
validation, are given in the last two columns. The last row    allows users to rapidly analyze complete NRPS gene                2025
gives the nearest neighbor to the query signature found in     clusters  or  even whole genomes  containing  multiple
our database of annotated A-domain signatures (based on   NRPS gene clusters (M. H. Medema et  al., submitted
Stachelhaus code) along with the sequence identity. Using     for publication).
this rule NRPSpredictor2 can even detect speciﬁcities for
which no SVM model could be learned, due to scarcity of
labeled training data.                          SUPPLEMENTARY DATA

                                                      Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online.
DISCUSSION

We have presented the NRPSpredictor2 that predicts
                                     ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSA-domain substrate speciﬁcity based on sequence and
structural  information  about  the  active  site  of  the    The  authors thank Rainer  Breitling  for  constructive
domain. The new predictor comes with an improved    comments and suggestions.