
[PDF physical page 1]
                                                       Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

                                                 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
                           Biotechnology Advances


                                         journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biotechadv

Research review paper
Recent advances in the identification of biosynthetic genes and gene
clusters of the polyketide-derived pathways for anthraquinone biosynthesis
and biotechnological applications
Nitesh Kumar Mund , Eva ˇCell´arov´a *
Pavol Jozef ˇSaf´arik University in Koˇsice, Faculty of Science, Institute of Biology and Ecology, Department of Genetics, M´anesova 23, 041 54 Koˇsice, Slovakia


A R T I C L E  I N F O                  A B S T R A C T

Keywords:                                        Natural anthraquinones are represented by a large group of compounds. Some of them are widespread across the
Hypericin                                      kingdoms, especially in bacteria, fungi and plants, while the others are restricted to certain groups of organisms.
Skyrin                                            Despite the significant pharmacological potential of several anthraquinones (hypericin, skyrin and emodin), theirEmodin                                                   biosynthetic pathways and candidate genes coding for key enzymes have not been experimentally validated.Biosynthetic gene clusters                                              Understanding the genetic and epigenetic regulation of the anthraquinone biosynthetic gene clusters in fungalBacteria
Fungi                                         endophytes would help not only understand their pathways in plants, which ensure their commercial avail­
Plants                                                     ability, but also favor them as promising systems for prospective biotechnological production.
Polyketide pathway


1. Introduction                                               emodin were found to slow the progression of autoimmune diabetes by
                                                                              inhibiting the MAPKK/ MAPK pathway (Chien et al., 2015).
   Secondary metabolites (SMs), also known as natural products, syn­        In bacteria and fungi, the genes of a particular biosynthetic pathway
thesized by various organisms ranging from microorganisms to higher     of SMs are often co-located in a continuous stretch of DNA, including
plants, are not directly involved in the growth, development and     genes for biosynthesis, tailoring, transportation, regulation, and resis­
reproduction of organisms but have various functions such as chemical     tance, collectively called a biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) (Chavali and
signals in cell communication, agents of symbiosis and transportation     Rhee, 2018). The genes for biosynthesis are considered the SM core
etc. Many SMs synthesized by terrestrial or marine organisms - bacteria,    backbone genes, which encode the core biosynthetic enzymes, for
fungi, plants and some animals are considered as drug candidates and     instance, polyketide synthase (PKS) in anthraquinones derived from
used as antibiotics, anti-cancer agents, insecticides, immunosuppres­     polyketide intermediates (Fig. 1). The tendency of secondary metabolite
sants, and herbicides (Romsdahl and Wang, 2019).                         biosynthetic genes to remain in clusters facilitates the identification of
   Anthraquinones belong to SMs containing three fused benzene rings    pathways using various approaches, including.
(tricyclic anthracene ring) with two carbonyl groups at positions 9 and
10, forming a basic structure of 9,10-anthracenedione. The replacement            i) comparative sequence analysis using gene sequences that encode
of hydrogen by various groups, such as –OH, –CH3, –OCH3, –CH2OH,          backbone enzymes,
–CHO, –COOH, determines the chemical and structural properties of            ii) creation of multiple deletion mutants and subsequent metabolite
anthraquinones, making them constitute one of the largest groups of            profiling to better understand the role of individual genes in a
compounds (Fouillaud et al., 2016). The anthraquinone skeleton ap­           given pathway,
pears to offer a wide range of biological activities, including anticancer,           iii) pathway reconstruction and overexpression in heterologous hosts
anti-inflammatory, antiarthritic, antifungal, antibacterial, antimalarial,          (He et al., 2018).
antiviral, antiplatelet, laxative and neuroprotective effects (Siddamurthi
et al., 2020; Malik et al., 2021; Li and Jiang, 2018). Some of the an­       The synthesis of anthraquinones occurs via two main pathways,
thraquinones,  including  cascarin,  catenarin,  rhein,  physcion, and     polyketide pathway and the shikimate pathway. The former operates in


 * Corresponding author.
    E-mail address: eva.cellarova@upjs.sk (E. ˇCell´arov´a).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2023.108104
Received 14 November 2022; Received in revised form 27 December 2022; Accepted 23 January 2023
Available online 27 January 2023
0734-9750/© 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.


[PDF physical page 2]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

bacteria, fungi, and plants, whereas the latter is known to be exclusive to     incorporation into the growing chain. On the other hand, type III PKSs
plants (Perassolo et al., 2011). In the polyketide pathway, polyketide    can catalyze the decarboxylative condensation of acyl CoA substrates
synthases (PKSs) are the key enzymes responsible for the synthesis of the     without using any ACP to form polyketides (Shimizu et al., 2017). Even
polyketide intermediate which subsequently forms the anthraquinone    though all three types of PKSs have different structural organizations,
backbone (Shakour and Farag, 2021). On the basis of structural ar­     the process of formation of polyketide intermediates by sequential
rangements and catalytic functions, the PKSs have been categorized into     decarboxylative condensation reactions remains largely similar. Because
three types, such as type I, II, and III PKSs. Type I PKSs are multifunc­     of tendency of the highly reactive polyketide chains formed by PKSs to
tional and structurally they can be of multidomain systems or modular    undergo spontaneous cyclization, regio-selective cyclization becomes
megasynthases (not depcticed  in  this manuscript). In  fungi, non-      critical for the formation of properly fused aromatic ring systems.
modular type I PKSs are associated with anthraquinone biosynthesis,    Depending on the type of PKS, the enzymes required for the cyclization
which catalyzes the decarboxylative condensation of extender units in     reaction may be present within the PKSs or located outside of them.
an iterative manner to form polyketide products. On the basis of     Broadly, regio-selective cyclization or folding of the polyketide chain
reduction during chain elongation, iterative type I PKSs can be sub­     has been classified into two types, mode F and mode S on the basis of
categorized into non-reducing (NR- PKS), partially reducing (PR-PKS),    number of intact acetyl units get incorporated in initial benzene ring. In
and highly reducing (HR-PKS) (Crawford and Townsend, 2010). In     fungi and higher plants, PKSs follow the F mode of folding pattern,
contrast, in bacteria, type I PKSs, for instance, pikromycin PKS, are    where two intact acetyl units are present in the first benzene ring. In
generally modular, having catalytic domains arranged in modules,     contrast, in bacteria, the initial benzene with three intact acetyl units
which successively act, using various acyl coenzyme A (CoA) monomers,    undergoes the S folding mode (Fig. 1) (Bringmann et al., 2006; F¨aseke
for the synthesis of polyketide compounds through elongation, pro­     et al., 2020). Further cyclization patterns continue in F mode (descrip­
cessing, and termination processes (Dutta et al., 2014). However, in     tion appears in Section 3). This review attempts to provide up-to-date
bacteria, type II PKSs, which are iteratively acting multi-enzyme com­     state of the art on genetic background and biosynthetic pathways
plexes, are mainly responsible for producing aromatic polyketides,     leading to anthraquinones in diverse groups of organisms from bacteria
including anthraquinones (Shen, 2003). In plants, homodimeric chal­     to higher plants. Understanding the pathways and their regulation in
cone synthases like PKSs represent type III PKSs that iteratively act to    lower organisms especially plant-borne endophytic fungi may serve as a
condense acyl-CoA units into polyketide intermediates, which are sub­    key for understanding the biosynthesis of high-value anthraquinone
sequently tailored to the aromatic skeleton to form anthraquinones.     pharmaceuticals in higher plants.
Type III PKSs are different from the former two types in terms of the
nature of the substrate they use for chain elongation. Both Type I and
Type II PKSs require acyl carrier protein (ACP) bound substrates for





Fig. 1. Biosynthesis of anthraquinones in fungi, bacteria, and plants by (a) Type I, (b) Type II and (c) Type III PKS (polyketide synthase), respectively. PKSs con­
denses starter acyl CoAs (typically acety-CoA) with seven malonyl-CoAs to form an ACP bound linear polyketide chain. (d) The polyketide chain undergoes two
different modes of folding, S-Mode (in bacteria) and F-Mode (in fungi and plants). SAT- starter unit ACP transacylase; AT- acyltransferase; KS-ketosynthase; CLF-
chain length factor; PT- product template; ACP- acyl carrier protein and TE/CLC- thioesterase/cyclase and Enz- acyl carrier protein or CoA. (e) Genes occurring in the
bacterial (actinorhodin) and fungal (endocrocin)biosynthetic gene clusters coding for some anthraquinones (adopted form antiSMASH database).

                                                                        2


[PDF physical page 3]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

2. Biosynthesis of anthraquinones in bacteria                        dehydratase (DH), and enoylreductase (ER), carry out the function of
                                                                     condensation and reduction of malonyl ACP and various acyl CoA for
   With over 13,000 reported bioactive compounds, the  bacteria    priming the minimal PKS II (Fig. 2 A) (Ames et al., 2011).
remain an indispensable source of novel compounds for drug develop­        Various downstream tailoring enzymes are required for the conver­
ment (Mohan et al., 2021). Among the various groups of bacteria, the     sion of the ACP-bound polyketide chain into aromatic structures. The
gram-positive and filamentous actinobacteria contribute to the pro­     intermediate must undergo proper cyclization and aromatization to
duction of over 70% of bioactive compounds. The SMs of actinobacteria    form an anthraquinone backbone. In bacteria, aromatase/cyclase (ARO/
have a wide range of pharmacological bioactivities, including antimi­    CYC) is responsible for the first ring aromatization, where as the cyclase
crobial, antifungal, anticancer, and immunosuppressive. Streptomyces,    (CYC) forms the second ring. In some cases, before the cyclization by
the actinobacterial genus with the largest number of species, has    ARO/CYC, the ACP-bound polyketide undergoes a keto reduction step at
received remarkable attention due to its diversity in the production of     the C-9 position by a ketoreductase (KR). For instance, during the
SMs (Lee et al., 2021; Jakubiec-Krzesniak et al., 2018).                     biosynthesis of aloesaponarin II which was found to be synthesized as a
   In bacteria, SMs of polyketide origin such as anthraquinones are     shunt product of the actinorhodin (ACT) biosynthesis pathway by
predominantly synthesized by type II PKS, which, unlike type I PKS, is     Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2), ketoreductase, ActIII performs the func­
nonmodular and comprises distinct enzymes with specific catalytic ac­     tion of reducing the keto group at the C-9 position (McDaniel et al.,
tivities, functioning jointly to generate a polyketide chain of various    1993) However, the biosynthetic pathway of anthraquinone R1128 in
lengths depending upon the starter unit and the number of extender     Streptomyces sp. does not follow any keto reduction step, hence, two
units involved. A typical type II PKS with three basic enzymes, such as     hydroxyl groups can be found in A ring of R1128 Fig. 2 (Nofiani et al.,
ketosynthase (KSα), chain length factor (CLF/KSβ), and acyl carrier     2019).
protein (ACP), also known as minimal PKS, iteratively functions to        In the biosynthesis of AQ-256 in Photorhabdus luminescens TT01, a
synthesize an ACP-bound polyketide intermediate (Wang et al., 2020).     ketoreductase (AntA) is responsible for the reduction at C9 position
In minimal PKS, associated with anthraquinone synthesis, malonyl-CoA    (Brachmann et al., 2007). Heterologous expression of the gene cluster
is the common starter unit that is transferred to the ACP by malonyl-    (antABCDEFGHI) in Escherichia coli and generation of an antI deletion
CoA: ACP transacylase (MAT/MCAT), and seven rounds of decarbox­    mutant of P. luminescens TT01 revealed an unusual mode of synthesis of
ylative condensation of malonyl-ACPs iterative chain extension by KSα    AQ-256. The initial steps of the synthesis of AQ-256 follow a similar path
are carried out by the KS-CLF complex which determines the carbon     to that of aloesaponarin II, in which ketoreductase (AntA) carries out the
chain length of aromatic polyketides by regulating the number of    C9 carbonyl reduction, while aromatase (AntH) and cyclase (AntC)
Claisen condensations (Fig. 1 b) (Wang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2017).    perform the first (C7/C12) and second (C5/C14) cyclization, respec­
However, formation of the anthraquinone backbone of R1128 does not      tively. However, unlike the actinorhodin pathway, an unusual third
follow the usual mode of starter unit loading, instead, an initiation PKS     cyclization or ring closure (C3/C16) is observed in AQ-256 biosynthesis,
module containing a ketosynthase III homolog, an ACP together with     in which AntI catalyzes a polyketide shortening event by releasing an
external partner enzymes from fatty acid synthesis such as malonyl-CoA:     acetyl-ACP (acetyl-AntF) from the octaketide backbone (Zhou et al.,
acyl   carrier  protein  transacylase  (MAT),  ketoreductase  (KR),     2019).





Fig. 2. Schematic representation of anthraquinones synthesis in bacteria. (a) Biosynthesis of R1128, MAT- malonyl-CoA:ACP transacylase; KSIII- ketosynthase III,
KR- ketoreductase; DH -dehydratase; ER - enoyl reductase; ACP- acyl carrier protein. (b) Biosynthesis of aloesaponarin II and AQ-256, KS- ketosynthase; CLF-chain
length factor; KR-ketoreductase; ARO – aromatase and CYC - cyclase. MAT- malonyl-CoA:ACP transacylase; ACP- acyl carrier protein; KS- ketosynthase; CLF-chain
length factor; KR-ketoreductase; ARO - aromatase; CYC - cyclase. Minimal PKS condenses eight malonyl- ACP (incase of aloesaponarin II and AQ-256) molecules to
form a polyketide backbone, in case of R1128, minimal PKS condenses an acyl molecule derived from initiation module and seven malonyl- ACP molecules.

                                                                        3


[PDF physical page 4]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

3. Biosynthesis of anthraquinones in fungi                            including  the  model  species  for  fundamental  genetic  research,
                                                                       A. nidulans, industrially used A.oryzae and A. niger, pathogenic and
  Many fungal species are known to have novel biochemical pathways,     toxin-producing species like A. fumigatus, A. parasiticus and A. flavus,
responsible for the synthesis of a wide range of pharmaceutically     lovastatin-producing  species  A.  terreus,  have  been  determined,
important SMs including penicillin, cyclosporine, and statins (Keller     providing a substantial amount of information about SM biosynthesis
et al., 2005). The diversity of fungal species with well-developed sec­      (Inglis et  al., 2013). Endophytic fungi represent another significant
ondary metabolism make them one of the great sources for the identi­    group capable of producing SMs of paramount medicinal value. Fungi
fication of novel drug candidates (Bills and Gloer, 2016).                can be found in plants as endosymbiotic microorganisms or endophytes
   Various species of filamentous fungi belonging to the Aspergillus     spending their entire life cycle, or at least a portion of it, inside plant
genus produce a wide range of SMs with various biological functions,     tissues without harming their host (Liu et al., 2021).
including lethal toxins, antibiotics, and compounds having anti-cancer       The SM biosynthetic abilities of endophytic fungi could be attributed
properties. The genome  sequences  of  several  Aspergillus  species,     to the genetic recombination events during the process of coevolution.





Fig. 3. (a) Schematic representation of biosynthesis of polyketides in fungi. PksA; PKS involved in norsolorinic acid anthrone in A. parasiticus, AptA; PKS involved in
asperthecin biosynthesis in A. nidulans, PKS4; PKS involved in bikaverin synthesis in G. fujikuroi and ACAS; PKS involved in atrochrysone biosynthesis A. terreus. SAT-
starter unit ACP transacylase; AT- acyltransferase; KS-ketosynthase; PT- product template; ACP- acyl carrier protein; TE/CLC- thioesterase/cyclase and TE- metallo-
lactamase-type thioesterase (MβL-TE). (b) Intermediates and products produced by replacement of PT-ACP domian of Pks4 with PT-ACP domain of AptA and and and
replacement of PT-ACP domains of Pks4 and PksA with PT-ACP domains of ACAS and MβL-TE (ACTE).

                                                                        4


[PDF physical page 5]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

However, the involvement of distinct pathways in both plants and fungi    Nr-PKSs devoid of a TE domain, often referred to as TE less NR-PKS (Liu
for various SM production needs further explanation (Shakour and     et al., 2017). The TE domain is known to operate the function of C–C
Farag, 2021). In fungi, the fundamental architecture of aromatic poly­     ring closure via Claisen condensation cyclization, instead of thioester
ketides such as anthraquinones is synthesized by iterative, non-reducing     hydrolysis, hence, it is often described as the TE/CLC domain. In PksA, it
polyketide synthases (NR-PKSs), which are multidomain enzymes that    was observed that the absence of TE/CLC resulted in spontaneous O–C
operate the synthesis following four characteristic mechanisms such as     cyclization rather than C–C cyclization, indicating the stringent role of
starter unit selection, chain length control, cyclization register control,    TE/CLC in conformational regulation of third ring formation via Claisen
and product release. In NR-PKS, the amino-terminal domains, starter-     condensation (Korman et al., 2010).
unit ACP transacylase (SAT), ketosynthase (KS), and malonyl acyl        In NR-PKSs of group V, MβL-TE is not coded as a domain in NR-PKS,
transferase (MAT/AT) modulate the initiation and elongation processes,     but instead, by a gene located adjacent to the gene encoding NR-PKS in a
whereas product template (PT) and thioesterase/Claisen cyclase (TE/     specific cluster. The catalytic role of MβL-TE is different from that of TE/
CLC) domains (physically discrete TE in some cases) located in the    CLC as MβL-TE functions as a thioester hydrolylase. The role of MβL-TE
carboxy terminus are responsible  for regiospecific cyclization and    was first described in A. terreus atrochrysone biosynthesis PKS (ACAS),
release of the product, respectively (Klejnstrup et al., 2012) (Newman    where a discrete MβL-TE (ACTE) was responsible for the synthesis of
et al., 2014). The SAT domains predominately accept acetyl-CoA as the     atrochrysone derived from atrochrysone carboxylic acid (Awakawa
starter unit in most of the NR-PKSs associated with anthraquinone     et al., 2009). In general, the majority of MβL-TEs require Zn+2 for cat­
biosynthesis. However, some SATs can  also  accept hexonyl-CoA      alytic operations, however, MβL-TE from A. nidulans, AptB has been
(Crawford et al., 2006). The MAT/AT domain transfers malonyl-CoAs     described to have preference for Mn+2 (Li et al., 2011). Further studies
as extender  units to  acyl-carrier protein (ACP), which undergoes     are needed to clarify the role of MβL-TE in the formation of the third ring
decarboxylative Claisen condensation catalyzed by KS to form a reactive     after hydrolysis. However, in vitro studies using early proteins from the
polyketide intermediate of carbon length C16 or C18, depending upon     actinorhodin pathway resulted in the spontaneous formation of the third
the number of malonyl-CoAs incorporated (Fig. 1a) (Shakour and Farag,     ring after the thioester hydrolysis step, arguing the similar pattern of
2021). In fungi, NR-PKSs have been categorized into eight groups. In     spontaneous third ring formation in fungal anthraquinone biosynthesis
groups, I–III, VI–VIII, PT domain-driven first-ring cyclization via C2-C7    where MβL-TEs are associated (Taguchi et al., 2017). Cortinarius odori­
aldol condensation is observed, whereas in groups IV and V, cyclization      fer, a basidiomycete mushroom species, was recently addressed to
of  C4-C9  and  C6-C11  occurs,  respectively.  The  majority  of    encode an unusual type of polyketide synthase (CoPKS1), which, unlike
anthraquinone-biosynthesizing NR-PKS, such as ACAS, PKS, and others,     previously discussed fungal NR-PKSs, lacks a SAT domain and also
belong to group V. However, a few exceptions, such as the norsolorinic     contains an integral α/β hydrolase superfamily-type TE domain, dis­
acid anthrone PKS in Aspergillus parasiticus (PksA), which is involved in     tinguishing it from NR-PKSs in group V. Due to the lack of the SAT
the biosynthesis of aflatoxins, are classified as group IV. The PT domains    domain, CoPKS1 uses malonyl-CoA as the sole substrate for decarbox­
in anthraquinone-synthesizing NR-PKSs are also associated with the     ylative condensation to form atrochrysone carboxylic acid, making it
second ring cyclization via aldol condensation of C4-C13 in group V and     constitute a new class of atrochrysone carboxylic acid synthases (L¨ohr
C2-C11 in group IV (Liu et al., 2015). A specific PT from a particular NR-     et al., 2022).
PKS always follows the correct aldol condensation, i.e., C4-C9 or C6-
C11, irrespective of the polyketide intermediates it acts on (Fig. 3a).     3.1. Biosyntheis of endocrocin
In order to have a better understanding of the precise role of the PT,
various studies were carried out, altering the native PT domains of a        Endocrocin, a simple anthraquinone having significant values in
given NR-PKS with non-native ones. The PT domain from NR-PKS     medicine, food industry and cosmetics, is often found in the fungal
(AptA) involved in the synthesis of anthraquinone asperthecin via C6-     isolates of various species of fungi. A gene cluster (enc), required for the
C11 cyclized aromatic polyketides in A. nidulans, was used to replace     synthesis of endocrocin in A. fumigatus, was identified to be a TE-less NR-
the PT domain of PKS4, which is responsible for bikaverin synthesis in    PKS in the subtelomeric region of the left arm of chromosome IV. The
Gibberella fujikuroi via C2-C7 cyclization (Fig. 3b). The resultant hybrid     endocrocin gene cluster, comprising four genes, encA,encB,encC and
PKS, which was devoid of native PT and TE domains, resulted in the     encD, is involved in the endocrocin synthesis and was identified by
generation of a polyketide compound with a cyclization of C6-C11,     studying the mutants of all these genes (Fig. 4). Proposedly, the NR-PKS,
suggesting the consistent role of the PT template in governing precise    EncA, in association with MβL-TE, EncB, condenses seven malonyl-CoA
aldol condensation ability even in the non-native polyketide (Li et al.,     into atrochrysone carboxylic acid (ACA), which after subsequent spon­
2010a). Similarly, studies on domain swapping of various NR-PKS were     taneous dehydration forms endocrocin-9-anthrone. The anthrone oxi­
conducted to have a better insight into the regioselectivity of various PT     dase, EncC, catalyzes the synthesis of endocrocin from endocrocin-9-
domains. In the study, the intact Pks4 was disrupted and the PT and ACP     anthrone. Among the four genes, only encA, encB, and encC are
domains were replaced with those of ACAS-Pks and the TE domain was     responsible for the synthesis of endocrocin, whereas the role of encD is
replaced with ACTE (thioesterase), which resulted in the generation of a     not relevant in synthesis since the knockout mutant strain of encD
product with an atrochrysone core structure with ACAS-PT catalyzed    accumulated even more endocrocin. In contrast, overexpression of encD
C6-C11 and C4-C13 cyclization (Fig. 3b). In addition, similar alterna­    impeded the endocrocin production, which suggests that EncD is likely
tions were carried out in PksA, in which, PT and ACP domains of ACAS     to be involved in the modification of endocrocin into other metabolites,
and ACTE were able to complement catalysis in combinations with PksA    and endocrocin could possibly be one of the by-products of an inter­
SAT-KS-MAT and the resultant product did not exhibit the C4-C9    mediate of another SM generation (Lim et al., 2012). The contribution of
cyclization  pattern,  rather C6-C11 and C4-C13  cyclizations were     another physically discrete cluster to the synthesis of endocrocin was
observed  (Fig. 3b) (Newman et  al., 2014). In anthraquinone bio­     observed in A. fumigatus AF293 (Throckmorton et al., 2016). Here, one
synthesizing NR-PKSs, the product-releasing domain/enzyme (PRE)    more polyketide compound, trypsidin cluster (tpc) was observed to
plays a key role not only in final product offloading but also in editing by     synthesize endocrocin as a shunt metabolite. Trypasidin, an  anti-
third ring cyclization in some cases. PRE in NR-PKSs is classified into     protozoal spore metabolite produced by A. fumigatus, was found to be
three types: thioesterase (TE), metallo-lactamase-type TE (MβL-TE), and     cytotoxic to both the A549 pulmonary adenocarcinoma cell line and
reductase (R), the latter two of which are associated with anthraquinone    human bronchial epithelial cells. Search for the gene cluster responsible
biosynthesizing NR-PKSs of groups IV and V, respectively. TE in group     for the synthesis of trypsidin led to the identification of a similar NR-PKS
IV Nr-PKSs always remains as a catalytic domain, whereas MβL-TE in     cluster involved in the synthesis of anthraquinone-derived compounds
group V is a physically separate enzyme that acts in coordination with    such as geodin monodictyophone and endocrocin. The gene cluster for

                                                                        5


[PDF physical page 6]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104





Fig. 4. Schematic representation of biosynthesis of endocrocin. EncA/TpcC- NR-PKS (SAT- starter unit ACP transacylase; AT- acyltransferase; KS-ketosynthase; PT-
product template; ACP- acyl carrier protein); EncB/TpcB- metallo-lactamase-type thioesterase (MβL-TE); EncC/TpcL- anthrone oxygenase and TpcK-decarboxylase.

trypsidin synthesis contains 13 genes, sharing homology with the genes     endocrocin nearly tenfold higher than the wild strain, whereas the
of the enc cluster. Like the enc cluster, the tcp cluster is also devoid of a    double deletion mutant of ΔtpcK/ΔtpcL (TpcL; a putative anthrone
canonical thioesterase and rather encodes a MβL-TE (tcpB), located     oxygenase) showed no difference in accumulation when compared to
adjacent to tpcC that encodes NR-PKS. Both TpcB and TpcC carry out the     the ΔtpcK mutant strain, implying the involvement of another oxidase or
synthesis of atrochrysone carboxylic acid (ACA) which undergoes     spontaneous oxidation of endocrocin anthrone to endocrocin.
decarboxylation by the decarboxylase, TpcK, to form atrochrysone.        Endocrocin accumulation in the deletion mutants,ΔtpcK, ΔtpcL,
Atrochrysone is eventually converted to trypsidine by the action of a    ΔtpcK/L in a ΔencC background strain was reduced to half as compared
series  of enzymes  that  carry out  various  modification  reactions.     to their respective deletion mutants in a wild-type (WT) background,
A. fumigatus AF293, which produces both trypsidine and endocrocin,     proposing the existence of two separate operational pathways for the
was studied to understand the interrelationship between the two path­     endocrocin biosynthesis governed by enc and tpc clusters. More specif­
ways by generating various knock-out mutants of both of the pathway      ically, in trypacidin biosynthesis pathway, the incomplete conversion of
genes. As compared to the previous study carried out by Lim et al.   ACA to atrochrysone by TpcK results in the generation of endocrocin as a
(2012), where the deletion mutant, ΔencA strain completely abolished     shunt product (Throckmorton et al., 2016).
the accumulation of endocrocin, A. fumigatus AF293 ΔencA mutant was
still able to accumulate endocrocin at a lower magnitude. In order to
understand whether the tpc cluster is involved in the endocrocin accu­     3.2. Emodin and chrysophanol and their hub role in various pathways
mulation in A. fumigatus AF293, a double knock-out mutant, ΔencA/
ΔtpcC was generated, which completely lost the endocrocin production       Emodin, a simple naturally occurring anthraquinone, found in many
capability, suggesting the role of tpc cluster in enocrocin accumulation     plants, molds, and lichens, is described as a protein tyrosine kinase in­
in A. fumigatus AF293. ΔencA mutant used by Lim et  al., 2012 to     hibitor and anticancer drug exhibiting activity on a variety of cancer
establish the endocrocin biosynthesis pathway was also having tpc      cells. Combinational use of emodin with various allopathic medicines in
cluster but did not produce endocrocin, which was due to the existence    chemotherapy is currently being investigated to reduce the side effects
of a single nucleotide mutation in tcpC, leading to the loss of function of    and improve the efficacy of standard anticancer drugs (Dong et al.,
NR-PKS. The  deletion mutant  tpcK  resulted  in an  accumulated    2016; Semwal et al., 2021). Emodin can be found in a wide range of
                                                                         fungal species, including A. ochraceus, A. wentii (Qiu et  al., 2021),

                                                                        6


[PDF physical page 7]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

A. terrus (Guo and Wang, 2014), A. fumigatus, Phoma foevata (Masi and     also accumulates other SMs, of which geodin is the most prevalent
Evidente, 2020) and marine-derived-fungus A. favipes (Qiu et al., 2021).    (Hasan et al., 2019; Yin et al., 2016). Emodin is the key anthraquinone
The presence of emodin as a pigment in various fungal strains synthe­    from which geodin is derived via a series of steps that also synthesize
sizing other anthraquinone-derived compounds such as geodin and     various other stable intermediate pigment compounds such as questin
xanthones suggests that emodin is not produced as an end product,    and sulochrin. Early studies on geodin biosynthesis hypothesized the
rather as an intermediate and possibly co-accumulated as a shunt    involvement of an emodin anthrone PKS, which produces emodin
metabolite with the end product. Chrysophanol is another pharmaceu­     anthrone. The emodin anthrone is then oxidized to the first stable
tically important anthraquinone that has been proposed to have a wide    compound, emodin, by emodin anthrone oxygenase (GedH). A methyl
range of biological properties, including anticancer effects (Prateeksha     transferase converts the emodin into questin, which is subsequently
et al., 2019). Generation of various gene deletion mutants of xanthone-     converted to sulochrin and eventually to geodine (Fig. 5) (Huang et al.,
biosynthesizing fungal species revealed the involvement of chrys­     1995). Studies on the disruption emodin anthrone PKS in the A. terreus
ophanol as a key intermediate in the xanthone biosynthesis pathway    RED1 mutant, which is only able to produce questin because of the
(discussed later).                                                     blocked pathway between questin and sulochrin, resulted in the iden­
                                                                                    tification of the PKS involved in the synthesis of the geodin (Couch and
3.2.1. Emodin in geodine synthesis pathway                              Gaucher, 2004). The emodin anthrone PKS sequence from A. terreus
    Aspergillus terreus is known to produce lovastatin, a compound of    RED1 was used to identify the homologous sequence in the strain
clinical importance used for reducing cholesterol levels by inhibiting the     A. terreus NIH2624, and was later named as atrochrysone carboxylic acid
activity of hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG–CoA) reductase.     synthase (ACAS) PKS (GedC), which is responsible for the synthesis of
During the fermentation processes, in addition to lovastatin, A. terreus   ACA in the presence of atrochrysone carboxyl ACP thioesterase (ACTE,





Fig. 5. Schematic representation of biosynthesis of emodin in geodin pathway. ACAS/GedC- NR-PKS (SAT- starter unit ACP transacylase; AT- acyltransferase; KS-
ketosynthase; PT- product template; ACP- acyl carrier protein); ACTE/GedB- metallo-lactamase-type thioesterase (MβL-TE); GedH- anthrone oxygenase; GedI-
decarboxylase; GedG-methyltransferase;GedF-reductase and GedK-dioxygenase.

                                                                        7


[PDF physical page 8]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

GedB), a MβL-TE and not associated with the ACAS PKS module. The     3.2.2. Emodin and chrysophanol in the biosynthesis of xanthones
ACA synthesized by the PKS and MβL-TE is highly unstable and con­       Xanthone derivatives are a class of natural compounds having a
verted to atrochrysone, which was revealed in in vitro assay using ACAS     distinct heterocyclic structure with a dibenzo γ-pyrone moiety, and are
and ACTE. Moreover, under in vitro conditions, the detection of a trace    known to exhibit a variety of biological activities, including antibacte­
amount of emodin could be due to spontaneous decarboxylation and      rial and cytotoxic properties (Soares et al., 2022). Fungal compounds
dehydration of ACA, whereas the presence of endocrocin could only be    with a xanthone scaffold, such as di- and tetrahydroxanthone, are pri­
due to the dehydration of ACA. Heterologous expression of ACAS (GedC)     marily synthesized by polyketide synthases, which use one acetyl-CoA
and ACTE (GedB) in A. oryzae resulted in significantly higher accumu­    molecule and seven malonyl-CoA molecules. In recent years, several
lation of both homo and heterodimers of endocrocin anthrones than    gene clusters associated with fungal xanthone biosynthesis have been
emodin or atrochrysone, indicating the presence of a native dehydratase     identified, indicating the involvement of the anthraquinone compound
in A. oryzae that converts ACA to endocrocin anthrone. However,     chrysophanol, which is synthesized from emodin, as the precursor of a
neither atrochrysone nor endocrocin anthrone were detected in the    number of different fungal xanthones (Fig. 6) (Wei et al., 2022). Tetra­
culture of A. terreus NIH2624, possibly due to the fact that atrochrysone    hydroxanthone (THX), a subclass of xanthone forms various bioactive
is immediately catalyzed by the tailoring enzymes to form the geodin    compounds such as secalonic acids (ergochromes), neosartorin, and
(Awakawa et al., 2009).                                                  cryptosporioptides after dimerization (Yang et al., 2021).





Fig. 6. Schematic representation of biosynthesis of emodin and chrysophanol in biosynthetic pathway of various xanthone compounds. MdpG/AgnPKS/NsrB/
DmxPKS- NR-PKS (SAT- starter unit ACP transacylase; AT- acyltransferase; KS-ketosynthase; PT- product template; ACP- acyl carrier protein); MdpF/AgnL7/NsrC/
DmxR1- metallo-lactamase-type thioesterase (MβL-TE); MdpH/AgnL1/NsrE/DmxR15-decarboxylase; MdpH2/AgnL2/NsrD/DmxR16- anthrone oxygenase; MdpK/
AgnL4/NsrR/DmxR7-oxidoreductase;     MdpC/AgnL6/NsrJ/DmxR18-reductase;     MdpB/AgnL8/NsrI/DmxR17-dehydratase;    MdpL/AgnL3/NsrF/DmxR6-
Baeyer−Villiger monooxygenase (BVMO).

                                                                        8


[PDF physical page 9]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

  A gene cluster for monodictyphenone (mdp) in A. nidulans was     pathway-related clusters such as agn, mdp, ged and targeted knockout of
identified using the deletion mutant of cclA, a component of the COM­     the various genes resulted in the identification of a cluster that codes
PASS complex of A. nidulans. The deletion resulted in the activation of a     putative cryptosporioptide PKS with SAT, KS, PT and ACP modules and
cluster responsible for synthesis of monodictyphenone and emodin and a     other homologous genes encoding proteins required for the synthesis of
series of deletions of genes of this cluster resulted in the identification of    emodin and chrysophanol, including DmxR1(MβTE), DmxR15(decar­
genes required for monodictyphenone biosynthesis (Fig. 6). In this     boxylase), DmxR16 (oxygenase), DmxR7(oxidoreductase), DmxR17
cluster, mdpG, mdpF and mdpH were identified to encode NR-PKS,     (reductase) and DmxR18(dehydratase). DmxR6 was assigned to be the
β-lactamase, and  decarboxylase,  respectively. The TE  less mono­     Baeyer–Villiger monooxygenase carrying out the function of anthra­
dictyphenone PKS, MdpG, is made up of the ACP transacylase starter    quinone ring opening to form monodictyphenone since the deletion
unit, ketosynthase, acyltransferase, product template, and acyl carrier    mutant ΔdmxR6 produced chrysophanol at a high magnitude (Fig. 6)
protein (ACP) domains. The mdpH mutant strain produced the anthra­     (Greco et al., 2019).
quinone compound endocrocin, indicating that the absence of MdpH led       Monodictyphenone is the crucial branch point which determines the
to the spontaneous dehydration of ACA to endocrocin instead of     structure of the xanthone, for instance, in neosartorin biosynthesis,
decarboxylation to atrochrysone. Emodin and emodin-derived com­     conversion of monodictyphenone to a methyl ester is essential for the
pounds were produced in the strains lacking mdpB, mdpC, mdpJ, mdpK,     characteristic C-12 methyl ester in neosartorin and secalonicacids. In
and mdpL, but monodictyphenone was not detected. These results sug­     secalonicacid producing strains, the presence of gene homologous to
gest that the conversion of emodin to monodictyphenone requires the    gene encoding a putative methyltransferase, nsrG of nsr cluster also
involvement of enzymes, oxidoreductase (MdpK), reductase (MdpC),     suggests the possibility of conversion of monodictyphenone to a methyl
dehydratase (MdpB), Baeyer−Villiger monooxygenase (BVMO) (MdpL)     ester (Neubauer et al., 2016). In the synthesis of shamixanthnone, it is
and glutathione S-transferase (MdpJ), however, the role of MdpJ is still    proposed that at C-12 position of monodictyphenone, reduction to an
not clear (Fig. 6) (Chiang et al., 2010).                                 aldehyde group is essential for accurate routing (Simpson, 2012) and in
   The targeted deletion of the earlier identified mdp cluster was carried     the case  of cryptosporioptide biosynthesis, however, instead  of a
out in the A. nidulans strain producing prenylated anthrones, shamix­     reduction to an aldehyde group, reduction of C-12 to alcohol is proposed
anthrone and emericellin revealing that the mdp cluster is responsible      (Fig. 9). The mechanism of alternation of monodictyphenone at C-12 or
for the synthesis of prenyl xanthones, in which emodin and mono­     the direct formation of its analogue with a hydroxymethyl group is still
dictyphenone act as precursors. The synthesis of prenyl xanthone is a     inexplicit (Wei et al., 2022).
complex process that requires the products of the mdp cluster along with       The  ring-opening  of  anthraquinone  chrysophanol  to  mono­
the products of three genes located outside of the cluster. In this study,     dictyphenone is believed to be catalyzed by BVMO in all chrysophanol-
the anthraquinone chrysophanol was detected in the deletion mutant of     derived xanthone pathways  since  the gene encoding  this mono­
mdpL and it was proposed that the conversion of emodin to mono­    oxygenase is located in all the clusters. However, a recent study in the
dictyphenone includes a complicated pathway  that  also produces     geodin biosynthesis revealed that the formation of geodin, which had
chrysophanol as a stable intermediate (Fig. 6) (Sanchez et al., 2011).      long been  believed  to  follow  the  Baeyer–Villiger  oxidation  type
   The BGC (nsr) involved in the synthesis of the fungal xanthone het­     anthraquinone ring-opening step to form desmethylsulochrin (Fig. 8) is
erodimer neosartorin was identified in A. novofumigatus and the in­    proposed to be mediated by two enzymes, a reductase, GedF and a
termediates of the pathway were examined using a series of gene     dioxygenase, GedK. GedF reduces questin to questin hydroquinone,
deletion mutants. A homologous gene of mdpG with high sequence    which is subsequently converted to desmethylsulochrin by GedK (Qi
similarity was identified and further considered to identify the nsr     et al., 2021). In a genetic comparison of xanthone clusters with that of
cluster, consisting of 19 genes. PKS NsrB forms the polyketide which is     geodin, for instance, the agn and dmx clusters, it can be observed that
converted to ACA by MβTE NsrC. The ACA get decarboxylated to emodin    GedF is homologous to Agnl4 and DmxR7, both of which are responsible
anthrone by NsrE and NsrD oxidizes it to emodin. The conversion of     for the conversion of emodin to emodin hydroquinone in agnestin and
emodin to chrysophanol is putatively catalyzed by three enzymes such     cryptosporioptide biosynthesis, respectively. GedK, on the other hand, is
as short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) NsrR, dehydratase NsrI    homologous to BVMOs such as AgnL3 and DmxR6. Hence, possibly,
and reductase NsrJ. Chrysophanol is considered to be the substrate of   BVMO  receives chrysophanol hydroquinone  as the  substrate, not
BVMO (NsrF), which converts  it into monodictyphenone since the     chrysophanol (Qi et al., 2021).
deletion of nsrF resulted in the detection of chrysophanol (Fig. 6)
(Matsuda et al., 2018).                                                        3.3. Biosynthesis of cladofulvin, skyrin, rugulosin A and rubellin
  A gene cluster for dihydroxy-xanthone metabolites, agnestins (agn),
was identified in Paecilomyces variotii employing the comparison with        Dimerization of the basic anthraquinone structure via enzyme-
mdp and ged clusters from A. nidulans. The agn cluster encodes a NR-PKS    mediated aryl–aryl bond formation was first described in fungal plant
and is located near the downstream genes agnL1 to agnL12. The TE less    pathogen Cladosporium fulvum which naturally produces cladofulvin by
PKS is associated with MβTE (AgnL7) to form ACA which is further    C4–C2′ linked- homodimerization of nataloe-emodin (Griffiths et al.,
converted to emodin by decarboxylase, AgnL1, and oxidase, AgnL2. The     2016). On the basis of consistent expression profiles of a PKS gene
oxidoreductase, AngL4, converts emodin  into a dihydroxyquinone     during the cladofulvin synthesis, a putative gene cluster was identified
tautomer, which is converted to the substrate chrysophanol by enzymes     to be involved in the synthesis of cladofulvin. The cluster was found to
a reductase, AgnL6, and a dehydratase, AgnL8. The intermediate    be comprised of homologous genes of mdp cluster required for chrys­
chrysophanol was described to undergo Baeyer–Villiger oxidation by    ophanol biosynthesis, however, homologs of the further genes which are
BVMO and AgnL3 to form monodictyphenone. Deletion mutant analysis     required for conversion of chrysophanol to monodictyphenone were
confirmed the involvement of agnPKS in the synthesis of agnestins since     missing. In addition, the cluster was also found to encode a cytochrome
the agnPKS mutant  strain was unable  to produce  either mono­    P450 monooxygenase. The NR-PKS, ClaG  is devoid of thioesterase
dictyphenone or agnestins. A knockout mutant of agnL3 produced    domain and an MβTE (ClaF) catalyzes the thioester hydrolysis to form
emodin and chrysophanol, which confirms the  role  of AngL3  in    ACA, which was confirmed when A. oryzae strain over expressing both
receiving chrysophanol as the substrate for further conversion into    ClaG and ClaF produced endocrocin and emodin. Further  trans­
monodictyphenone (Fig. 6) (Szwalbe et al., 2018).                       formation experiments resulted in the identification of a decarboxylase
   Greco et al., 2019 isolated dimeric xanthones, cryptosporioptides,     (ClaH) which forms atrochrysone, which spontaneously dehydrated to
from Cryptosporiopsis sp. 8999 and identified the gene cluster (dmx)    form emodin. ClaB and ClaC are involved in the synthesis of chrys­
involved in  their  synthesis. Genetic analysis with other xanthone     ophanol, which is further possibly converted to nataloe emodin by ClaK

                                                                        9


[PDF physical page 10]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

and ClaN. In this study, cytochrome P450 (ClaM) was described to be the     of the presence of chrysophanol in the liqid culture, RccH may catalyze
key enzyme performing the dimerization of anthraquinone nataloe     the decarboxylation of atrochrysone carboxylic acid to chrysophanol,
emodin to cladofulvin (Fig. 10) (Griffiths et al., 2016).                  which appears unreasonable since the emodin synthesized from atroc­
   Bisanthraquinone skyrin, a homodimer of C-C5’coupled emodin, is     hrysone must undergo reduction, dehydration, and oxidation to form
proposed to be one of the pharmaceutically important compounds for     chrysophanol. Hence, further experimental validations are required to
cancer treatment. Skyrin is the main pigment of the endophytic fungus,     identify the genes present in the cluster, which catalyze the conversion
Cyanodermella asteris isolated from the medicinal plant Aster tataricus.     of emodin to chrysophanol.
Preliminary ideas about the skyrin biosynthesis were described in
C. asteris employing gene sequence analysis and an in silico approach. A     3.4. Biosynthesis of asperthecin
NR-PKS (PKS_4063) devoid of the SAT domain was proposed to be
involved in skyrin biosynthesis. Unlike the other PKSs involved in ACA       The sexual spore pigment asperthecin, an anthroquinone compound
biosynthesis, PKS_4063 was found to be having a TE domain. In addition     synthesized by A. nidulans, provides protection to the species from UV
to PKS_4063, four other enzymes, Sky_4050–62, a dehydratase, two      light irradiation (Palmer et al., 2021). Investigations carried out on the
dehydrogenases and a monooxygenase were  hypothesized  to be    sumO deletion mutant of A. nidulans established the initial information
involved in the emodin dimerization to skyrin (Jahn et al., 2017).         about the gene cluster involved in asperthecin synthesis. In A. nidulans,
   Talaromyces sp. YE3016, a fungal endophyte found in Aconitum    sumO encodes the SUMO protein, presumably involved in the regulation
carmichaeli,  is known to produce two bisanthraquinones, skyrin and     of transcription and also in the regulatory processes during secondary
rugulosin A. Using various approaches such as genome sequencing, gene     metabolite synthesis. Deletion of sumO, leading to an increase in the
knockouts, and heterologous overexpression studies, it was identified     production of asperthecin, assisted in the identification of 10 NR-PKS
that in Talaromyces sp. YE3016, synthesis of skyrin and rugulosin A     putatively associated with asperthecin synthesis. Furthermore, series
follows the same pathway in which skyrin (C5-C5′ dimerized emodin) is     deletions of 10 different NR-PKS in the ΔsumO background strain
converted to a cage-like structure after the formation of two new bonds,     resulted in the identification of an NR-PKS, encoded by aptA, responsible
C7 −C10a’ and C10a −C7′, among the two emodin monomers of skyrin     for asperthecin synthesis, as all other 9 NR-PKS deleted strains produced
(Han et al., 2021). Sequence analysis and inactivation of a PKS revealed     asperthecin while the aptA deleted strain did not. The apt cluster con­
that the gene cluster rug, responsible for the synthesis of both of the     tains at least six genes. Of these, aptA encodes the asperthecin PKS,
bisanthraquinones, codes TE-less PKs (RugA), MβTE (RugB), decarbox­     containing SAT-KS-AT-PT-ACP domains, aptB encodes MβL-TE and aptC
ylase (RugF), anthrone oxygenase (RugE), cytochrome P450 mono­    encodes a monooxygenase. AptA and AptB were proposed to condense
oxygenase (RugG) and aldo-keto reductase (RugH) minimally required     acetyl-CoA and seven malonyl-CoA molecules to form atrochrysone
for the condensation of acyl-CoAs into skyrin and rugulosin A. Step-by-     carboxylic acid, which is eventually converted to asperthecin by a series
step overexpression of various genes of the rug cluster in A.oryzae     of actions performed by AptC (Fig. 8a) (Szewczyk et al., 2008).
revealed that rugABE resulted in the accumulation of endocrocin and        In order to understand the role of AptA, AptB and AptC in the syn­
endocrocin anthrone dimers  as  seen  in a  previous  investigation     thesis of asperthecin, the three encoding genes were heterologously
(Awakawa  et  al., 2009). The  strain expressing rugABEF produced     expressed in the yeast system. In contrast to the proposed pathway for
emodin due to the decarboxylation of ACA to atrochrysone by RugF.     asperthecin generation in A. nidulans by Szewczyk et al. (2008), in which
Skyrin was detected in the strain with rugABEFG genes and the addition    an octaketide is synthesized from 1 acetyl-CoA and 7 malonyl-CoA by
of rugH to this cassette enabled A.oryzae to produce rugulosin A as the    AptA, Li et al. (2011) found that when three genes (aptA,aptB and aptC)
major compound along with a minor amount of skyrin (Han et al.,    were co-expressed, instead of an octaketide-derived compound, a com­
2021).                                                            pound, derived from a nonaketide intermediate after dehydration,
   Recently, the biosynthetic gene cluster sky for skyrin biosynthesis     decarboxylation, and hydroxylation, was detected. The yeast strain co-
was identified in Talaromyces islandicus, which encodes NR-PKS (SkyG),     expressing only two genes (aptA and aptB), synthesized a compound
MβTE (SkyF), decarboxylase (SkyH), anthrone oxygenase (SkyX), cyto­    with almost identical structure to the compound synthesized by the
chrome P450 monooxygenase (SkyM) and aldo-keto reductase (SkyY).     strain harboring three genes (aptA, aptB and aptC). However, the com­
Construction of two different strains of A.oryzae expressing two different    pound was devoid of C2-OH group (Fig. 8a). The absence of this OH
cassettes of genes such as skyGFHX and skyGFHXM was carried out,    group in the strain lacking aptC indicates the functional role of AptC as a
resulting in the production of emodin in the former strain and skyrin in     C2-hydroxylase. Moreover, no trace of asperthecin in the yeast strain
the latter one. This investigation yet again confirmed the role of a cy­     overexpressing these three genes suggests the involvement of additional
tochrome P450 monooxygenase in the dimerization of emodin to skyrin.    enzymes in A. nidulans which are encoded by the genes located outside
However, the presence of a gene coding aldo-keto reductase (SkyY) in     the asp cluster (Li et al., 2011).
the sky  cluster, which  is homologous to RugH, suggests that the
biosynthesis of skyrin and rugulosin may share the same pathway in     3.5. Biosynthesis of anthraquinones in the aflatoxin pathway
T. islandicus, and SkyY may be involved in the conversion of skyrin to
rugulosin (Fukaya et al., 2022).                                                 Aflatoxins, potent carcinogens causing acute liver damage, liver
   The ascomycete fungus Ramularia collo-cygni is the causative agent of      cirrhosis, tumour induction, and teratogenesis in humans and animals,
Ramularia leaf spot (RLS) disease in barley, possibly by reactive oxygen     are mainly synthesized by Aspergillus flavus and A. parasiticus. The af­
species (ROS), such as superoxide (O2•-) generated by phytotoxic SMs     latoxins AFB1, AFB2, AFG1, and AFG2 are the major known toxins
called rubellins produced by the fungus (Heiser et al., 2004). Of all the     primarily produced by these two species. A. parasiticus is able to produce
rubellins, rubellin B 2 and D 4 are the important final products of the      all of the four aflatoxins, whereas A. flavus can produce only AFB1 and
rubellin biosynthetic pathway since they are found in the highest con­    AFB2. AFB1 is the most prevalent and most toxic of all and can poten­
centrations in infected barley leaves. The biosynthetic pathway of      tially contaminate food grains, causing a serious threat across the globe
rubellins, which structurally resemble cladofulvin, has been proposed to    (Roze et al., 2013).
be synthesized by an NR-PKS (Dussart et al., 2018). Further phyloge­       The synthesis of aflatoxins follows a complex pathway that is cata­
netic analysis revealed that the NR-PKS associated with rubellin syn­     lyzed by at least 27 enzymes, coded by genes arranged in a cluster, and
thesis (named as RccG) shared homology with ClaG and MdpG. The    two cluster-specific regulators, aflR and aflS principally regulate the
RccG was proposed to be a TE-less PKS which requires β-lactamase     expression of these genes (Caceres et al., 2020).
(RccF) and a decarboxylase (RccH) to form atrochrysone (Dussart and         Structurally, aflatoxins are difuranocumarins derived from polyke­
Jakubczyk, 2022). However, as per the authors’ prediction on the basis     tide intermediates. In the early steps of aflatoxin synthesis, a polyketide

                                                                        10


[PDF physical page 11]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

intermediate is generated by the iterative type I NR-PKS (PksA). The      (Fig. 9b). Ring C is formed via C–C bond formation between an isoprene
PksA containing an SAT, KS, MAT, ACP, PT and TE/CLC domains, ex­     unit from either isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) or dimethylallyl py­
tends the hexanoyl starter with seven malonyl-CoA to form the aflatoxin     rophosphate (DMAPP) derived from either the 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol
precursor, norsolorinic acid. Here, unlike the usual SAT domain, PksA-     4-phosphate (MEP) pathway or the mevalonic acid (MVA) pathway and
SAT is primed by the saturated hexanoyl CoA, which is synthesized by     the aromatic ring of the naphthoquinone, which is formed after DHNA
two specialized fatty acid synthases (Fas) enzymes, Fas α-subunit and    undergoes a prenylation step (Shukla et al., 2017). A good number of the
Fas β-subunit, encoded by two alf cluster genes, aflA and aflB, respec­     studies on the anthraquinone biosynthesis have been conducted in
tively (Fig. 8b) (Crawford et al., 2006; Mahanti et al., 1996).               various species of the Rubiaceae family. However, the whole pathway
   The activity of PksA results in the synthesis of norsolorinic acid     has not been elucidated and many genes, particularly the gene involved
anthrone (NAA) as the initial product, which is oxidized by the anthrone     in the formation of the third ring, have yet to be identified (Zhang et al.,
oxidase (HypC) to form the first stable anthraquinone intermediate,     2022b).
norsolorinic acid (NA) in the aflatoxin biosynthesis (Ehrlich et  al.,
2010). PT and TE/CLC domains of PksA play a crucial role in the regio-     4.2. Biosynthesis of anthraquinones via polyketide pathway
specific cyclization of the highly reactive polyketide intermediate (as
discussed  earlier) (Korman  et  al., 2010). A  series of downstream       Numerous anthraquinone derivatives in higher plants, particularly in
tailoring enzymes catalyze the conversion of NA to versicolorin B, a     the Rheum, Rumex, Rhamnus, Aloe, Senna, and Hypericum species, are
common precursor node that is either redirected for the synthesis of    examples of compounds derived from the (acetate-malonate)-polyketide
AFB1 or AFB2 (Yu et al., 2004). Many Aspergillus spp. produce another     route. A polyketide synthase, more specifically an octaketide synthase,
carcinogenic compound, sterigmatocystin, the penultimate precursor of     condenses eight malonyl-CoA to form a nascent octaketide chain which
aflatoxin, as a final product due to the absence of a few of the enzymes    undergoes further modifications to form emodin-type anthraquinone
carrying out the conversion of sterigmatocystin to AFB1. A gene cluster    compounds characterized by the presence of at least two hydroxyl
responsible for the synthesis of sterigmatocystin in A.nidulans shares     groups in both the A and C rings (Fig. 9a).
striking homology with the genes in the afl cluster coding for ster­
igmatocystin formation in A. parasiticus and A. flavus (Yabe and Naka­     4.2.1. Recent advances in biosynthesis of anthraquinones in Hypericum
jima,  2004).  Similar  to  the  afl  cluster,  the  gene  cluster  for      spp. (Hypericaceae)
sterigmatocystin (stc) also encodes two Fas, stcJ and stcK and follows a        Hypericin, one of the most promising naturally occurring compounds
similar way of biosynthesis (Yu and Leonard, 1995) (Brown et al., 1996).     of pharmaceutical interest mostly due to its anticancer activities, is a
Dothistromin, a toxic red compound exhibiting structural similarities     bisanthraquinone known to occur in some species of the genus Hyper­
with versicolorin B, is produced by many coniferous trees fungal path­     icum. Hypericin  is  localized  in dark glands present  in hypericin-
ogens such as Dothistroma septosporun and D. pini (Schwelm and Brad­     producing Hypericum species on aerial parts of the plants, especially
shaw, 2010).                                                              leaves and flowers (Huang et al., 2014; Revuru et al., 2020). Distribution
                                                                              of the dark glands on leaves is not consistent in all the species. In some
4. Biosynthesis of anthraquinones in plants                            species including H. perforatum, H. annulatum, H. humifusum and H.
                                                                 maculatum dark glands are located in the margin of the leaves, whereas
   Anthraquinones are found in a wide range of plant species of various     irregular distribution of these glands across the leaf blades can be
families, including Leguminosae, Rubiaceae, Rhamnaceae, Scrophular­     observed in H. rumeliacum and H. erectum (Kucharíkov´a et al., 2016).
iaceae, Liliaceae, Verbenaceae and Hypericaceae (Wang et al., 2021a;        Hypericin biosynthesis is one of the most investigated pathways
Duval et al., 2016). While many anthraquinones are present in various    among the plant anthraquinone biosynthesis pathways. Experimental
plant families, for instance emodin (Izhaki, 2002), some of them are     validation via blocking  of the  alternative proposed chorismate/o-
found exclusively in certain plant genera such as hypericin which is     succinylbenzoate pathway  for anthraquinone biosynthesis revealed
present only in some Hypericum species.                                    that the synthesis of hypericin is carried out exclusively through the
  Two major possible pathways that result in anthraquinones are     polyketide synthase (PKS) route (Pillai and Nair, 2014). It is synthesized
proposed in plants, including the the shikimate or chorismate/o-succi­    by a type III PKS that condenses eight molecules of malonyl-CoA to form
nylbenzoic acid pathway, leading to the formation of anthraquinones    an octaketide chain, which further undergoes cyclization and decar­
having just one hydroxylated ring and the polyketide pathway, which     boxylation to form atrochrysone which is dehydrated to form emodin
results in anthraquinones with two hydroxylated rings derived from the     anthrone.
octaketide chain (Fig. 9).                                                      In the presence of an oxygenase, emodin anthrone is converted to
                                                                  emodin. Oxidative coupling of emodin anthrone and emodin is believed
4.1. Biosynthesis of anthraquinones via chorismate/O-succinylbenzoic         to form protohypericin which is further spontaneously converted to
acid                                                                     hypericin in presence of light (Kirakosyan et al., 2004; Zobayed et al.,
                                                                   2006; Karioti and Bilia, 2010). As per one of our previous studies, on the
   Chorismate/O-succinylbenzoic acid pathway is typical for alizarin/     basis of liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-based phenotyping
rubia type anthraquinones synthesized in plants belonging to the     of 17 Hypericum species, the possibility of involvement of an alternative
Rubiaceae family such as Morinda, Rubia, and Cinchona species (Han    pathway via skyrin can be proposed, in which skyrin and its derivatives
et al., 2002). In these anthraquinones, the basic structural skeleton is    appear to be associated with hypericin synthesis (Fig. 10) (Kim´akov´a
derived from two different pathways. The rings A and B are synthesized     et al., 2018).
from α-ketoglutarate and o-succinylbenzoic acid (OSB), whereas ring C       However, the whole biosynthetic pathway and enzymes associated
is derived from the terpenoid route from isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP)    with hypericin biosynthesis is yet to be elucidated. In the first attempt to
(Veremeichik et al., 2019). Formation of the rings A and B begins with     identify a gene coding for the key intermediate in the hypericin
the condensation of phosphophenol pyruvate (PEP) and erythrose-4-    pathway, Hyp-1 gene product was proposed as the key enzyme involved
phosphate (E4P), and results in the synthesis of isochorismate, which     in the biosynthesis of hypericin through dimerization of emodin and
enzymatically condenses with ketoglutarate to form OSB in the presence    emodin  anthrone, and  phenolic  oxidation  to  protohypericin and
of thiamine diphosphate by OSB synthase. OSB: CoA ligase catalyzes the     hypericin (Bais et al., 2003). However, several subsequent papers based
formation of the OSB-CoA ester by adding CoA to the aliphatic carboxyl    on gene expression studies of the hyp-1 gene demonstrated that it was
group of OSB. Ring closure step OSB-CoA ester eventually gives rise to     highest in roots as hypericin-free organs and occurred in hypericin-
1,4-dihydroxy-2-naphthoic acid (DHNA), constituting the rings A and B     lacking Hypericum species as well (Koˇsuth et al., 2007; Koˇsuth et al.,

                                                                        11


[PDF physical page 12]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

2010). This was further supported by X-ray crystallographic studies,    were compensated by the endogenous enzymes of A. thaliana (Guo et al.,
indicating that the key intermediates of the hypericin biosynthetic     2021). In a similar study, two new OKS (PKS4 and PKS5) from Aloe
pathway are still unclear (Michalska et al., 2010; Sliwiak et al., 2016). A     arborescens were expressed in E. coli, in which both of the enzymes could
PKS (OKS) from H. perforatum, HpPKS2 (plant-specific type III PKS), was    be able to catalyze the successive condensation of eight molecules of
considered to elucidate its possible involvement in the biosynthesis of    malonyl-CoA to form the octaketides SEK4 and SEK4b (Mizuuchi et al.,
hypericin. The in vitro assay using purified enzyme catalyzed conden­     2009).
sation of malonyl-CoA to yield tri- to octaketide products, including
octaketides SEK4 and SEK4b (not shown in the figure) as well as hep­     5. Application of anthraquinones
taketide aloesone instead of the atrochrysone carboxylic acid or emodin,
suggesting the involvement of additional enzymes such as cyclase,       Even though significant advancements have been made in the field of
thioesterase and oxygenase for the formation of emodin (Karppinen     cancer research, incorporating the use of natural products as prospective
et al., 2008).                                                             therapeutic candidates is increasingly becoming crucial.
   Several candidate biosynthetic genes were proposed on the basis of       Anthraquinones exhibit a variety of anticancer properties, including
comparative  transcriptional analysis and  differential expression  of     the inhibition of cancer cell, induction of cellular apoptosis and tumour
several Hypericum species/tissues containing and lacking hypericin     angiogenesis through inhibiting a wide range of targets, including DNA
(Sot´ak et al., 2016a; Sot´ak et al., 2016b) and whole-genome sequence     quadruplex, telomerase, protein kinases, and topoisomerases (Malik
data of H. perforatum (Zhou et al., 2021b) but none of them have been     et al., 2021).
successfully experimentally validated.                                   Emodin, present in numerous plants and fungi offers a broad-
                                                                  spectrum effects to be used as a candidate for inhibition of cancer
4.2.2. Biosynthesis of anthraquinones in Senna tora (Fabaceae)                 cells interfering numerous biological pathways related to oncogenic
   Senna tora, an annual herb belonging to Fabaceae family, is known to    growth signaling including protein kinase B (AKT), mitogen-activated
contain numerous anthraquinones in its seeds, including chrysophanol,     protein kinase (MAPK), HER-2 tyrosine kinase, Wnt/−catenin, and
emodin, rhein, and others, making this plant medicinally important in     phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase(PI3K) in cancer cells (Akkol et al., 2021).
various traditional medicine practices (Kang et al., 2020a). Preliminary        In human lung squamous cell line CH27, emodin promoted upre­
ideas about the genes involved in the synthesis of anthraquinones in     gulation and translocation of Bax and Bak proteins, resulting in release
S. tora were given using combined genomics, transcriptomics, metab­     of cytochrome C from mitochondria to cytosol, activation of both
olomics, and biochemistry approaches (Kang et al., 2020b). On the basis     caspase-9 and caspase-3 and eventually apoptotic cell death (Lee, 2001).
of the transcriptome and metabolome analysis during different seed       Emodin  exhibits  similar mechanism  of  action  as  anti-cancer
development stages with varied anthraquinone contents, a probable    chemotherapy  drugs  daunorubicin  and  mitoxantrone,  in  which
candidate gene, chs-l9 was identified, sharing similarities with pks of H.    emodin induces DNA double-strand breaks through stabilized topo­
perforatum. In order to understand the role of CHS-L9, the protein was     isomerase II-DNA covalent complexes and suppression of ATP hydrolysis
heterologously expressed in E. coli, purified, and subjected to assay using      (Li et al., 2010b).
malonyl-CoA as the substrate. The biochemical assay results revealed      On the basis of various in vivo or in vitro experimental models,
that unlike the previously described PKS-III from plants, HpPKS2    emodin has been proposed to be effective for the management of cancer,
(Karppinen et al., 2008) and ArOKS (Mizuuchi et al., 2009) which pre­     particularly in digestive system cancers such as pancreatic cancer.
dominantly forms shunt products, (SEK4 and SEK4b) due to spontaneous    However, to realise the practical viability of natural compounds like
and non-specific cyclization, CHS-L9 could catalyze the formation of    emodin in clinical trials, scaling up the experiments to more in vivo
ACA. Moreover,  the  reaction  mixture  also  contained  endocrocin    models and clinical trials becomes essential (Zhang et al., 2022a).
anthrone, which is a result of spontaneous dehydration in vitro. Further        Hypericin, one of the most promising naturally occurring compounds
studies in S. tora are required to identify genes involved in various other     of pharmaceutical interest, mostly due to its anticancer activities, is a
activities like decarboxylation and oxidation since no product such as     bisanthraquinone known to occur in some species of the genus Hyper­
endocrocin, emodin anthrone or emodin were detected in the reaction     icum. The prominent antiproliferative effect of hypericin, when irradi­
containing CHS-L9 (Kang et al., 2020b).                                  ated by visible light on various tumour cells has made this compound
                                                               one of the most promising candidates for treating various cancers by
4.2.3. Biosynthesis of anthraquinones in the species of the Polygonaceae      hypericin-medicated photodynamic therapy (PDT). Moreover, in com­
and Asphodelaceae families                                                bination with chemotherapeutic agents or targeted therapies, the PDT
   The genus Rheum is known to have many species rich in anthraqui­     appears even more effective in impeding the tumour cell growth (Dong
none compounds, including emodin, aloe-emodin, and physcion. How­     et al., 2016) (de Andrade et al., 2021).
ever, very few studies on the biosynthesis of anthraquinones in Rheum      PDT technique, which uses non-toxic dyes or photosensitizers (PS)
have so far been carried out. A combination of targeted metabolomics     along with safe visible light, was developed for applications in tumour
and  transcriptomics  in two  species  of Rheum,  R. palmatum and     therapy and diagnostics. In PDT, a nontoxic medication or dye known as
R. officinale, predicted a possible candidate, the caffeoyl-CoA methyl­    a PS is administered to the tumour site, which is later irradiated with
transferase gene, which is responsible for methylation of emodin to     visible light. In the presence of oxygen, photon absorption of the
physcion in R. officinale (Liu et al., 2020).                                  photosensitizer activates it into an excited singlet state, which is spon­
   In another study, using comparative transcriptomics of roots, stems,     taneously converted into a relatively stable triplet state (Castano et al.,
and leaves of R. tanguticum, some of the candidate genes involved in the     2004). The excited triplet can either react with substrates to form
biosynthesis of anthraquinones were predicted, including eight probable     reactive oxygen species (ROS) like superoxide and hydroxyl radicals or
candidate genes for type III PKS (Zhou et al., 2021a). Polygonum cuspi­    can transfer their energy to triplet molecular oxygen to form singlet
datum is another important species of the family Polygonaceae which is    oxygen (Wang et al., 2021b).
also considered a rich source of anthraquinone compounds. An octake­       The formation of ROS and singlet oxygen promotes the apoptosis,
tide synthase from P. cuspidatum (PcOKS) was expressed in E. coli, which     necrosis, or autophagy mechanisms either by DNA damage or by dis­
resulted in the condensation of eight molecules of malonyl-CoA to form     rupting cellular metabolism and changing the signaling pathways,
a variety of abnormally folded aromatic octaketides. However, emodin    which can potentially kill tumour cells (Fig. 11a) (Verebov´a et al.,
synthesis was observed when PcOKS was expressed in Arabidopsis     2020).
thaliana suggesting that the regio-specific cyclization of the nascent        Hypericin, having a maximum absorption at 590 nm, is a strong
octaketide chain required the function of additional enzymes, which     photosensitizer which produces significant singlet oxygen. Moreover, its

                                                                        12


[PDF physical page 13]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

tendency to localize at tumour cell and exhibiting less dark toxicity     6. Advances in heterologous production of anthraquinone
make it one of the promising candidates for PDT (Jendˇzelovsk´a et al.,    compounds
2016).
   As compared to the PDT using photosensitizer drugs, such as hae­          Initial investigation on the synthesis of two anthraquinones, endo­
matoporphyrin, hypercin- mediated system offers an advantage over it     crocin and emodin, in S. cerevisiae was carried out by expressing a TE-
in terms of the half-life and effeciency. Haematoporphyrin has a rela­      less NR-PKS (SlACAS) from Stemphylium lycopersici along with MβL-
tively longer half life as compared to hypericin, which might result in    TEs and decarboxylases from various sources in a step-by-step consti­
complications due to the extended skin photosensitivity to light (Zhang     tution process. Initially, SlACAS and MβL-TE from S. lycopersici were
et al., 2015).                                                          overexpressed in S. cerevisiae, resulting in the accumulation of both
   Evidence of hypericin-mediated cytotoxicity and apoptosis has been     endocrocin and emodin at a titer of around 44.9 mgL−1 and 3.9 mgL−1,
reported in a variety of cancer cell lines and animal models. Evaluation     respectively. Different strains expressing MβL-TEs from different species
of human colorectal cancer cell lines for the phototoxic effects of     alongside SlACAS were constructed and the combination of SlACAS and
hypericin-mediated PDT resulted in an inhibition of cell proliferation    MβL-TE from Hypoxylon sp. EC38 (HyTE) exhibited the best catalytic
due to S-phase cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, triggered by reactive     activity with an endocrocin accumulation of around 96.8 mgL−1. The
oxygen species generation (Hu et al., 2021).                             absence of a decarboxylase in this strain led to the accumulation of
   To elucidate the combinational effects of chemotherapy and PDT,     endocrocin by spontaneous dehydration of ACA. Hence, decarboxylases
hypericin and doxorubicin were incorporated together in a system,    from various fungal sources were co-expressed with SlACAS and HyTE
hypericine-functionalized graphene oxide (GO) loaded with doxoru­     for emodin synthesis. Among seven different expressed enzymes, the
bicin. Both in vitro and in vivo assays revealed the superior function of     strain with decarboxylase from Aspergillus fischeri NRRL 181 (AfDC)
the system in terms of mitochondria-mediated apoptosis of breast car­    accumulated around 96.5 mgL−1 emodin and a negligible amount of
cinoma cells, suggesting the use of hypericin-functionalized GO for     endocrocin due to the efficient conversion of ACA into emodin anoth­
improved therapeutic effectiveness of chemotherapeutic drugs (Han     rone via decarboxylation by AfDC (Fig. 12a) (Sun et al., 2019).
et al., 2018).                                                                  In another study, the genes of the actinorhodin pathway from
   Despite being a promising  naturally occurring  photosensitizer,      S. coelicolor were integrated into S. cerevisiae. However, due to the lack
hypericin has not gained significant recognition due to some of the     of functional expression of act minimal PKS, no product was detected,
limiting factors in its use, such as bioavailability and cell selectivity (de    which was overcome by replacing the act PKS with a type III PKS from
Andrade et al., 2021). Studies are being conducted to increase aqueous     Aloe arborescens (AaOKS). Even though all the genes of the act pathway
solubility and bioavailability using various methods, such as preparation    were overexpressed, DMAC accumulation was significant, suggesting
of hypericin-loaded oil-in-water nanoemulsions (Ma et al., 2021) and     that the bicyclic product released by ActIV undergoes spontaneous
superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) based selectivity-     cyclization to form DMAC instead of being used as the substrate for
drug delivery systems, which offer the scope of bringing PDT and     ketoreduction by ActVI as in native, possibly due to the lack of optimal
magnetic drug targeting (MDT) therapies together for more precise cell     function of ActVI in S. cerevisiae (Fig. 12b) (Jakoˇci¯unas et al., 2020).
selectivity  (Unterweger  et  al.,  2015).  Recently,  an  endogenous        Synthesis of hypericin was carried out overexpressing RugH (derived
bioluminescence-triggering PDT technique employing a luciferase gene    from T. wortmannii YE3016) in ΔclamM mutant of Cladosporium fulvum
inserted into plasmid DNA was developed to overcome the limitations of      (Fig. 7). As discussed earier in this manuscript (Section 3.3, Fig. 7), in
PDT due to light penetration. In this study, d-luciferin and hypericin     rugulosin A biosynthesis pathway, RugG, a P450 monooxygenase,
were combined inside polyethyleneimine (PEI)-modified nano‑calcium     responsible for the dimearization of two emodin molecules (C5–5′) to
phosphate (CaP) and fused with a plasmid containing a luciferase gene    form skyrin. However, when RugG was transferred to ΔclaM mutant of
to form a nanodrug, DHDC. Localization DHDC at tumour cell initiates     C. fulvum (see Section 3.3, Fig. 7 for biosynthesis of cladofulvin), which
expression of luciferase which oxidizes d-luciferin and produces lumi­    can accumulate emodin bianthrone, RugG was observed to be substrate-
nescence which in.                                                  promiscuous monooxygenase flexible to accept the emodin bianthrone
   turn triggers hypericin to generate ROS (Fan et al., 2021).               for subsequent C5–5′ bond formation (Fig. 12c). The resultant com­
   Anthraquinone compounds, including sennosides, rheinosides, and    pound was eventually convereted to hypericin in presence of light at a
anthraquinone aglycones, are responsible for the laxative effects of    magnitude of 43.1 mgL−1 (Wu et al., 2022).
rhubarb and senna (Le et al., 2021). Sennosides, which are the primary
bioactive components, are anthranoid glycosides and are made up of     7. Conclusions and future perspectives
several anthraquinone derivatives, such as sennoside A, B, C, and D
(Sasaki et al., 1979). Sennoside A potently exhibits laxative effects such        Despite the importance of anthraquinone compounds in various
as activating the bowel and causing diarrhea after being converted to      fields, naturally producing hosts are still the major sources for isolation
rheinanthrone by gut bacteria in the colon (Xie et al., 2020). Because of     of these compounds as a chemical synthesis approach  is not an
its properties, rhubarb is employed in various traditional medicinal     economically viable option. On the other hand, natural producers such
systems as a laxative taken orally. Sennoside A is not absorbed in the     as filamentous fungi and actinobacteria often require long cultivation
small intestine but in the colon, where in the presence of glucosidase     times for product biosynthesis, and yet the magnitude of production
enzyme secreted by the gut microflora, it is converted into its active    remains low (Tippelt and Nett, 2021).
form, rheinanthrone, and later oxidized to rhein and gets eliminated       With the expansion of genome sequence database, it is becoming
(Cao et al., 2017).                                                            clear that vast majority of BGCs are cryptic in nature and do not readily
   The mechanism of laxative effects of sennoside A may be attributed     operate under standard laboratory conditions (Gao et al., 2021). BGCs
to its reducing the expression of aquaporin-3 (AQP3) in the colon, which     are regulated by complex transcriptional regulation mechanism and
would restrict water transfer from the intestinal tract to the vascular     hence, alternation of promoter elements becomes one of the critical
side, inducing diarrhea. The active metabolite rheinanthrone stimulates     approaches for the activation of these dormant BCGs. Considering the
colon macrophages and promotes prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which in­     use of both constitutive and inducible promoters, for instance, consti­
hibits the expression of aquaporin-3 (AQP3), resulting in lower AQP3     tutive promoter Psco5768 from S. coelicolor M145, can play a key role in
levels (Fig. 11b) (Kon et al., 2014).                                           effective transcription, however, BGC expression in the native strain
                                                      may result in their delayed growth under fermentation conditions (Xu
                                                                                 et al., 2022).
                                                                             Synthetic biology and metabolic engineering strategies using various

                                                                        13


[PDF physical page 14]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104





Fig. 7. Schematic representation of biosynthesis of cladofulvin, skyrin and rugulosin A. ClaG/RugA/SkyG/RccG- NR-PKS (SAT- starter unit ACP transacylase; AT-
acyltransferase; KS-ketosynthase; PT- product template; ACP- acyl carrier protein); ClaF/RugB/SkyF/RccF-metallo-lactamase-type thioesterase (MβL-TE); ClaH/
RugF/SkyH/RccH -decarboxylase; RugE/SkyX - anthrone oxygenase; ClaC- reductase; ClaB-dehydratase; ClaK/ClaN- oxidoreductase; ClaM/RugG/SkyM- cytochrome
P450 monooxygenase; RugH/SkyY-aldo-keto reductase.

physiological parameters, multi-omics data and genome-scale metabolic    compound biosynthesis (Tippelt and Nett, 2021). In particular, S. cer­
network models, are being considered to increase the yield of a target      evisiae, a unicellular ascomycete suitable for large-scale fermentation,
compound in actinomycetes, however, inadequate availability of the     has gained much attention for biotechnological applications due to its
tools for actinomycetes as compared to the model organisms limits the     superiorities in many aspects, including fast-growth, established genetic
performance (Palazzotto et al., 2019) (Li et al., 2017).                   background, availability of omics data, easy transformation methods,
   Use of alternative model hosts such as E. coli and S.cerevisiae to    and flexibility in incorporating many exogenous genes. Furthermore,
reconstitute the pathway appears to be an appealing approach because     unlike prokaryotes, which lack an anchoring platform such as the
both strains are well established and a robust cell factories for various    endoplasmic reticulum for some of the critical enzymes, for instance,

                                                                        14


[PDF physical page 15]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104





Fig. 8. (a) Schematic representation of biosynthesis of asperthecin. AptA- NR-PKS (SAT- starter unit ACP transacylase; AT- acyltransferase; KS-ketosynthase; PT-
product template; ACP- acyl carrier protein); AptC-monooxygenase; AptB-metallo-lactamase-type thioesterase (MβL-TE). (b) Schematic representation of aflatoxins
biosynthesis. AflA/StcJ -Fattyacid synthesis α-subunit; AflB/StcK- Fattyacid synthesis β-subunit; PksA/PksST- NR-PKS (SAT- starter unit ACP transacylase; AT-
acyltransferase; KS-ketosynthase; PT- product template; ACP- acyl carrier protein; TE/CLC- thioesterase/Claisen cyclase); HypC/StcM- anthrone oxygenase.

cytochrome P450s, involved in many SM biosynthesis, S. cerevisiae, as an    and very few studies have yet been carried out (Zhao et al., 2020).
eukaryotic system, can functionally express these (Bond et al., 2016).       The biosynthetic logic of anthraquinone compounds offer an assis­
Even though S. cerevisiae is known to be a well-established and robust     tance in designing the heterologous production in non native hosts, for
cell factory for the obligatory production of many compounds, produc­     instance, when the actinorhodin biosynthesis genes (act) were expressed
tion of polyketide compounds like anthraquinones is still in its infancy     in yeast, act minimal PKS was found to be non functional, however,


                                                                        15


[PDF physical page 16]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104





                   Fig. 9. Biosynthesis if anthraquinones in plants (a) polyketide pathway and (b) chorismate/O-succinylbenzoic acid pathway.

when it was replaced with a type III octaketide synthase from plant    endophytes or other heterologous production systems are considered for
(AaOKS), the yeast strain could be able to produce the octaketide, which     prospective  biotechnological  production  of  bioactive  polyketides,
was later tailored by remaining gens of act pathway expressed alongside     especially hypericin or skyrin, at least following questions should be
AaOKS to synthesize desired compound (Jakoˇci¯unas et  al., 2020).     answered: Different groups of anthraquinones synthesized by diverse
Similarly, in the other study, without prior knowledge of biosynthetic    and phylogenetically distant groups of organisms raise the question:
pathway of hypericin, on the basic of structure of the compound,    what genes and enzymes of the biosynthetic pathway are evolutionary
biosynthetic platform was constructed using enzyme form a different     conserved orthologues and what changes in the genomes over time led
pathway, resulting in the generation of the product (Wu et al., 2022).      to a wide spectrum of anthraquinone derivatives? An increasing evi­
   Despite it is well documented that microbial endophytes produce    dence on genome organization reveals that the polyketide biosynthetic
some of the profiling secondary metabolites of their hosts (Henzelyov´a     genes in bacteria and fungi are clustered, but the data on the organi­
et al., 2020), the way of their communication in biosynthetic pathways     zation of the polyketide genes in plant genomes is scarce. Another
is still far from being understood (Kusari et al., 2009).                    important aspect is the communication between the symbiotic organ­
   Anthraquinones including hypericin, and its putative intermediates     isms and their plant hosts and its impact on the biosynthetic capability.
emodin, emodin anthrone, skyrin and others are widespread in fungi      Is it necessary, for prospective production purposes, to elucidate the
including fungal plant-borne endophytes. Biosynthetic core genes and     entire pathway or just to focus on the key reaction(s) necessary for
genes coding for regulatory elements are clustered in the fungal ge­     application of the synthetic biology approach?
nomes and reveal fundamental aspects of their potential genetic and       Comprehensive information about the pathways of anthraquinone
regulatory function at the genomic level. Understanding of genetic and     biosynthesis in various organisms ranging from bacteria to plants pro­
epigenetic background of the anthraquinone biosynthetic gene clusters     vided in this review will serve as a valuable source for the elucidation of
and way of their activation in fungal endophytes would help not only    new genes and gene clusters associated with anthraquinone biosynthesis
understand their pathways in plants, for instance, Hypericum spp. as the    and  also  provide  future  directions  for  metabolic  engineering
essential producers of hypericin in the plant kingdom, but also favor     approaches.
them as promising heterologous/homologous system for prospective
biotechnological  production  of  hypericin  and  other  desirable    CRediT authorship contribution statement
anthraquinones.
   Simple eukaryotic organisms such as fungi and even some prokary­       Nitesh Kumar Mund: Writing – original draft, Visualization. Eva
otic systems are being used as models to study certain aspects of various      ˇCell´arov´a: Writing – review & editing.
metabolic processes typical for complex eukaryotes. Moreover, these
simple organisms may represent effective heterologous cell factories for
production  of  desirable  eukaryotic  products.  Before  the  fungal

                                                                        16


[PDF physical page 17]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104





                   Fig. 10. Biosynthesis of anthraquinones in Senna tora and hypericin biosynthesis in Hypericum sp. KS/CHS-L9- ketosynthase.





Fig. 11. (a) Hypericin mediated PDT induces celldeath after being actived at at 585 nm. Activated hypericin generated ROS that activates mitochondrial (intrinsic)
pathway of apoptosis. (b) Proposed pathways of sennoside A activity. In large intestine, sennoside A is converted into rhein anthrone which induces its laxative effect.





                                                                        17


[PDF physical page 18]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104





Fig. 12. Hetrologous production of anthraquinone compounds.
(a) Hetrologous production of endocrocin and emodin. SlACAS- NR-PKS from Stemphylium lycopersici; HyTe- MβL-TE from Hypoxylon sp. EC38 and AfDC- decar­
boxylase form Aspergillus fischeri. (b) Hetrologous production of DMAC; AaOKS- type III PKS from Aloe arborescens; actIII-ketoreductase; actVII- Aromatase/cyclase;
actIV-cyclase from actinorhodin (act cluster) of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). (c) Hetrologous production of hypericin; RugH- P450 monooxygenase.

Declaration of Competing Interest                                         Brachmann, A.O., Joyce, S.A., Jenke-Kodama, H., Schw¨ar, G., Clarke, D.J., Bode, H.B.,
                                                                                       2007. A type II polyketide synthase is responsible for anthraquinone biosynthesis in
                                                                                      Photorhabdus luminescens. ChemBioChem. 8 (14), 1721–1728.
   The authors declare no conflict of interest.                                Bringmann, G., Noll, T.F., Gulder, T.A., Grüne, M., Dreyer, M., Wilde, C., Pankewitz, F.,
                                                                                                      Hilker, M., Payne, G.D., Jones, A.L., Goodfellow, M., Fiedler, H.P., 2006. Different
Data availability                                                                         polyketide folding modes converge to an identical molecular architecture. Nat.                                                                              Chem. Biol. 2 (8), 429–433.
                                                                                Brown, D.W., Yu, J.H., Kelkar, H.S., Fernandes, M., Nesbitt, T.C., Keller, N.P., Adams, T.
  No data was used for the research described in the article.                       H., Leonard, T.J., 1996. Twenty-five coregulated transcripts define a
                                                                                                 sterigmatocystin gene cluster in Aspergillus nidulans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93
                                                                                                               (4), 1418–1422.
Acknowledgement                                                                    Caceres, I., Khoury, A.A., Khoury, R.E., Lorber, S., Oswald, I.P., Khoury, A.E., Atoui, A.,
                                                                                                   Puel, O., Bailly, J.D., 2020. Aflatoxin biosynthesis and genetic regulation: a review.
   This work was supprted by the Slovak Research and Development          Toxins (Basel) 12 (3).
Agency, grant No APVV 18-0125: Novel anthraquinones of natural origin      Cao,2017.Y.J., Pu,AdvancesZ.J., Tang,in bio-activeY.P., Shen,constituents,J., Chen, pharmacologyY.Y., Kang, A.,andZhou,clinicalG.S., applicationsDuan, J.A., of
for biomedical applications and Scientific Grant Agency of Ministry of          rhubarb. Chin. Med. 12, 36.
Education, Slovak Republic, grant No VEGA 1/0013/19: Biosynthetic      Castano, A.P., Demidova, T.N., Hamblin, M.R., 2004. Mechanisms in photodynamic
gene clustrers of skyrin in fungal endophytes: a key for elucidation of          therapy: part one-photosensitizers, photochemistry and cellular localization.                                                                                           Photodiagn. Photodyn. Ther. 1 (4), 279–293.
hypericin biosynthesis in the genus Hypericum?.                                   Chavali, A.K., Rhee, S.Y., 2018. Bioinformatics tools for the identification of gene clusters
                                                                                                    that biosynthesize specialized metabolites. Brief. Bioinform. 19 (5), 1022–1034.
References                                                                          Chiang, Y.M., Szewczyk, E., Davidson, A.D., Entwistle, R., Keller, N.P., Wang, C.C.,                                                                                            Oakley, B.R., 2010. Characterization of the Aspergillus nidulans monodictyphenone
                                                                                     gene cluster. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76 (7), 2067–2074.
Akkol, E.K., Tatlı, I.I., Karatoprak, G., A˘gar, O.T., Yücel, Ç., Sobarzo-S´anchez, E.,             Chien, S.-C., Wu, Y.-C., Chen, Z.-W., Yang, W.-C., 2015. Naturally occurring
    Capasso, R., 2021. Is Emodin with anticancer effects completely innocent? Two sides          anthraquinones: chemistry and therapeutic potential in autoimmune diabetes. Evid.
    of the coin. Cancers (Basel) 13 (11).                                                   Based Complement. Alternat. Med. 2015, 357357.
Ames, B.D., Lee, M.Y., Moody, C., Zhang, W., Tang, Y., Tsai, S.C., 2011. Structural and      Couch, R.D., Gaucher, G.M., 2004. Rational elimination of Aspergillus terreus sulochrin
    biochemical characterization of ZhuI aromatase/cyclase from the R1128 polyketide           production. J. Biotechnol. 108 (2), 171–178.
    pathway. Biochemistry. 50 (39), 8392–8406.                                         Crawford, J.M., Townsend, C.A., 2010. New insights into the formation of fungal
Awakawa, T., Yokota, K., Funa, N., Doi, F., Mori, N., Watanabe, H., Horinouchi, S., 2009.          aromatic polyketides. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 8 (12), 879–889.
    Physically discrete beta-lactamase-type thioesterase catalyzes product release in         Crawford, J.M., Dancy, B.C., Hill, E.A., Udwary, D.W., Townsend, C.A., 2006.
    atrochrysone synthesis by iterative type I polyketide synthase. Chem. Biol. 16 (6),             Identification of a starter unit acyl-carrier protein transacylase domain in an iterative
    613–623.                                                                               type I polyketide synthase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103 (45), 16728–16733.
Bais, H.P., Vepachedu, R., Lawrence, C.B., Stermitz, F.R., Vivanco, J.M., 2003. Molecular      de Andrade, G.P., de Souza, T.F.M., Cerchiaro, G., Pinhal, M., Ribeiro, A.O., Gir˜ao, M.,
   and biochemical characterization of an enzyme responsible for the formation of             2021. Hypericin in photobiological assays: an overview. Photodiagn. Photodyn.
    hypericin in St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum L.). J. Biol. Chem. 278 (34),              Ther. 35, 102343.
    32413–32422.                                                                 Dong, X., Fu, J., Yin, X., Cao, S., Li, X., Lin, L., Ni, J., 2016. Emodin: a review of its
Bills, G.F., Gloer, J.B., 2016. Biologically active secondary metabolites from the fungi.           pharmacology, toxicity and pharmacokinetics. Phytother. Res. 30 (8), 1207–1218.
    Microbiol. Spectr. 4 (6).                                                                  Dussart, F., Jakubczyk, D., 2022. Biosynthesis of rubellins in Ramularia collo-cygni-
Bond, C., Tang, Y., Li, L., 2016. Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a tool for mining, studying            genetic basis and pathway proposition. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23 (7).
   and engineering fungal polyketide synthases. Fungal Genet. Biol. 89, 52–61.


                                                                        18


[PDF physical page 19]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

Dussart, F., Douglas, R., Sj¨okvist, E., Hoebe, P.N., Spoel, S.H., McGrann, G.R.D., 2018.        Jakubiec-Krzesniak, K., Rajnisz-Mateusiak, A., Guspiel, A., Ziemska, J., Solecka, J., 2018.
   Genome-based discovery of polyketide-derived secondary metabolism pathways in          Secondary metabolites of actinomycetes and their antibacterial, antifungal and
    the barley pathogen Ramularia collo-cygni. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 31 (9),                 antiviral properties. Pol. J. Microbiol. 67 (3), 259–272.
    962–975.                                                                                        Jendˇzelovsk´a, Z., Jendˇzelovský, R., Kuch´arov´a, B., Fedoroˇcko, P., 2016. Hypericin in the
Dutta, S., Whicher, J.R., Hansen, D.A., Hale, W.A., Chemler, J.A., Congdon, G.R.,                   light and in the dark: two sides of the same coin. Front. Plant Sci. 7, 560.
    Narayan, A.R.H., Håkansson, K., Sherman, D.H., Smith, J.L., Skiniotis, G., 2014.         Kang, S.-H., Lee, W.-H., Lee, C.-M., Sim, J.-S., Won, S.Y., Han, S.-R., Kwon, S.-J., Kim, J.
    Structure of a modular polyketide synthase. Nature. 510 (7506), 512–517.                         S., Kim, C.-K., Oh, T.-J., 2020a. De novo transcriptome sequence of Senna tora
Duval, J., Pecher, V., Poujol, M., Lesellier, E., 2016. Research advances for the extraction,           provides insights into anthraquinone biosynthesis. PLoS One 15 (5), e0225564.
    analysis and uses of anthraquinones: a review. Ind. Crop. Prod. 94, 812–833.           Kang, S.-H., Pandey, R.P., Lee, C.-M., Sim, J.-S., Jeong, J.-T., Choi, B.-S., Jung, M.,
Ehrlich, K.C., Li, P., Scharfenstein, L., Chang, P.K., 2010. HypC, the anthrone oxidase            Ginzburg, D., Zhao, K., Won, S.Y., Oh, T.-J., Yu, Y., Kim, N.-H., Lee, O.R., Lee, T.-H.,
    involved in aflatoxin biosynthesis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76 (10), 3374–3377.            Bashyal, P., Kim, T.-S., Lee, W.-H., Hawkins, C., Kim, C.-K., Kim, J.S., Ahn, B.O.,
Fan, D., Wang, T., Hu, J., Zhou, L., Zhou, J., Wei, S., 2021. Plasmid DNA-based                 Rhee, S.Y., Sohng, J.K., 2020b. Genome-enabled discovery of anthraquinone
    bioluminescence-activated system for photodynamic therapy in cancer treatment.             biosynthesis in Senna tora. Nat. Commun. 11 (1), 5875.
   ChemMedChem. 16 (12), 1967–1974.                                                         Karioti, A., Bilia, A.R., 2010. Hypericins as potential leads for new therapeutics. Int. J.
F¨aseke, V.C., Raps, F.C., Sparr, C., 2020. Polyketide cyclizations for the synthesis of             Mol. Sci. 11 (2), 562–594.
    polyaromatics. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 59 (18), 6975–6983.                            Karppinen, K., Hokkanen, J., Mattila, S., Neubauer, P., Hohtola, A., 2008. Octaketide-
Fouillaud, M., Venkatachalam, M., Girard-Valenciennes, E., Caro, Y., Dufoss´e, L., 2016.          producing type III polyketide synthase from Hypericum perforatum is expressed in
    Anthraquinones and derivatives from marine-derived fungi: structural diversity and          dark glands accumulating hypericins. FEBS J. 275 (17), 4329–1342.
    selected biological activities. Mar. Drugs. 14 (4).                                             Keller, N.P., Turner, G., Bennett, J.W., 2005. Fungal secondary metabolism — from
Fukaya, M., Ozaki, T., Minami, A., Oikawa, H., 2022. Biosynthetic machineries of                biochemistry to genomics. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 3 (12), 937–947.
    anthraquinones and bisanthraquinones in Talaromyces islandicus. Biosci. Biotechnol.       Kim´akov´a, K., Kim´akov´a, A., Idkowiak, J., Stobiecki, M., Rodziewicz, P., Marczak, Ł.,
    Biochem. 86 (4), 435–443.                                                                                        ˇCell´arov´a, E., 2018. Phenotyping the genus Hypericum by secondary metabolite
Gao, Y., Zhao, Y., He, X., Deng, Z., Jiang, M., 2021. Challenges of functional expression            profiling: emodin vs. skyrin, two possible key intermediates in hypericin
    of complex polyketide biosynthetic gene clusters. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 69,                  biosynthesis. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 410 (29), 7689–7699.
    103–111.                                                                            Kirakosyan, A., Sirvent, T.M., Gibson, D.M., Kaufman, P.B., 2004. The production of
Greco, C., de Mattos-Shipley, K., Bailey, Andrew M., Mulholland, N.P., Vincent, J.L.,              hypericins and hyperforin by in vitro cultures of St. John’s wort (Hypericum
     Willis, C.L., Cox, R.J., Simpson, T.J., 2019. Structure revision of cryptosporioptides           perforatum). Biotechnol. Appl. Biochem. 39 (Pt 1), 71–81.
   and determination of the genetic basis for dimeric xanthone biosynthesis in fungi.        Klejnstrup, M.L., Frandsen, R.J.N., Holm, D.K., Nielsen, M.T., Mortensen, U.H., Larsen, T.
   Chem. Sci. 10 (10), 2930–2939.                                                                 O., Nielsen, J.B., 2012. Genetics of polyketide metabolism in Aspergillus nidulans.
Griffiths, S., Mesarich, C.H., Saccomanno, B., Vaisberg, A., Wit, P.J.G.M.D., Cox, R.,              Metabolites. 2 (1), 100–133.
    Collemare, J., 2016. Elucidation of cladofulvin biosynthesis reveals a cytochrome        Kon, R., Ikarashi, N., Nagoya, C., Takayama, T., Kusunoki, Y., Ishii, M., Ueda, H.,
   P450 monooxygenase required for anthraquinone dimerization. Proc. Natl. Acad.             Ochiai, W., Machida, Y., Sugita, K., Sugiyama, K., 2014. Rheinanthrone, a metabolite
     Sci. U. S. A. 113 (25), 6851–6856.                                                             of sennoside A, triggers macrophage activation to decrease aquaporin-3 expression
Guo, C.-J., Wang, C.C.C., 2014. Recent advances in genome mining of secondary                  in the colon, causing the laxative effect of rhubarb extract. J. Ethnopharmacol. 152
    metabolites in Aspergillus terreus. Front. Microbiol. 5, 717.                                         (1), 190–200.
Guo, Y., Nassar, S., Ma, L., Feng, G., Li, X., Chen, M., Chai, T., Abdel-Rahman, I.A.M.,       Korman, T.P., Crawford, J.M., Labonte, J.W., Newman, A.G., Wong, J., Townsend, C.A.,
    Beuerle, T., Beerhues, L., Wang, H., Liu, B., 2021. Octaketide synthase from                    Tsai, S.C., 2010. Structure and function of an iterative polyketide synthase
    Polygonum cuspidatum implements Emodin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant           thioesterase domain catalyzing Claisen cyclization in aflatoxin biosynthesis. Proc.
    Cell Physiol. 62 (3), 424–435.                                                                   Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107 (14), 6246–6251.
Han, Y.S., Heijden, R., Lefeber, A.W., Erkelens, C., Verpoorte, R., 2002. Biosynthesis of        Koˇsuth, J., Katkovˇcinov´a, Z., Olexov´a, P., ˇCell´arov´a, E., 2007. Expression of the hyp-1
    anthraquinones in cell cultures of Cinchona ’Robusta’ proceeds via the                     gene in early stages of development of Hypericum perforatum L. Plant Cell Rep. 26
    methylerythritol 4-phosphate pathway. Phytochemistry. 59 (1), 45–55.                          (2), 211–217.
Han, C., Zhang, C., Ma, T., Zhang, C., Luo, J., Xu, X., Zhao, H., Chen, Y., Kong, L., 2018.       Koˇsuth, J., Smelcerovic, A., Borsch, T., Zuehlke, S., Karppinen, K., Spiteller, M.,
    Hypericin-functionalized graphene oxide for enhanced mitochondria-targeting and           Hohtola, A., ˇCell´arov´a, E., 2010. The hyp-1 gene is not a limiting factor for hypericin
    synergistic anticancer effect. Acta Biomater. 77, 268–281.                                    biosynthesis in the genus Hypericum. Funct. Plant Biol. 38 (1), 35–43.
Han, Y.B., Bai, W., Ding, C.X., Liang, J., Wu, S.-H., Tan, R.X., 2021. Intertwined              Kucharíkov´a, A., Kim´akov´a, K., Janfelt, C., ˇCell´arov´a, E., 2016. Interspecific variation in
    biosynthesis of Skyrin and rugulosin A underlies the formation of cage-structured             localization of hypericins and phloroglucinols in the genus Hypericum as revealed by
    Bisanthraquinones. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143 (35), 14218–14226.                              desorption electrospray ionization mass spectrometry imaging. Physiol. Plant. 157
Hasan, H., Abd Rahim, M.H., Campbell, L., Carter, D., Abbas, A., Montoya, A., 2019.               (1), 2–12.
    Improved lovastatin production by inhibiting (+)-geodin biosynthesis in Aspergillus       Kusari, S., Zühlke, S., Kosuth, J., Cell´arov´a, E., Spiteller, M., 2009. Light-independent
     terreus. New Biotechnol. 52, 19–24.                                                   metabolomics of endophytic Thielavia subthermophila provides insight into microbial
He, Y., Wang, B., Chen, W., Cox, R.J., He, J., Chen, F., 2018. Recent advances in                 hypericin biosynthesis. J. Nat. Prod. 72 (10), 1825–1835.
    reconstructing microbial secondary metabolites biosynthesis in Aspergillus spp.            Le, J., Ji, H., Zhou, X., Wei, X., Chen, Y., Fu, Y., Ma, Y., Han, Q., Sun, Y., Gao, Y., Wu, H.,
    Biotechnol. Adv. 36 (3), 739–783.                                                     2021. Pharmacology, toxicology, and metabolism of Sennoside A, A medicinal plant-
Heiser, I., Heß, M., Schmidtke, K.-U., Vogler, U., Miethbauer, S., Liebermann, B., 2004.           derived natural compound. Front. Pharmacol. 12, 714586.
    Fatty acid peroxidation by rubellin B, C and D, phytotoxins produced by Ramularia       Lee, H.Z., 2001. Effects and mechanisms of emodin on cell death in human lung
     collo-cygni (Sutton et Waller). Physiol. Mol. Plant Pathol. 64 (3), 135–143.                squamous cell carcinoma. Br. J. Pharmacol. 134 (1), 11–20.
Henzelyov´a, J., Antalov´a, M., Nigutov´a, K., Logoida, M., Schreiberov´a, A., Kusari, S.,         Lee, N., Hwang, S., Kim, W., Lee, Y., Kim, J.H., Cho, S., Kim, H.U., Yoon, Y.J., Oh, M.K.,
     ˇCell´arov´a, E., 2020. Isolation, characterization and targeted metabolic evaluation of           Palsson, B.O., Cho, B.K., 2021. Systems and synthetic biology to elucidate secondary
    endophytic fungi harbored in 14 seed-derived Hypericum species. Planta Med. 86             metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters encoded in Streptomyces genomes. Nat. Prod.
    (13–14), 997–1008.                                                                   Rep. 38 (7), 1330–1361.
Hu, J., Song, J., Tang, Z., Wei, S., Chen, L., Zhou, R., 2021. Hypericin-mediated                 Li, Y., Jiang, J.G., 2018. Health functions and structure-activity relationships of natural
    photodynamic therapy inhibits growth of colorectal cancer cells via inducing S phase          anthraquinones from plants. Food Funct. 9 (12), 6063–6080.
     cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 900, 174071.                                Li, Y., Image, I.I., Xu, W., Image, I., Tang, Y., Image, I., 2010a. Classification, prediction,
Huang, K.X., Fujii, I., Ebizuka, Y., Gomi, K., Sankawa, U., 1995. Molecular cloning and         and verification of the regioselectivity of fungal polyketide synthase product
    heterologous expression of the gene encoding dihydrogeodin oxidase, a multicopper          template domains. J. Biol. Chem. 285 (30), 22764–22773.
    blue enzyme from Aspergillus terreus. J. Biol. Chem. 270 (37), 21495–21502.                 Li, Y., Luan, Y., Qi, X., Li, M., Gong, L., Xue, X., Wu, X., Wu, Y., Chen, M., Xing, G.,
Huang, L.-F., Wang, Z.-H., Chen, S.-L., 2014. Hypericin: chemical synthesis and                 Yao, J., Ren, J., 2010b. Emodin triggers DNA double-strand breaks by stabilizing
    biosynthesis. Chin. J. Nat. Med. 12 (2), 81–88.                                           topoisomerase II-DNA cleavage complexes and by inhibiting ATP hydrolysis of
Inglis, D.O., Binkley, J., Skrzypek, M.S., Arnaud, M.B., Cerqueira, G.C., Shah, P.,                topoisomerase II. Toxicol. Sci. 118 (2), 435–443.
   Wymore, F., Wortman, J.R., Sherlock, G., 2013. Comprehensive annotation of               Li, Y., Chooi, Y.H., Sheng, Y., Valentine, J.S., Tang, Y., 2011. Comparative
    secondary metabolite biosynthetic genes and gene clusters of Aspergillus nidulans,             characterization of fungal anthracenone and naphthacenedione biosynthetic
    A. fumigatus, A. niger and A. oryzae. BMC Microbiol. 13, 91.                             pathways reveals an α-hydroxylation-dependent Claisen-like cyclization catalyzed
Izhaki, I., 2002. Emodin – a secondary metabolite with multiple ecological functions in         by a dimanganese thioesterase. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133 (39), 15773–15785.
    higher plants. New Phytol. 155 (2), 205–217.                                                      Li, L., Jiang, W., Lu, Y., 2017. New strategies and approaches for engineering
Jahn, L., Schafhauser, T., Wibberg, D., Rückert, C., Winkler, A., Kulik, A., Weber, T.,              biosynthetic gene clusters of microbial natural products. Biotechnol. Adv. 35 (8),
     Flor, L., van P´ee, K.H., Kalinowski, J., Ludwig-Müller, J., Wohlleben, W., 2017.             936–949.
    Linking secondary metabolites to biosynthesis genes in the fungal endophyte            Lim, F.Y., Hou, Y., Chen, Y., Oh, J.H., Lee, I., Bugni, T.S., Keller, N.P., 2012. Genome-
    Cyanodermella asteris: the anti-cancer bisanthraquinone skyrin. J. Biotechnol. 257,           based cluster deletion reveals an endocrocin biosynthetic pathway in Aspergillus
    233–239.                                                                                        fumigatus. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78 (12), 4117–4125.
Jakoˇci¯unas, T., Klitgaard, A.K., Kontou, E.E., Nielsen, J.B., Thomsen, E., Romero-              Liu, L., Zhang, Z., Shao, C.-L., Wang, J.-L., Bai, H., Wang, C.-Y., 2015. Bioinformatical
    Suarez, D., Blin, K., Petzold, C.J., Gin, J.W., Tong, Y., Gotfredsen, C.H.,                       analysis of the sequences, structures and functions of fungal polyketide synthase
    Charusanti, P., Frandsen, R.J.N., Weber, T., Lee, S.Y., Jensen, M.K., Keasling, J.D.,           product template domains. Sci. Rep. 5 (1), 10463.
    2020. Programmable polyketide biosynthesis platform for production of aromatic         Liu, L., Zhang, Z., Shao, C.-L., Wang, C.-Y., 2017. Analysis of the sequences, structures,
   compounds in yeast. Synth. Syst. Biotechnol. 5 (1), 11–18.                             and functions of product-releasing enzyme domains in fungal polyketide synthases.
                                                                                                   Front. Microbiol. 8.

                                                                        19


[PDF physical page 20]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

Liu, J., Leng, L., Liu, Y., Gao, H., Yang, W., Chen, S., Liu, A., 2020. Identification and       Semwal, R.B., Semwal, D.K., Combrinck, S., Viljoen, A., 2021. Emodin - A natural
    quantification of target metabolites combined with transcriptome of two Rheum             anthraquinone derivative with diverse pharmacological activities. Phytochemistry.
    species focused on anthraquinone and flavonoids biosynthesis. Sci. Rep. 10 (1),             190, 112854.
    20241.                                                                            Shakour, Z.T., Farag, M.A., 2021. Diverse host-associated fungal systems as a dynamic
Liu, X., Zhou, Z.-Y., Cui, J.-L., Wang, M.-L., Wang, J.-H., 2021. Biotransformation ability          source of novel bioactive anthraquinones in drug discovery: current status and future
    of endophytic fungi: from species evolution to industrial applications. Appl.                   perspectives. J. Adv. Res. 39, 257–273.
    Microbiol. Biotechnol. 105 (19), 7095–7113.                                          Shen, B., 2003. Polyketide biosynthesis beyond the type I, II and III polyketide synthase
L¨ohr, N.A., Eisen, F., Thiele, W., Platz, L., Motter, J., Hüttel, W., Gressler, M., Müller, M.,          paradigms. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 7 (2), 285–295.
    Hoffmeister, D., 2022. Unprecedented mushroom polyketide synthases produce the      Shimizu, Y., Ogata, H., Goto, S., 2017. Type III polyketide synthases: functional
    universal anthraquinone precursor. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 61 (24), e202116142.               classification and phylogenomics. ChemBioChem. 18 (1), 50–65.
Ma, H.L., Varanda, L.C., Perussi, J.R., Carrilho, E., 2021. Hypericin-loaded oil-in-water       Shukla, V., Asthana, S., Gupta, P., Dwivedi, P.D., Tripathi, A., Das, M., 2017. Chapter one
    nanoemulsion synthesized by ultrasonication process enhances photodynamic                       - toxicity of naturally occurring anthraquinones. In: Fishbein, J.C., Heilman, J.M.
    therapy efficiency. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B 223, 112303.                                     (Eds.), Advances in Molecular Toxicology, vol. 11. Elsevier, pp. 1–50.
Mahanti, N., Bhatnagar, D., Cary, J.W., Joubran, J., Linz, J.E., 1996. Structure and           Siddamurthi, S., Gutti, G., Jana, S., Kumar, A., Singh, S.K., 2020. Anthraquinone: a
    function of fas-1A, a gene encoding a putative fatty acid synthetase directly involved          promising scaffold for the discovery and development of therapeutic agents in cancer
    in aflatoxin biosynthesis in Aspergillus parasiticus. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 62 (1),           therapy. Future Med. Chem. 12 (11), 1037–1069.
    191–195.                                                                        Simpson, T.J., 2012. Genetic and biosynthetic studies of the fungal prenylated xanthone
Malik, M.S., Alsantali, R.I., Jassas, R.S., Alsimaree, A.A., Syed, R., Alsharif, M.A.,               shamixanthone and related metabolites in aspergillus spp. revisited. ChemBioChem.
    Kalpana, K., Morad, M., Althagafi, I.I., Ahmed, S.A., 2021. Journey of                   13 (11), 1680–1688.
    anthraquinones as anticancer agents - a systematic review of recent literature. RSC       Sliwiak, J., Dauter, Z., Jaskolski, M., 2016. Crystal structure of Hyp-1, a Hypericum
    Adv. 11 (57), 35806–35827.                                                                perforatum PR-10 protein, in complex with melatonin. Front. Plant Sci. 7.
Masi, M., Evidente, A., 2020. Fungal bioactive anthraquinones and analogues. Toxins 12       Soares, J.X., Loureiro, D.R.P., Dias, A.L., Reis, S., Pinto, M.M.M., Afonso, C.M.M., 2022.
    (11), 714.                                                                                   Bioactive marine xanthones: a review. Mar. Drugs. 20 (1).
Matsuda, Y., Gotfredsen, C.H., Larsen, T.O., 2018. Genetic characterization of                   Sot´ak, M., Czerankov´a, O., Klein, D., Jurˇcackov´a, Z., Li, L., ˇCell´arov´a, E., 2016a.
    neosartorin biosynthesis provides insight into heterodimeric natural product                Comparative transcriptome reconstruction of four hypericum species focused on
    generation. Org. Lett. 20 (22), 7197–7200.                                                  hypericin biosynthesis. Front. Plant Sci. 7.
McDaniel, R., Ebert-Khosla, S., Hopwood, D.A., Khosla, C., 1993. Engineered                    Sot´ak, M., Czerankov´a, O., Klein, D., Nigutov´a, K., Altschmied, L., Li, L., Jose, A.,
    biosynthesis of novel polyketides. Science 262 (5139), 1546–1550.                          Wurtele, E.S., ˇCell´arov´a, E., 2016b. Differentially expressed genes in hypericin-
Michalska, K., Fernandes, H., Sikorski, M., Jaskolski, M., 2010. Crystal structure of Hyp-           containing Hypericum perforatum leaf tissues as revealed by De Novo assembly of
    1, a St. John’s wort protein implicated in the biosynthesis of hypericin. J. Struct.           RNA-Seq. Plant Mol. Biol. Report. 34 (5), 1027–1041.
     Biol. 169 (2), 161–171.                                                              Sun, L., Liu, G., Li, Y., Jiang, D., Guo, W., Xu, H., Zhan, R., 2019. Metabolic engineering
Mizuuchi, Y., Shi, S.P., Wanibuchi, K., Kojima, A., Morita, H., Noguchi, H., Abe, I., 2009.           of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for efficient production of endocrocin and emodin.
    Novel type III polyketide synthases from Aloe arborescens. FEBS J. 276 (8),                Metab. Eng. 54, 212–221.
    2391–2401.                                                                      Szewczyk, E., Chiang, Y.M., Oakley, C.E., Davidson, A.D., Wang, C.C., Oakley, B.R.,
Mohan, C.D., Rangappa, S., Nayak, S.C., Jadimurthy, R., Wang, L., Sethi, G., Garg, M.,          2008. Identification and characterization of the asperthecin gene cluster of
    Rangappa, K.S., 2021. Bacteria as a treasure house of secondary metabolites with              Aspergillus nidulans. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74 (24), 7607–7612.
    anticancer potential. Semin. Cancer Biol. 86 (2), 998–1013.                            Szwalbe, A.J., Williams, K., Song, Z., de Mattos-Shipley, K., Vincent, J.L., Bailey, A.M.,
Neubauer, L., Dopstadt, J., Humpf, H.U., Tudzynski, P., 2016. Identification and                    Willis, C.L., Cox, R.J., Simpson, T.J., 2018. Characterisation of the biosynthetic
    characterization of the ergochrome gene cluster in the plant pathogenic fungus            pathway to agnestins A and B reveals the reductive route to chrysophanol in fungi.
    Claviceps purpurea. Fungal Biol. Biotechnol. 3, 2.                                    Chem. Sci. 10 (1), 233–238.
Newman, A.G., Vagstad, A.L., Storm, P.A., Townsend, C.A., 2014. Systematic domain        Taguchi, T., Awakawa, T., Nishihara, Y., Kawamura, M., Ohnishi, Y., Ichinose, K., 2017.
    swaps of iterative, nonreducing polyketide synthases provide a mechanistic                   Bifunctionality of ActIV as a cyclase-thioesterase revealed by in vitro reconstitution
    understanding and rationale for catalytic reprogramming. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136             of actinorhodin biosynthesis in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). ChemBioChem. 18 (3),
    (20), 7348–7362.                                                                  316–323.
Nofiani, R., Philmus, B., Nindita, Y., Mahmud, T., 2019. 3-Ketoacyl-ACP synthase (KAS)      Throckmorton, K., Lim, F.Y., Kontoyiannis, D.P., Zheng, W., Keller, N.P., 2016.
      III homologues and their roles in natural product biosynthesis. MedChemComm. 10         Redundant synthesis of a conidial polyketide by two distinct secondary metabolite
     (9), 1517–1530.                                                                                    clusters in Aspergillus fumigatus. Environ. Microbiol. 18 (1), 246–259.
Palazzotto, E., Tong, Y., Lee, S.Y., Weber, T., 2019. Synthetic biology and metabolic          Tippelt, A., Nett, M., 2021. Saccharomyces cerevisiae as host for the recombinant
    engineering of actinomycetes for natural product discovery. Biotechnol. Adv. 37 (6),          production of polyketides and nonribosomal peptides. Microb. Cell Factories 20 (1),
    107366.                                                                              161.
Palmer, J.M., Wiemann, P., Greco, C., Chiang, Y.M., Wang, C.C.C., Lindner, D.L.,            Unterweger, H., Subatzus, D., Tietze, R., Janko, C., Poettler, M., Stiegelschmitt, A.,
     Keller, N.P., 2021. The sexual spore pigment asperthecin is required for normal               Schuster, M., Maake, C., Boccaccini, A.R., Alexiou, C., 2015. Hypericin-bearing
    ascospore production and protection from UV light in Aspergillus nidulans. J. Ind.            magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for selective drug delivery in photodynamic
    Microbiol. Biotechnol. 48 (9–10).                                                           therapy. Int. J. Nanomedicine 10, 6985–6996.
Perassolo, M., Quevedo, C.V., Busto, V.D., Giulietti, A.M., Talou, J.R., 2011. Role of          Verebov´a, V., Beneˇs, J., Staniˇcov´a, J., 2020. Biophysical characterization and anticancer
    reactive oxygen species and proline cycle in anthraquinone accumulation in Rubia              activities of photosensitive phytoanthraquinones represented by hypericin and its
    tinctorum cell suspension cultures subjected to methyl jasmonate elicitation. Plant          model compounds. Molecules. 25 (23).
    Physiol. Biochem. 49 (7), 758–763.                                                  Veremeichik, G.N., Bulgakov, V.P., Shkryl, Y.N., Silantieva, S.A., Makhazen, D.S.,
Pillai, P.P., Nair, A.R., 2014. Hypericin biosynthesis in Hypericum hookerianum Wight and          Tchernoded, G.K., Mischenko, N.P., Fedoreyev, S.A., Vasileva, E.A., 2019. Activation
    Arn: investigation on biochemical pathways using metabolite inhibitors and                   of anthraquinone biosynthesis in long-cultured callus culture of Rubia cordifolia
    suppression subtractive hybridization. C. R. Biol. 337 (10), 571–580.                       transformed with the rolA plant oncogene. J. Biotechnol. 306, 38–46.
Prateeksha, Yusuf, M.A., Singh, B.N., Sudheer, S., Kharwar, R.N., Siddiqui, S., Abdel-       Wang, J., Zhang, R., Chen, X., Sun, X., Yan, Y., Shen, X., Yuan, Q., 2020. Biosynthesis of
   Azeem, A.M., Fernandes Fraceto, L., Dashora, K., Gupta, V.K., 2019. Chrysophanol: a          aromatic polyketides in microorganisms using type II polyketide synthases. Microb.
    natural anthraquinone with multifaceted biotherapeutic potential. Biomolecules. 9            Cell Factories 19 (1), 110.
     (2), 68.                                                                  Wang, D., Wang, X.-H., Yu, X., Cao, F., Cai, X., Chen, P., Li, M., Feng, Y., Li, H., Wang, X.,
Qi, F., Zhang, W., Xue, Y., Geng, C., Huang, X., Sun, J., Lu, X., 2021. Bienzyme-catalytic          2021a. Pharmacokinetics of anthraquinones from medicinal plants. Front.
   and dioxygenation-mediated anthraquinone ring opening. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143            Pharmacol. 12, 638993.
    (40), 16326–16331.                                                        Wang, K., Yu, B., Pathak, J.L., 2021b. An update in clinical utilization of photodynamic
Qiu, X., Gong, L., Xin, X., An, F., 2021. Enhancement of Emodin production by medium          therapy for lung cancer. J. Cancer 12 (4), 1154–1160.
    optimization and KH(2)PO(4) supplementation in submerged fermentation of           Wei, X., Wang, W.G., Matsuda, Y., 2022. Branching and converging pathways in fungal
    marine-derived Aspergillus favipes HN4-13. Mar. Drugs. 19 (8), 421.                           natural product biosynthesis. Fungal Biol. Biotechnol. 9 (1), 6.
Revuru, B., B´alintov´a, M., Henzelyov´a, J., ˇCell´arov´a, E., Kusari, S., 2020. MALDI-HRMS     Wu, X.M., Guan, Q.Y., Han, Y.B., Wang, X.C., Zhuang, W.Y., Tan, R.X., 2022.
    imaging maps the localization of skyrin, the precursor of hypericin, and pathway            Regeneration of phytochemicals by structure-driven organization of microbial
    intermediates in leaves of Hypericum species. Molecules. 25 (17), 3964.                       biosynthetic steps. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 61 (8), e202114919.
Romsdahl, J., Wang, C.C.C., 2019. Recent advances in the genome mining of Aspergillus       Xie, L., Wang, Y., Luo, G., Zhou, W., Miao, J., Tang, S., Jiang, Q., Guan, Y., Gao, X., 2020.
    secondary metabolites (covering 2012–2018). MedChemComm. 10 (6), 840–866.              Identification of the multiple bioactive derivatives and their endogenous molecular
Roze, L.V., Hong, S.Y., Linz, J.E., 2013. Aflatoxin biosynthesis: current frontiers. Annu.            targets that may mediate the laxative effect of rhubarb in rats. J. Tradit. Chin. Med. 7
    Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 4, 293–311.                                                                 (2), 210–220.
Sanchez, J.F., Entwistle, R., Hung, J.H., Yaegashi, J., Jain, S., Chiang, Y.M., Wang, C.C.,      Xu, Z., Ji, L., Tang, W., Guo, L., Gao, C., Chen, X., Liu, J., Hu, G., Liu, L., 2022. Metabolic
    Oakley, B.R., 2011. Genome-based deletion analysis reveals the prenyl xanthone             engineering of Streptomyces to enhance the synthesis of valuable natural products.
    biosynthesis pathway in Aspergillus nidulans. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133 (11),                   Eng. Microbiol. 2 (2), 100022.
    4010–4017.                                                                       Yabe, K., Nakajima, H., 2004. Enzyme reactions and genes in aflatoxin biosynthesis.
Sasaki, K., Yamauchi, K., Kuwano, S., 1979. Metabolic activation of sennoside A in mice.           Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 64 (6), 745–755.
    Planta Med. 37 (4), 370–378.                                                      Yang, J., Mori, T., Wei, X., Matsuda, Y., Abe, I., 2021. Structural basis for isomerization
Schwelm, A., Bradshaw, R.E., 2010. Genetics of dothistromin biosynthesis of Dothistroma           reactions in fungal tetrahydroxanthone biosynthesis and diversification. Angew.
    septosporum: an update. Toxins. 2 (11), 2680–2698.                                  Chem. Int. Ed. 60 (35), 19458–19465.

                                                                        20


[PDF physical page 21]
N.K. Mund and E. ˇCell´arov´a                                                                                                                  Biotechnology Advances 63 (2023) 108104

Yin, Y., Cai, M., Zhou, X., Li, Z., Zhang, Y., 2016. Polyketides in Aspergillus terreus:          Zhao, M., Zhao, Y., Yao, M., Iqbal, H., Hu, Q., Liu, H., Qiao, B., Li, C., Skovbjerg, C.A.S.,
    biosynthesis pathway discovery and application. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 100             Nielsen, J.C., Nielsen, J., Frandsen, R.J.N., Yuan, Y., Boeke, J.D., 2020. Pathway
    (18), 7787–7798.                                                                         engineering in yeast for synthesizing the complex polyketide bikaverin. Nat.
Yu, J.H., Leonard, T.J., 1995. Sterigmatocystin biosynthesis in Aspergillus nidulans            Commun. 11 (1), 6197.
    requires a novel type I polyketide synthase. J. Bacteriol. 177 (16), 4792–4800.          Zhou, Q., Br¨auer, A., Adihou, H., Schmalhofer, M., Saura, P., Grammbitter, G.L.C.,
Yu, J., Chang, P.K., Ehrlich, K.C., Cary, J.W., Bhatnagar, D., Cleveland, T.E., Payne, G.A.,            Kaila, V.R.I., Groll, M., Bode, H.B., 2019. Molecular mechanism of polyketide
    Linz, J.E., Woloshuk, C.P., Bennett, J.W., 2004. Clustered pathway genes in aflatoxin           shortening in anthraquinone biosynthesis of Photorhabdus luminescens. Chem. Sci. 10
    biosynthesis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70 (3), 1253–1262.                                     (25), 6341–6349.
Zhang, Q., Li, Z.H., Li, Y.Y., Shi, S.J., Zhou, S.W., Fu, Y.Y., Zhang, Q., Yang, X., Fu, R.Q.,      Zhou, T., Zhang, T., Sun, J., Zhu, H., Zhang, M., Wang, X., 2021a. Tissue-specific
    Lu, L.C., 2015. Hypericin-photodynamic therapy induces human umbilical vein              transcriptome for Rheum tanguticum reveals candidate genes related to the
    endothelial cell apoptosis. Sci. Rep. 5, 18398.                                            anthraquinones biosynthesis. Physiol. Mol. Biol. Plants 27 (11), 2487–2501.
Zhang, Z., Pan, H.-X., Tang, G.-L., 2017. New insights into bacterial type II polyketide       Zhou, W., Wang, Y., Li, B., Petijov´a, L., Hu, S., Zhang, Q., Niu, J., Wang, D., Wang, S.,
    biosynthesis. F1000Research. 6, 172.                                                 Dong, Y., ˇCell´arov´a, E., Wang, Z., 2021b. Whole-genome sequence data of Hypericum
Zhang, Q., Chen, W.W., Sun, X., Qian, D., Tang, D.D., Zhang, L.L., Li, M.Y., Wang, L.Y.,           perforatum and functional characterization of melatonin biosynthesis by N-
   Wu, C.J., Peng, W., 2022a. The versatile emodin: a natural easily acquired                   acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase. J. Pineal Res. 70 (2), e12709.
    anthraquinone possesses promising anticancer properties against a variety of            Zobayed, S.M., Afreen, F., Goto, E., Kozai, T., 2006. Plant-environment interactions:
    cancers. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 18 (8), 3498–3527.                                             accumulation of hypericin in dark glands of Hypericum perforatum. Ann. Bot. 98 (4),
Zhang, R., Miao, Y., Chen, L., Yi, S., Tan, N., 2022b. De novo transcriptome analysis            793–804.
    reveals putative genes involved in anthraquinone biosynthesis in Rubia yunnanensis.
    Genes (Basel) 13 (3).





                                                                        21