
[PDF physical page 1]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



   Multiplexed perturbation of yew reveals cryptic proteins that enable a
            total biosynthesis of baccatin III and Taxol precursors


    Conor James McClune1,6†, Jack Chun-Ting Liu2†, Chloe Wick1, Ricardo De La Peña1,
            Bernd Markus Lange3, Polly M. Fordyce4,5, Elizabeth S. Sattely1,6*
     1Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, California 94305, 2Department of Chemistry,
       Stanford University, California 94305, 3Institute of Biological Chemistry, Washington State University,
       Pullman, Washington 99164, 4Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, California 94305,
       5Department of Genetics, Stanford University, California 94305, 6Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
                                Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305

                               †These authors contributed equally
                     *Corresponding author: Elizabeth S. Sattely (sattely@stanford.edu)


   Abstract
           Plants make complex and potent therapeutic molecules, but difficulties in sourcing from
    natural producers or chemical synthesis can challenge their use in the clinic. A prominent
   example  is the anti-cancer therapeutic paclitaxel (Taxol®). Identification of the  full paclitaxel
    biosynthetic pathway would enable heterologous drug production, but  it has eluded discovery
    despite a  half century  of  intensive research. Within the search space  of Taxus'  large,
   enzyme-rich genome, we suspected the complex paclitaxel pathway would be difficult to resolve
   using conventional gene co-expression  analysis and small sample sets. To improve the
    resolution of gene set  identification, we developed a multiplexed perturbation strategy to
    transcriptionally  profile  cell states spanning tissues, cell types, developmental stages, and
    elicitation  conditions. This approach revealed a set of paclitaxel biosynthetic genes that
   segregate into expression modules that suggest consecutive biosynthetic sub-pathways. These
   modules resolved seven new genes that, when combined with previously known enzymes, are
    sufficient for the de novo biosynthesis and isolation of baccatin III, an industrial precursor for
    Taxol, in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves at levels comparable to the natural abundance in Taxus
    needles. Included are taxane 1β-hydroxylase (T1βH), taxane 9α-hydroxylase (T9αH), taxane
    7β-O-acyltransferase  (T7ΑΤ),  taxane  7β-O-deacetylase  (T7dA),  taxane  9α-O-deacetylase
    (T9dA), and taxane 9-oxidase (T9ox). Importantly, the T9αH we discovered is distinct and
   independently evolved from those recently reported, which failed to yield baccatin  III with
   downstream enzymes. Unexpectedly, we also found a nuclear transport factor 2 (NTF2)-like
    protein (FoTO1) crucial for high yields of taxanes; this gene promotes the formation of the
    desired product during the first taxane oxidation step, resolving a longstanding bottleneck in
    paclitaxel pathway reconstitution. Together with a new β-phenylalanine-CoA-ligase, the eight
   genes   discovered    in    this   study   enables   the   complete    reconstitution    of
    3’-N-debenzoyl-2’-deoxy-paclitaxel with a 20-enzyme pathway in Nicotiana plants. More broadly,
   we  establish a  generalizable approach  for pathway discovery  that scales the power of
   co-expression studies to match the complexity of specialized metabolism, enabling discovery of
   gene sets responsible for high-value biological functions.


[PDF physical page 2]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



   Introduction

           Plants defend themselves with complex chemical arsenals that have been an essential
   source of therapeutics1,2. Paclitaxel (trade name Taxol®) is a potent microtubule-stabilizing agent
   discovered from Taxus plants during the 1960s-1970s National Cancer Institute screening
   campaign and one of the most valuable chemotherapeutics used in the clinic3. Shortly after its
   approval by the FDA in 1993 for the treatment of ovarian cancer, this diterpenoid became a
    best-selling pharmaceutical and remains the active component of diverse formulations,
    derivatizations, and biological conjugates4. This extensive use, combined with the chemical
    complexity and low natural abundance (0.007% DW in Taxus bark)4,5 of Taxol have made it one
    of the most sought-after molecules for synthesis. While many elegant synthetic routes have
   been developed6, none are economically viable; drug supply still relies on the extraction from
   yew tissue, either from plant cell cultures or farming. The promise of a biomanufacturing
    strategy has made the discovery of the complete Taxus enzyme set for heterologous Taxol
    biosynthesis a grand challenge for natural product chemistry.

         The search for the complete Taxol biosynthetic gene set, which was originally proposed
    to involve 19 enzymes [including 14 enzymes to a key intermediate, baccatin III (16)], began in
    the late 1990s. By 2006, The Croteau lab and others had discovered 12 enzymes, including the
    scaffold-forming enzyme, taxadiene synthase (TDS), as well as multiple tailoring oxidases and
    acyltransferases (Fig. 1a, Table S1). Progress largely stalled for two decades, until recent
    reports identified a taxane oxetanase (TOT) that installs Taxol’s unique oxetane moiety, as well
   as several additional enzymes proposed to act in the pathway7–11. However, several of the
     critical functional groups on Taxol, such as the C-1β hydroxyl, still do not yet have an assigned
   enzyme with direct biochemical evidence.

            In addition to missing pathway enzymes, heterologous reconstitution of the Taxol
   pathway has been stymied by inefficiency of the first proposed Taxol oxidation. Despite
    extensive troubleshooting and optimization efforts in a variety of heterologous systems,12 the
     first Taxol oxidase, taxadiene 5α-hydroxylase, (T5αH), primarily produces side products with
   rearranged carbon bonds instead of the proposed “on-pathway” intermediate, taxadien-5α-ol
     (2)13–16. These two challenges indicate a major gap in our understanding of the endogenous
    biochemistry (Fig. 1a). Both a complete enzyme set and resolution of early oxidation channeling
    into productive pathway intermediates will be crucial for realizing a heterologous biosynthetic
    route to Taxol.

         The missing components of the Taxol pathway have likely eluded scientists due to the
    metabolic and genomic complexity of Taxus. Taxol is one of almost 600 of taxanes that have
   been isolated from Taxus species4,17, including hundreds of 6/8/6 taxanes that differ from Taxol
   by only subtle tailoring modifications4 (Fig. 1b). Within the Taxus genome, Taxol pathway genes
   are just a minute fraction of the hundreds of oxidases, acyltransferases and other enzymes
    involved in the biosynthesis of primary and secondary metabolites, including numerous taxanes
    (Fig. 1c)18.


[PDF physical page 3]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



           Transcriptional co-expression approaches that have illuminated other complex plant
    biosynthetic pathways19,20 have not identified the complete Taxol pathway, despite extensive
    transcriptional profiling of Taxus18,21,22. Diverse taxanes appear to be co-produced with similar
    timing, tissue specificity and conditions, suggesting bulk tissue analysis does not provide
    sufficient resolution to differentiate Taxol enzymes from the thousands of other Taxus
    specialized metabolism genes (Fig. 1d). Improving gene-association specificity would also be
   necessary if this pathway requires unanticipated genes. To parse large lists of candidate genes,
    previous efforts have made assumptions about which genes are involved in Taxol biosynthesis,
     filtering candidates to gene families where previous Taxol enzymes were found, such as the
   P450 subclass CYP725A7–11.

         To improve our resolution for identifying gene associations within the taxane metabolic
    network, we developed an approach to efficiently profile Taxus cell states across a vast set of
    cell types and perturbations. Differential transcriptional activation of Taxus’s diverse biosynthetic
   processes enabled the discovery of multiple Taxol transcriptional modules, from which we
    identified eight new genes in Taxol biosynthesis. Highlighting the importance of this approach,
   most identified genes do not belong to previously proposed Taxol gene families. None of the
    four oxidases identified here derive from the CYP725A family that has been the focus of
    previous search efforts7–11. Three other enzymes are proposed to catalyze the addition and
   removal of cryptic acetylations that are absent from Taxol, but the inclusion of these enzymes is
    essential in our reconstituted pathway. Finally, we identified a protein from the NTF2-like family,
    not previously implicated in plant metabolism, that is crucial for high yields of the productive
    intermediate during the first taxane oxidation step; this protein resolves the previous challenge
    of efficient reconstitution the first steps of Taxol biosynthesis13–16. With this set of eight genes
    plus nine previously described, we constructed a pathway in Nicotiana benthamiana that
   produces the prevalent Taxol precursor baccatin III (16) at levels comparable to the natural
   abundance in yew.

   RESULTS

   Multiplexed chemical elicitation produces cells with high expression of known Taxol
   biosynthetic enzymes

               Initially, we developed traditional single-cell transcriptomic methods for Taxus and tested
   whether natural cell type heterogeneity would be sufficient to identify differentially expressed
   pathways and new Taxol enzyme candidates. The cells of Taxus species, like many plants, are
    often 2–3x larger than the 35 µm diameter limit for the standard 10x Genomics Chromium
    single-cell library devices. Consequently, we could not use single-cell isolation approaches (e.g.
    protoplasting) without introducing severe cell-type bias and instead adapted recent nuclei
    isolation methods23 into a conifer-compatible single-nuclei RNA-seqencing (snRNA-seq)
    protocol (Methods). Taxus media var. hicksii aerial tissues (needles, stems, and bud scales)
   were manually disrupted by razorblade and detergent treatment, followed by DNA staining,
    fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) purification, and library synthesis in the 10x
   Chromium platform. Initially, we profiled 6,077 cells from unelicited (“naive”) mature tissues.


[PDF physical page 4]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



   Scanning for Taxol pathway expression revealed that several Taxol biosynthetic enzymes,
    including TDS, T5αH, and 10-deacetylbaccatin III-10-O-acetyl transferase (DBAT) were not
    highly expressed in any cell (Fig. S1). This exemplified one of the core challenges of using
    transcriptomes to find specialized metabolism genes: tissues must be in a state of active
    biosynthesis – the conditions for which can be difficult to determine – to capture
   pathway-associated transcripts24. The search for such a tissue state can be risky and
    challenging, as it may require a specific developmental age25 or exposure to a specific biotic
    stress24.

         To mitigate the difficulty of identifying biosynthetic cell states by screening large panels
    of perturbations individually, we leveraged the scale of single-cell transcriptomics into a method
   we term multiplexed perturbation x single nuclei (mpXsn) that simultaneously test large numbers
    of perturbations. While single cell transcriptomics have been developed into parallelized screens
    in mammalian systems26–28, we were unable to find such an experimental platform for plants.
   When developing mpXsn, we also considered the value of a method that requires no genetic
    tools and would therefore be generalizable to diverse, non-model species. The fact that many
    plant tissues can be kept alive in liquid media for extended periods of time enables tissues to be
    subjected, in parallel, to large panels of chemical or biological challenges prior to transcriptome
    profiling. By combining all tissues into a single snRNA-seq library assembly, individual sample
   processing is no longer limiting, enabling us to test a large number of samples (272), spanning
    conditions and time points, in a single experiment (Fig. 1e). To maximize the probability of
    activating biosynthetic states, we compiled a panel of plant hormones (associated with growth,
    abiotic stress, and biotic stress), pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), taxane
   pathway intermediates, and select bacterial and fungal species (Table S2). We subjected both
   young and mature T. media needles to this panel for 1, 2, 3, or 4 days before washing and
    pooling all tissues, extracting nuclei, and generating snRNA-seq libraries. Compared to the
   naive cell states initially collected, a subset of the elicited cell states now displayed high
   expression of the early Taxol pathway (Fig. S1).

         To determine if this single cell transcriptional data provides new information for
    identifying Taxol enzymes, we directly compared co-expression analysis using either our mpXsn
   data or bulk RNA-seq data from six previous studies spanning tissues and elicitation conditions
   (Methods). mpXsn data was produced by integrating 8,039 elicited transcriptomes, 3,027 naive
    transcriptomes from young tissues, and 6,077 naive transcriptomes from mature tissues,
    clustering these 17,143 profiles into 2,901 cell states using scVI29 Leiden clustering, and pooling
    the reads for each cell state to yield 2,901 pseudobulk RNA-seq profiles. We then determined
   which dataset showed a stronger correlation between known Taxol genes. Using either bulk
   RNA-seq data set (79 samples) or the mpXsn (2,901 cell states), we ranked each gene in the
   Taxus genome by Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) to TDS (Fig. 1f). When examining the
   14 genes previously associated with Taxol biosynthesis (Table S1), all but two genes were
    prioritized higher using the mpXsn data compared to bulk RNA-seq data (Fig. 1f, S2-S3). This
    analysis suggested the Taxol pathway was better resolved in the mpXsn dataset compared to
   compiled bulk RNA-seq datasets.


[PDF physical page 5]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



    Identification of three Taxol biosynthetic gene modules

         The Taxol pathway has been hypothesized to involve 19 transformations, and previously
    at least 13 enzymes have been characterized (Fig. 2a, Table S1). While the first enzyme in the
   pathway, TDS, does show correlated expression to most Taxol genes (Fig. 1f, S3), some known
    Taxol genes are much more co-expressed than others, forming different co-expressed subsets
    of the pathway (Fig. 2b). These subclusters motivated us to take an untargeted approach to
    identify gene co-expression modules across the T. media transcriptome to determine if the Taxol
   genes fell into one or more co-expressed gene sets and which other genes were highly
   co-expressed.

          Using consensus non-negative matrix factorization30 we factored the large gene-by-cell
    matrix from the mpXsn dataset into submatrices that describe how genes are organized into
   modules (gene-module score), and how these modules are expressed across cells in the
    dataset (module-cell score) (Fig. 2c). The top scoring genes in each module are coordinately
   expressed and likely part of the same molecular processes. Of 200 total gene expression
   modules, we found three where the top genes included many known Taxol enzymes
   (subsequently called Taxol modules 1, 2, and 3) (Fig. 2d-e, i). Interestingly, no single gene
   module has all the known Taxol enzymes ranked in the top 200 (Fig. 2e), suggesting that the full
    Taxol biosynthesis is regulated by separate transcriptional programs. Furthermore, Taxol module
   1 is enriched in genes of the methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway, but not the mevalonate
   (MEV) pathway, highlighting a linkage of primary and secondary metabolism (Fig. 2f). This
    finding is consistent with current consensus that the MEP pathway supplies precursors for
    diterpenoids in gymnosperms31.

         The Taxol modules are highly enriched in enzymes, indicating that these are dominant
    genetic programs in specialized metabolism. When modules are ranked by the number of
   enzymes associated with specialized metabolism within their top 100 genes, the three Taxol
   modules rank first (Fig. 2g). Furthermore, these three modules were expressed in different
   subsets of cells (Fig. 2h). Elicitation was crucial for activating module 1, which consists of the
    early portion of Taxol pathway, as it was not strongly expressed in the naive young and mature
   Taxus tissues we profiled (Fig. 2h). An unfiltered analysis of the top genes of the Taxol module
   1 revealed all of the genes we had previously used to reconstitute the early Taxol pathway14,
    including TDS, T5αH, taxadien-5α-ol-O-acetyltransferase (TAT), taxane 10β-hydroxylase
   (T10βH), and DBAT (Fig. 2i). We therefore initiated our search for the missing components of
    the Taxol pathway by examining the uncharacterized genes in this highly co-expressed gene
   module.

   Discovery of Facilitator of Taxane Oxidization (FoTO1)

        One of our primary goals was to determine if there are missing pathway components that
   could account for the inefficiency of the early Taxol pathway. The first taxane oxidation by T5αH
    yields a large set of closely related products, most of which appear to not be productive pathway
    intermediates. Dozens of studies, including from our group, have tried to dissect and


[PDF physical page 6]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



    troubleshoot this enzyme in a variety of contexts12–16. Previously, we reported the first de novo
    reconstitution of the early six Taxol biosynthetic steps, consisting of TDS, T5αH, TAT, T10βΗ,
   DBAT, and taxane 13α-hydroxylase (T13αΗ), in Nicotiana benthamiana, that resulted in the
    production of 5α,10β-diacetoxytaxadien-13α-ol (4) (Fig. 3a)14. This required extensive
   expression tuning of T5αΗ that increased yields of the on-pathway intermediate taxadien-5α-ol
    (2)32 relative to 5(12)-oxa-3(11)-cyclotaxane (OCT, 2’a), iso-OCT (2’b), and other rearranged
    side products (2’c). Despite our optimization efforts, these side products still accumulated as the
   dominant products of T5αH14. Notably, OCT-derived products are not known to naturally
   accumulate to significant levels in Taxus plants. We hypothesized that Taxol module 1 might
    contain previously undiscovered proteins that could facilitate this initial oxidation and eliminate
    the formation of side-products. We tested gene candidates highly ranked in Taxol module 1 (Fig.
   3b) by expressing them with the six-enzyme early pathway in N. benthamiana via
   Agrobacterium mediated transient expression.

            Surprisingly, we observed that gene #13 from module 1, a NTF2-like protein we later
   named FoTO1 (Facilitator of Taxane Oxidation), resulted in a 10–17 fold increase in yields from
    early Taxol subpathways (Fig. 3c). We hypothesized that FoTO1 may be involved in altering
   product flux of the early oxidative steps.To determine if FoTO1 ameliorates side product
    formation, we compared gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GCMS) analysis of N.
   benthamiana leaf extracts expressing TDS and T5αΗ with and without FoTO1. Without FoTO1,
   T5αΗ yields primarily undesired side products, including 2’a-c and many uncharacterized
   compounds, and very little of the desired product, taxadien-5α-ol (2) (Fig. 3d-e). However,
    inclusion of FoTO1 drastically alters the product profile: side products 2’a-c are no longer
   produced, and taxadien-5α-ol (2) and its derivatives (2’d) become the major products (Fig.
    3d-e).

        FoTO1 is a 197 amino-acid protein in the NTF2 (nuclear transport factor 2)-like family
    (Fig. 3f), which has not previously been implicated in plant metabolism. While some fungal
   NTF2 proteins have evolved catalytic activity33,34, plant and animal NTF2 proteins have primarily
   been studied for their capacity to mediate protein transport to the nucleus35. Consequently, we
    anticipated that FoTO1 could be operating via a multitude of mechanisms including (i)
    scaffolding or allosteric support of Taxol enzymes, (ii) transport or positioning of taxane
    intermediates, or (iii) enzymatic resolution of an unstable intermediate. FoTO1 homologs from T.
   media and Arabidopsis thalaiana did not produce the same metabolomic change for early Taxol
   pathway reconstitution as FoTO1, suggesting FoTO1 may have a function specific to taxane
    biosynthesis (Fig. S4). When co-expressed in planta with either TDS1 or TDS2, FoTO1 has no
    effect on the production of taxadiene (1) and iso-taxadiene, nor does it yield new products (Fig.
    S5), suggesting it has no enzymatic activity on taxadiene (1). To further test for potential active
    sites that could be important for catalysis or substrate binding, we generated mutations of
    residues within the protein’s cavity based on the predicted AlphaFold structure of FoTO1 (Fig.
    3f, S6). While none of the amino acid substitutions tested caused FoTO1 to lose its capacity to
   suppress oxidation side products (Fig. S6), deletion of the C-terminal alpha helix, but not the
    N-terminal helix, eliminated FoTO1’s in planta phenotype (Fig. 3f-g).


[PDF physical page 7]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



         To determine if FoTO1’s function involved a direct interaction with Taxol enzymes and
   perhaps a scaffolding role, we purified FoTO1 (fused to mTurquoise2) and the soluble portions
    of TDS2 and T5αΗ. Using microstate thermophoresis, we found that FoTO1 binds both T5αΗ
   and TDS2 with high nanomolar KD values (Fig. 3h-i). Deletion of the C-terminal helix, which
    disrupts FoTO1's in planta metabolic phenotype (Fig. 3g), also eliminated binding affinity with
   both proteins (Fig. 3h-i), suggesting that this region may be involved in protein-protein
    interactions. To determine if this physical interaction was physiologically relevant, we conducted
    co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) of epitope-tagged proteins, V5-FoTO1 and T5αΗ-HA,
   co-expressed in N. benthamiana leaves (Fig. 3j). Immunoprecipitation of the bait, V5-FoTO1,
   using V5 antibody was able to capture T5αΗ-HA (Fig. 3j, S7). Furthermore, the T5αΗ-HA co-IP
    signal increased four-fold when leaf lysates were incubated with 400 μM taxadiene (1), but not a
   mock terpene (caryophyllene) (Fig. 3j, S7).

         Taken together, these data suggest a mechanism involving a direct interaction between
   FoTO1, T5αΗ, and possibly TDS. The influence of taxadiene (1) on the efficiency of co-IP of
   T5αΗ and FoTO1 could indicate that the metabolite plays a direct role in such an interaction.
   While TDS, T5αΗ, and FoTO1 localizes to different subcellular locations – plastid, endoplasmic
    reticulum (ER), and cytoplasm, respectively (Fig. S8) – direct contacts between the outer lamina
    of these membranes are known to be involved in lipid trafficking36 and the biosynthesis of other
    diterpenoids like gibberellin37.

   Independently evolved taxane 9α-hydroxylases (T9αHs) for different taxane substrates

         The presence of FoTO1 and all biosynthetic enzymes for (4) in gene module 1
   suggested coordinated regulation of early Taxol biosynthetic enzymes and an opportunity to
    discover missing Taxol enzymes from this module (Fig. 3b). The next oxidation after C-5α,
   C-10β, and C-13α hydroxylation is proposed to be the C-9α hydroxylation. Therefore, we
   screened the activities of the oxidases, including both 2-oxoglutarate dependent dioxygenases
   (2-ODDs) and P450s, within the top 50 genes of module 1 by co-expressing candidate genes in
   batches together with the upstream pathway to 4, a taxane with three oxidation and two
    acylation modifications (3O2A), in N. benthamiana. Through untargeted metabolomic analysis,
   we found a P450 in the CYP750C family (T9αH-750C) that resulted in depletion of 3O2A (4)
   and, surprisingly, concurrent production of a mass corresponding to a 4O3A (5) intermediate
    that includes both an additional oxidation and an acetylation on 4 (Fig. 4b). The additional
    acetylation was unexpected given that the reconstitution included only two acetyltransferases,
   TAT and DBAT, which were known mainly to acetylate the C-5 and C-10 hydroxyls, respectively.
   To confirm the function of T9αH-750C and to provide support for the structural assignment of 5,
   we further co-expressed TAX19, the previously characterized C-13α-O-acetyltransferase38, with
    the biosynthetic genes to 4 and T9αH-750C at large scale and isolated the resulting acetylated
   4O4A products from N. benthamiana leaves. Through extensive 1D- and 2D-nuclear magnetic
   resonance (NMR) and MS/MS comparison to a standard, we structurally characterized the
   products as 5α,9α,10β,13α-tetraacetoxytaxadiene, also known as taxusin (6), and its isomer
    13β-taxusin (6’) (Fig. 4b, Table S3, Fig. S9). This structural analysis supports the role of
   T9αH-750C as a taxane 9α-hydroxylase (T9αH).


[PDF physical page 8]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.





           Recently, multiple groups have independently reported a distantly related CYP725A
   P450, with <20% identity at the protein level to T9αH-750C, as the taxane T9αH (referred to
   here as T9αΗ-725A for distinction), through transcriptome-informed screening of the CYP725A
   genes, a Taxus-specific enzyme family that includes all previously known Taxol P450s8–10.
    Interestingly, while both T9αH-750C and T9αΗ-725A can act as T9αH to produce taxusin (6)
   when TAX19 is present, only T9αΗ-750C can deplete 3O2A to yield 4O3A (Fig. 4b, S10). In
    contrast, T9αΗ-725A is unable to produce 4O3A and appears to require a substrate with C-13α
   acetoxy group (Fig. 4b, S10). Extremely low sequence conservation between these enzymes
   suggests the independent evolution of T9αH activities in two distinct P450 families (CYP725A
   and CYP750C), and their different substrate specificities suggest that T9αΗ-725A is involved in
    the biosynthesis of C-13α-acetoxyl taxanes while T9αH-750C is involved in the biosynthesis of
   C-13α-hydroxyl taxanes. As Taxol and its precursor baccatin III (16) lack a C-13α-acetoxy
    moiety, we used the expression of biosynthetic pathway to 4 and T9αH-750C (i.e., pathway to 5)
    in N. benthamiana as the foundation for all subsequent taxane pathway reconstructions (Fig.
    4c).

                  It is worth noting that the reconstructed pathway to taxusin (6) required three
    acetyltransferases despite four acetoxyl groups on this molecule; these data suggest that one of
    the acetyltransferases is bi-functional. Experiments involving the feeding of 4 to N. benthamiana
   leaves expressing T9αH-750C with either TAT, or DBAT revealed that TAT is likely a
    bi-functional enzyme that introduces the acetyl groups on both the C-10β and C9ɑ hydroxyls
    (Fig. S11). This is consistent with previously reported acetylation activities of TAT on C-9 and
   C-10 hydroxyls.38

   Discovery of a taxane 7β-acyltransferase (T7AT) and two taxane 1β-hydroxylases (T1βHs)

         The missing C-1β hydroxylation in Taxol is proposed to occur after functionalization by
    several known mid-pathway enzymes: taxoid 2α-hydroxylase (T2αH) and 7β-hydroxylase
   (T7βH) have both been shown to independently oxidize various tetra-ol taxane derivatives,39,40
   taxane 2α-O-benzoyltransferase (TBT) has been characterized using 2-debenzoyl baccatin III
   as the substrate,41 and taxane oxetanase (TOT) that installs the signature oxetane ring has
   been independently reported by multiple groups recently using hexa-acyl taxane (6O6A) as the
    substrate7–9. We hypothesized that these characterized enzymes can function coordinately to
   reach a hepta-oxidized (7O) taxane intermediate before tailoring of the C-1β hydroxylation, and
    thus began reconstituting the downstream pathway starting from 4O3A (5). Upon co-expression
    of T2αΗ and TBT with the pathway to 5, we detected a mass feature corresponding to the
   expected hydroxylated and benzoylated product (7-Bz) (Fig. 4c). Intriguingly, we also detected
   a mass feature corresponding to the acetylated product (Fig. 4c), suggesting that TBT is also
    able to catalyze acetylation. Further testing of TBT with 1-hydroxybaccatin I and baccatin VI
   showed that TBT is able to mediate the interconversion between C-2α-benzoyl and acetyl group
    (Fig. S12). This bifunctionality is consistent with recent report42 and might explain the
   prevalence of C-2α-acetoxy taxanes in nature.4,17


[PDF physical page 9]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



         Subsequent expression of T7βH with the 5O4A gene sets yielded the expected
   benzoylated and acetylated 6O4A. However, adding TOT to the 6O4A pathway did not result in
   any expected oxidized product (Fig. 4d). Given that many of the highly oxygenated taxanes with
   an oxetane or epoxide moiety originating from TOT activity are also C-7β-Ο-acetylated (e.g.
    baccatin I, baccatin IV, and baccatin VI; Fig. S13)17, we reasoned that the installation of a
   C-7β-acetoxy group might be a prerequisite for TOT function. Therefore, we screened
    acyltransferase candidates and found the 15th gene in module 2 to be capable of various
    C-7β-O-acylations, including acetylation (Fig. S14), which we named taxane
    C-7β-O-acyltransferase (T7AT). Expression of T7AT with the upstream 6O4A pathway resulted
    in the acetylated and benzoylated 6O5A products, 8-Ac and 8-Bz, respectively (Fig. 4c), and
   most importantly, further addition of TOT to the 6O5A pathway led to the appearance of
   dominant mass features corresponding to oxidized products 9-Ac and 9-Bz (Fig. 4c-d). As TOT
   has been shown to generate non-interchangeable epoxide and oxetane products7–9, it is likely
    that the two major peaks associated with 9-Ac and 9-Bz EIC correspond to those two products.
   T7AT was independently reported in a recent publication but its importance for TOT function has
    not been described.9

            After reconstituting a pathway to 9-Ac and 9-Bz (7O5A), we screened the oxidases
   (2-ODDs and P450s) of module 2 to identify the missing C-1β hydroxylase. This revealed two
   2-ODDs (2-ODD184 and 2-ODD686) that yielded multiple mono-oxidized products when
   expressed with various upstream pathways (Fig. 4c, S15). To determine if any of these
   mono-oxidation activities was a C-1β-hydroxylation, we tested whether these enzymes would
   enable reconstitution of the pathway to baccatin VI (11-Bz), an octa-oxygenated taxane (8O6A)
    containing the C-1β-hydroxyl of interest, which is available as a standard. Expression of the
   7O5A pathway and TAX19 (C-13α-O-acetyltransferase) with either 2-ODD184 and 2-ODD686
    resulted in the production of baccatin VI (11-Bz), as confirmed by MSMS comparison to the
   standard (Fig. 4c, 4e) as well as several 1β-hydroxybaccatin I isomers (11-Ac peaks, Fig. S16).
    This result suggests that either 2-ODD can function as the missing taxane 1β-hydroxylase
   (T1βH) since all other functional groups in baccatin VI (11-Bz) can be explained by other
   enzymes included in the reconstitution. Intriguingly, both 2-ODDs resulted in two major products
    with the 2α-O-acetylated pathways while only one major product with the 2α-O-benzoylated
   pathways (Fig. 4c, S15). Among the two major products in the 2α-O-acetylated pathways, one
     is presumably the 1β-hydroxylated product, but the other remains unidentified. Therefore, we
    isolated the two products from 2-ODD184 co-expressed with taxusin (6) pathway in N.
   benthamiana at large scale and structurally characterized them to be 1β-hydroxytaxusin (6-Ο1)
   and its structural isomer, 15-hydroxy-11(15→1)abeo-taxusin (6-Ο2) (Table S4-6, Fig. S17). We
   propose that the non-classical 11(15→1)abeotaxane scaffold arises from radical rearrangement
   associated with 2-ODD-mediated 1β-hydroxylation (Fig. S17). These data support a role for
   these 2-ODDs in the C-1β hydroxylation and thus they are referred to as T1βH-184 and
   T1βH-686 hereafter.

         Taken together, these results reveal the discovery of an independently evolved T9αΗ, a
   T7AT important for the function of TOT, and two T1βHs, which allows us to reconstitute the
    biosynthesis of highly oxygenated taxanes (10-Αc and 10-Bz) and their C-13α-acetoxy


[PDF physical page 10]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



    counterparts (11-Αc and 11-Bz). We found that T1βH-686 results in significantly higher levels of
   2α-O-benzoylated product 10-Bz compared to T1βH-184, which is desirable for Taxol
    production, and carried out all subsequent pathway reconstitution with T1βH-686.

   Discovery of two taxane deacetylases and the taxane C-9 oxidase (T9ox) that complete
   baccatin III biosynthesis

         The structure of baccatin III (16), the direct precursor to Taxol before side-chain
    installation, would suggest that it requires nine oxidations (seven hydroxylations, one oxetane
    formation, and one ketone formation) and three acylations (two acetylations and one
    benzoylation) on the taxadiene (1) scaffold. Using a simplified, two-dimensional
    oxidation-acylation biosynthesis model (Fig. 5a), we can see that our latest intermediate 10-Bz
   has two additional acetylations not found in baccatin III (16) and is lacking a C-9 ketone
    oxidation. The two additional acetylations come from (i) TAT that promiscuously O-acetylates
    the C-9-hydroxyl (Fig. 4b, Fig. S11), and (ii) T7AT that O-acetylates the C-7-hydroxyl, which is
     vital for the function of TOT (Fig. 4c-d). While the roles of these additional acetylations is
   unknown, we considered that they might serve as protecting groups during the biosynthesis, a
    strategy utilized in the biosynthesis of other plant terpenoids43. We hypothesized that, from
   10-Bz, one oxidase and two deacetylases would then be required for the biosynthesis of
    baccatin III (16) (Fig. 5a). To identify such enzymes, we fed substrate baccatin VI (11-Bz) or
    9-dihydro-13-acetylbaccatin-III (9DHAB, 13) which structurally resemble our latest intermediate
   10-Bz to N. benthamiana leaves expressing top candidate genes in the gene modules to rapidly
   screen for desired deacetylation and oxidation activities.

          Screening of alpha/beta-hydrolase candidates revealed two of these deacetylases
   (DeAc898 and DeAc1023) were capable of stepwise removal of two O-acetylations from
    baccatin VI (11-Bz) to yield a product matching a 9DHAB (13) standard, which lacks the C-7
   and C-9 O-acetyl groups, as supported by MS/MS analysis (Fig. 5b, Fig. S18). In addition,
   expressing the full baccatin VI (11-Bz) pathway (rather than fed substrate) with the two
   deacetylases also resulted in the production of 9DHAB (Fig. S19). Screening of oxidase
   candidates identified a putative taxane C9-oxidase (T9ox) in the 2-ODD family that was capable
    of oxidizing 9DHAB to the corresponding oxidized product with loss of two protons, presumably
    via ketone formation at C-9 (Fig. S20). This gene has since been independently reported by
   another group10. When we combined T9ox, DeAc898, and DeAc1023 with our 14-enzyme
   pathway to 10-Bz, an abundant and significant new taxane product formed (Fig. S21), which
   was subsequently isolated and confirmed as baccatin III (16) based on NMR and MS/MS
    analysis compared to a standard (Fig. 5c-d, S22). Stepwise assembly of the final steps of the
   pathway revealed DeAc898 to be a prerequisite for T9ox, suggesting this enzyme hydrolyses
    the C-9 acetyl group (Fig. 5c). Consequently, we renamed the DeAc898 and DeAc1023 as
   taxane 9α-O-deacetylase (T9dA) and taxane 7β-O-deacetylase (T7dA), respectively.

   Side-chain biosynthetic enzymes enable total biosynthesis of
   3’-N-debenzoyl-2'-deoxypaclitaxel in Nicotiana leaves


[PDF physical page 11]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



         The side chain installation and maturation of Taxol have been extensively studied: it is
   proposed to involve phenylalanine aminomutase (PAM) and β-phenylalanine CoA-ligase (PCL)
    that convert phenylalanine to β-phenylalanine CoA, which serves as the substrate for baccatin
    III:3-amino-3-phenylpropanoyl transferase (BAPT). BAPT installs the β-phenylalanine side-chain
   onto baccatin III (16), and ultimately 2’α-hydroxylation and 3’-N-benzoylation by taxane
    2’α-hydroxylase (T2’αΗ) and 3′-N-debenzoyl-2′-deoxypaclitaxel-N-benzoyl transferase
   (DBTNBT), respectively, complete the biosynthesis to Taxol (18) (Fig. 5e, Table S1)21,44. While
     all five enzymes have been separately reported, we failed to observe the expected product
   when attempting to reconstitute Taxol biosynthesis by expressing these reported enzymes in
   combination in Nicotiana leaves. Specifically, despite previous reports that two separate Taxus
    acyl activating enzymes (AAE) can act as PCL,10,21,45, neither resulted in the production of the
    3’-N-debenzoyl-2’-deoxypaclitaxel (17) when expressed with PAM and BAPT with fed-in
    baccatin III (16) in our system. To identify the missing PCL, we examined the top AAEs in the
    Taxol expression modules (Fig. 5f), revealing a single prominent candidate: AAE-867.5.
   Co-expression of this PCL with PAM and BAPT in planta enabled conversion of fed baccatin III
    (16) to a mass corresponding to 3’-N-debenzoyl-2’-deoxypaclitaxel (17) (Fig. 5g). Furthermore,
    addition of PCL, PAM and BAPT to our 17-enzyme baccatin III pathway yielded the same
   dominant product (Fig. 5g), which constituted the first de novo biosynthetic production of the
    late-stage paclitaxel precursor 3’-N-debenzoyl-2'-deoxypaclitaxel (17).

            Similarly, while T2’αΗ and DBTNBT have been previously reported44,46, we were not able
    to produce Taxol (18) when adding them to the our pathway to 17. However, when DBTNBT
   was expressed with PCL, PAM, and DBAT with fed-in baccatin III (16) we detected a mass
   corresponding to 2'-deoxypaclitaxel at very low level (Fig. S23). This result suggests that
   DBTNBT might be functional but requires upstream 2’α-hydroxylation by T2’αH to react
     efficiently, consistent with previous specificity measurements47.

   Expression profile and essentiality of the new Taxol biosynthetic enzymes

         Of the eight new Taxol enzymes discovered in this work (Table S7), few were clear
   candidates for the pathway when conducting co-expression analysis using bulk RNA-seq
    datasets (Fig. 6a). Correlation to TDS ranked these genes as 1,000th-10,000th priority with bulk
   RNAseq, but within the top 10s-100s if using the mpXsn data (Fig. 6a), demonstrating that
   mpXsn strategy was crucial for efficient gene discovery.

         These genes provide new insights into the organization of the biosynthetic pathway by
   separate transcriptional modules. When ordered by presumed pathway reaction order, the early
   pathway forms an especially discrete cluster in Taxol module 1 (Fig. 6b), suggesting that the
   pathway up to 4O3A (5) may be controlled by separate transcriptional regulation than the later
   pathway. The latter pathway is not as clustered by order, which could be for multiple reasons:
   our presumed enzyme order may not reflect the biological pathway or the branching of taxane
   metabolism towards multiple products may be regulated at various post-transcriptional stages,
   such as RNA stability or protein localization. Interestingly, some enzymes, such as TDS1, TAT,
   T1βH-686, are top ranking genes in all three Taxol modules.


[PDF physical page 12]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.





          For our 17-gene reconstituted baccatin III (16) pathway, dropping most of the genes
   completely abolishes baccatin III (16) production, except for FoTO, T5αΗ, DBAT, and T9ox (Fig.
    6c, Fig. S24-25). Furthermore, in our system, this 17-gene pathway yields levels of baccatin
      III (16) that are significantly greater than those obtained with previously published gene sets
    (Fig. 6c, Fig. S24-25)8,10: our attempts to replicate baccatin III (16) production with these
    published gene sets did not yield an amount above the limit of detection in our system (Fig.
   S24). Because these published gene sets lacked several biosynthetic enzymes (e.g. T1βH,
   T7AT, T7dA, and T9dA), it is possible these findings resulted from multifunctionality of Taxus
   enzymes11 or endogenous N. benthamiana enzymes. Furthermore, exchange of the T9αH-750C
   discovered in this work with the alternative T9αH-725A reported in recent publications also
    yielded no detectable baccatin III (16) in our pathway (Fig. S25-26), as would be anticipated
   based on T9αH-750C’s specificity requirement of a C-13α acetoxy that is absent from Taxol and
   our pathway (Fig. 4b).

   Widespread functional overlap of Taxus enzymes

            Surprisingly, our dropout experiment revealed that T5αH appeared to be nonessential in
   our reconstituted 17-gene baccatin III (16) biosynthesis (Fig. 6c, Fig. S24-25). After examining
   oxidases in the pathway, we found T13αH is able to compensate for T5αΗ in the early pathway
   and is the only oxidase besides T5αH that can oxidize taxadiene (1). Like T5αΗ, T13αΗ yields
    multiple oxidized taxadiene products including OCT (2’a) and iso-OCT (2’c) when expressed
   alone with the taxadiene (1) pathway, but not after the introduction of FoTO1 (Fig. S27). When
   co-expressed with FoTO, T13αH produces a di-oxidized taxadiene, which we propose is
    taxadien-5α,13α-diol (19) based on comparison to published MS spectra48 and the fact that it
   can be converted to a diacetoxy-taxadiene by TAX19 (Fig. 6d, Fig. S28). This is consistent with
    previously reported multifunctionality of T13αΗ [converting taxadiene (1) to
    taxadien-5α,10β,13α-triol]8 and exemplifies a repeated observation of enzyme functional
   redundancy during our dissection of the Taxol biosynthetic pathway (Fig. 6e).

          Beginning with the first committed step of taxane biosynthesis, which can be catalyzed
   by either of two TDS paralogs,18 we found that many taxane functional groups could be installed
   by multiple genes with different sequences and expression patterns (Fig. 6e). In the extreme
   case of the T9αHs, highly divergent sequences imply convergent evolution. For the T9αH and
   T1βH variants we found, different substrate and product specificity suggests that these enzymes
   may be involved in different branches of taxane metabolism, like C-13α-acetoxy taxanes and
   11(15→1)abeotaxanes. For others, this may just be accidental promiscuity that lacks any
    evolutionary pressure to correct. A third possibility is that redundant copies of taxane pathway
   genes act during different conditions, such as at specific developmental stages or after
   pathogen exposure. Regardless of the mechanism, the prevalence of functional redundancy
   across the four major enzyme classes in taxane biosynthesis complicates both the dissection of
    various branches of endogenous taxane metabolism and the identification of optimal enzyme
    sets for heterologous taxane production.


[PDF physical page 13]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



   DISCUSSION

            In this investigation we identified eight new genes in the Taxol biosynthetic pathway, and
   use them to build 17-gene and 20-gene pathways for de novo biosynthesis of baccatin III (16)
   and 3’-N-debenzoyl-2'-deoxypaclitaxel (17), respectively (Fig. 6f), in Nicotiana benthamiana.
   Future engineering or discovery of the final oxidase, T2’αΗ, would enable de novo total
    biosynthesis of Taxol. Two of the new enzymes, T7AT and T9ox, have recently been
   independently reported by other groups (Table S1).9,10 Without optimization, our reconstituted
   17-gene pathway yields 10-30 ug/g baccatin III (16) in N. benthamiana leaves, equivalent to its
    natural abundance in Taxus media needles (Fig. S29). Because extraction of baccatin III (16) as
   a semi-synthesis precursor is a dominant industrial strategy for manufacturing Taxol and its
    derivatives, we believe this work represents a major step towards sustainable production of
    Taxol and other taxane-based therapeutics.

         Our discovery of FoTO1 breaks a long-standing assumption that cytochrome P450s are
    the sole actors in the first oxidative steps of the Taxol pathway. While all P450s require a
   cytochrome P450 reductase (CPR) partner, this is the first example, to our knowledge, of a plant
   P450 that acts in concert with an additional protein to guide product specificity. It is also the first
   example of NTF2-like proteins being implicated in plant metabolism. Interestingly, a cellulose
   synthase like protein, GAME15, was recently discovered to be essential for the biosynthesis of
   Solanaceae steroidal molecules and is thought to help orchestrate the function of early pathway
   enzymes, including two P450s and 2-ODD, on the ER membrane.49 Together with our work, this
    hints at a potentially broader role of protein facilitators in plant secondary metabolism.

           Further investigation is needed to dissect how FoTO1 leads to such profound
   improvements in the activities of multiple Taxus oxidases. Co-immunoprecipitation and in vitro
    binding data (Fig. 3h-j) suggest the role of direct protein-protein interactions with pathway
   enzymes, analogous to protein scaffolding role of NTF2-like domains in Ras GTPase activating
    protein (RasGAP) signaling50. While the few characterized NTF2-like proteins in plants also
   have roles in protein shuttling unrelated to specialized metabolism35,51, these proteins differ from
   FoTO1 in sequence and domain architecture. Thus, we should be cautious with functional
    extrapolation, given the propensity for this small, conical fold to adapt diverse roles. Beyond the
    plant kingdom, NTF2-like proteins have independently evolved catalytic activity in fungi and
    bacteria33,52 and have also been computationally engineered into synthetic luciferases53.
   Regardless of its mechanism, FoTO1 has uncharacterized homologs throughout land plants and
   may represent a conserved family of plant proteins with metabolic roles (Fig. S30). It is likely
   these proteins will be critical for the engineering of complex pathways such as Taxol into
   heterologous hosts such as yeast for molecule manufacture.

         Beyond the unexpected requirement of FoTO1 and the sheer scale of Taxus specialized
   metabolism, multiple obstacles slowed the search for the Taxol biosynthetic enzymes. The
   number of Taxus enzymes that can decorate the taxane scaffold, but not in a way that appears
    to lead to Taxol biosynthesis, repeatedly lead to dead ends. For example, the T1βH functional
   homolog T1βH-184 appears to have different substrate and product specificity than the more


[PDF physical page 14]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



    efficient T1βH-686, suggesting it may act in a different branch of taxane metabolism (Fig 4c,
   S15). Similar expression patterns of these and other taxane enzymes suggest that the branches
    of the taxane metabolic network may be regulated through posttranslational mechanisms such
   as protein interactions or metabolons; FoTO1 could be the first of several proteins with
    scaffolding roles. Furthermore, our long-held model of Taxol biosynthesis requires an update:
   two additional acetylations appear necessary for the functions of intermediate oxidases, and
   downstream deacetylations by two deacetylases furnish the baccatin III (16) end product (Fig.
    6f).

          While the gene set we identified here heterologously produces baccatin III (16) efficiently
    in N. benthamiana via C-13α-hydroxyl intermediates (Fig. 6f), it is to be determined if this is the
   same biosynthetic route adopted in the Taxus plants. The prevalence of C-13α-acetoxy taxanes
    like taxusin (6), baccatin VI (11-Bz), and 1β-hydroxybaccatin I in Taxus plants indicates it is
     difficult to rule out that the natural biosynthetic pathway might proceed through C-13α-acetoxy
    intermediates. We were able to access these C-13α-acetoxy taxanes by incorporating the
    C-13α-O-acetyltransferase, TAX19, to our gene set (Fig. 6f); however, we were unable to
    identify a corresponding C-13α-O-deacetylase, which prevented us from accessing baccatin III
    (16) via this alternative biosynthetic route.

       We overcame the myriad hurdles of Taxol gene discovery by developing a transcriptomic
    strategy, mpXsn, to more specifically infer gene-gene associations. Scalable profiling of diverse
    cell states with differentially perturbed biosynthetic processes enabled us to discriminate
    different enzyme sets and was crucial for prioritizing candidate genes that conflicted with our
     initial hypothetical biochemical models. In addition to gene discovery, mpXsn data provided
    biological context, including linkage to primary metabolism (Fig. 1f) and the partitioning of Taxol
   enzymes into modules that appear separately regulated. Beyond Taxol biosynthesis, we
    anticipate mpXsn to be useful for studying gene sets of interest in other non-model organisms.
    In mammalian systems, single-cell techniques with parallelized genetic26 or chemical27,28
    perturbation experiments have enabled the de-orphaning of genes and dissecting gene
    networks. However, most organisms and biological systems lack genetic interrogation tools and
    rely heavily on observational experiments, such as transcriptomics and other “-omics”.
   Eukaryotes, especially, face steep challenges for functional genomics and gene-guided
    discovery as they generally lack the comprehensive gene clusters found in prokaryotes. The
   advent of methods like mpXsn, which affordably capture precise gene covariance across
    diverse transcriptional states, may finally overcome this long standing challenge in functional
   genomics.


[PDF physical page 15]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



   DATA AVAILABILITY

   The raw NMR free induction decay (FID) data of individual compounds have been deposited in
    the Natural Products Magnetic Resonance Database (np-mrd.org) with the following ID: taxusin
    (6, NP0341906), 13β-taxusin (6’, NP0341907), 1β-hydroxytaxusin (6-O1, NP0341908),
   15-hydroxy-11(15→1)abeo-taxusin (6-O2, NP0341909); the processed NMR data are shown in
    Fig. S32-56 and Table S3-6.

  AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION

    C.J.M., P.M.F. and E.S.S. conceived of the mpXsn approach used to identify pathway
    candidates. C.J.M. developed and conducted single-cell procedures, performed transcriptome
    analysis, selected and cloned gene candidates, and performed initial activity screens. C.J.M.
   and J.C-T.L. characterized Taxus enzymes and analyzed the Taxol pathway products. J.C-T.L.
    isolated and structurally characterized taxane intermediates by NMR as well as MSMS and
   performed enzyme phylogenetic analysis. C.W. and C.J.M. performed experiments to
    characterize the role of FoTO1. B.M.L. shared Taxus resources. R.D.L.P. conducted preliminary
   experiments to establish procedures to characterize Taxus enzymes, which B.M.L. helped
    analyze. E.S.S. and P.M.F. helped analyze the data; C.J.M., J.C-T.L. and E.S.S. wrote the
    manuscript.

  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

  We thank all Sattely lab members (2016-2024) for constructive feedback for this project,
    specifically, Catherine Liou for the help with QQQ data acquisition. We also thank Patrick
    Almhjell (Stanford University) for helpful comments on this manuscript. We thank Hudson Alpha
   and the Joint Genome Institute for their work on the Taxus media cultivar:Hicksii genome
   (PRJNA651763), which we used to identify complete versions of some genes. The assembly of
    the Taxus media genome (proposal: 10.46936/10.25585/60001097 led by Joerg Bohlmann) was
   conducted by the U.S. Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute
    (https://ror.org/04xm1d337), a DOE Office of Science User Facility, and is supported by the
    Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy operated under Contract No.
   DE-AC02-05CH11231. We thank Joerg Bohlmann, Jay Keasling, Philipp Zerbe and Anne
   Osbourn for helpful discussions. We would like to acknowledge Stanford Genomics Core, the
   Macromolecular Structure Knowledge Center at ChEMH, and Stanford Chemistry NMR facility
    for use of their instruments. This work is supported by NIH R01 AT010593 (E.S.S.), NIH K99
   1K99AT012787 (C.J.M.), and Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation DRG: 2421-21
    (C.J.M.).

  COMPETING INTERESTS

    Stanford University has filed a provisional patent on work from this manuscript on which the
   authors are inventors.


[PDF physical page 16]
     bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                                available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

   a   scaffold                   tailoring                       side chain     b             Metabolic complexity
                                                                                                      -H     6/8/6 taxanes (>300)           R        R
                                                                                        -OH    GGPP           TDS                                    8                                 known                                                            3                                                      known                                                                                              -OAc                                                                                                                                                                        R                                                                        R =
                                  +                                  ? unknown    AcO   O  OH                                                         +                                                        ? unknown                                                                                              -OBz              10  9                                                                                                                                                                                       R                       7
                          6 T5αΗ                                                                                     -others             H                         R
                                                                                         paclitaxel              R   R  R    H        R   R  R            R    R  R
                           5                1 2        13                                               OH       RO                                                                        O         (Taxol®)                                                                       H                        4                 H                                           H                                                                                  OAc                                                                OH  OBz           14  H                                      H                                                                                      (18)                      20                                                                                                                                                                     R  R                                                                                                                                     O   R                                                                                                                             R                                                                                                                                        H                                                                                                                                                              H   O                                                                                                                                                                                        R
                                                                                                                                           R                                                                                                                                    R  R                                                                                                                                                          R  R       taxadiene                    (1)                                    5α-ol                                              (2)                                                          baccatin                                                                                                               III                                                                        (16)                                                                                                                                                                        OR
                        side                                                               5,20-oxetanes   4,20-epoxides  abeotaxanes
                     products                                                                                               ( >100)           (>20)         (>100)
   c  Genomic complexity            d             Co-expression pipelines for pathway identification
         103-104 enzymes per plant genome                                                multiplex perturbation x                                                     conventional (bulk) RNA-seq                                                                        snRNA-seq (mpXsn)                       # in Taxus chinensis
                      0      500     1000                                        136 mulitplexed perturbations
                                                        2 elicitors                     other
                                                                                               - 1 2     4 tissues                        103 cell states
              2-ODD
                                                                 vs                                                  oxidases   P450                                                                                                                                expression
                ɑβ-hydro             X
                   AcylT                                         n=79
                                                                                     (6 studies)                TPS                                                                                          pathway                                                                                                        n=17,143 (this study)



                                                                                                                                     single        known Taxol P450s                                                                                                                                        clustering                                                                                                             pathway
                                                                                                          module          other Taxus P450s                                                      gene


                                                                               PCC rank of known
  e              Taxus media                                                                       f        Taxol genes to TDS
                                         10x library      17,143 nuclear               2,901               0
                                                preparation      transcriptomes  pseudobulk    cell states
                                                                                                           5,000

                                                     nuclei           overview
         tissue                                  extraction                                                                                        rank 10,000
           elicitation:                                                                     elicited
              - hormones                                      naive                                            15,000       mpXsn     - pathway intermediates                          (young)
                                                                     naive (mature)          gene-gene              - pathogens                                                                                                        20,000
                                              pool tissues                                     co-expression            bulk  mpXsn


Figure 1. A platform combining multiplexed perturbation and single nuclei RNA-seq (mpXsn) to overcome the
challenges of Taxol biosynthetic gene discovery. (a) Proposed Taxol biosynthesis pathway with gaps highlighted in
orange. In addition to our incomplete knowledge of the biosynthetic gene set, significant inefficiencies (red arrows) of the
first oxidase, taxadiene 5α-hydroxylase (T5αΗ), prevent Taxol pathway reconstitution and discovery. TDS, taxadiene
synthase. (b) Prominent classes of taxane metabolites that have been isolated from Taxus species. The tailoring acyl
groups on taxanes include acetyl, benzoyl, small chain fatty acid residues, or phenylisoserine derivatives. (c) Gene counts
in Taxus chinensis genome of the enzyme families known to be involved in taxane biosynthesis: 2-oxoglutarate dependent
dioxygenase (2-ODD), cytochrome P450 (P450), ɑβ-hydrolase (αβ-hydro), acyltransferase (AcylT), and terpene synthase
(TPS). (d) Overview of the differences between conventional co-expression approaches and the mpXsn methodology in
this manuscript. Dot networks are visualizations of the co-expression network, where nodes are linked when mutual rank
<20, using either bulk RNA-seq or our mpXsn data. For visual clarity, only P450s are displayed. (e) Experimental overview
for mpXsn with UMAP of single nuclei transcriptomes. (f) Rank of each known Taxol gene by Pearson correlation coefficient
(PCC) to TDS using either bulk or mpXsn data.


[PDF physical page 17]
     bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                                available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

 a       MEP    MEV    c matrix factorization to identify gene modules   g          60                       2-ODD (PF03171)
                                                                                                             P450 (PF00067)
                                               cells(104)        modules                                          40                 isoprenoid                                                                                                         AcylT (PF02458)                 precursors                                                              in genes 20
                                                                                 cells                                  0
                                             231    module    GGPPS                                                  x                                            transcriptomes                                                 single nuclei  = genes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            module            GGPP                                                                                                                                                                                                                        modules     where modules express                       enzymes     TDS1
                                         #                                                                                                                                                                        genes(104)                                                                                                                              100  50       or TDS2
                         10  9    7                                                     how genes organize into modules                 top                                      6
     T5αΗ   13       1 2 H   4  5   d                                                                    0
     TAT         14  H       20                                 2 3 1     module (ranked by enzyme content)     T10βH    taxadiene (1)                            genes
    DBAT                                                                                    “Taxol modules”
     T13αH                                                          Taxol
     T9αΗ?
                 AcO   OAc
                                         h                                                                                                                  i                                                                                                        ΤΑΧ19                                                                                 known                                                                         module 1                                                                                                          8 TDS2                                                                                         all modules (n=200)                                                                                                                   known Taxol genes                               OAc                                                                                                 DBAT          HO                       H
                   H                                                                                      TDS2       new Taxol genes                 e            1 2 3 “Taxol modules” (n=3)     T2αΗ           (5)                                                                                                          6      BAPT2        other genes
     TBT                            GGPPS                                                                  T5αH2
     T7βH                                TDS1                                                               TDS1
                                          TDS2    TOT                                                         rank                                                                             in                                                                                                       BAPT1                    AcO                      O                          OH                                                                                                          4                                          T5αH     T1βH?                                                   module                                                                                                               T5αH1                                                                                                       T10βH                                           TAT     T9ox?                                                                                             elicited                                                                                                                      TAT                                                    1                                                                                                                 enzymes                                           T10βH                                                                                                           T5αH3
                             O                                                                                                 GGPPS           HO                        H                                       DBAT                                                                                                          2
                            OAc                         OBz                   OH                                          T13αH    PAM
     PCL?    baccatin III (16)                 ΤΑΧ19           100
    BAPT                                          T7βH                                     module 2          8      T2αH     T2’αH?                               T2αH
    DBTNBT          AcO   O  OH              TBT1           200     young          Bz                                                                                                                                                                                                      Taxol-associated   PAM                            mature
            NH  O                           BAPT2                                                               6
                 O           H     O          BAPT4                                                                  TDS1
             OH                         OH  OBz OAc          DBTNBT                                                                                                                 TAT   TOT               Taxol (18)                                                                                                          4                                                                                                                       T10βH
                                                                                                         PAM
 b                                f    MEP         MEV                                                                  T5αH2GGPPS
     PCC between known Taxol genes        pathway         pathway                                       2                  T13αH1                                                                                                                         T13αH2                                            1.0                                     DXP1          AACT    TDS2
    DBAT                                     DXP2       HMGCS1    TAX19                                                                      rank in                                             HMGCS2    TDS1                                 0.8   DXR1                                                                         module 3          3      T7βH1
      TAT                            DXR2       HMGCS3        module                                   BAPT3
    T10βH
     T2αH                                 0.6    CMK       HMGCS4          1
     T5αH                          MCS        HMGR1
   BAPT2
   GGPPS                                 0.4   HDS1        HMGR2                                                    T13αH2
    T13αH                                                 MVK1                                    HDS2                                                                                                             T13αH1                                                               50                                  2     PAM                                                 MVK2                                    HDR1     T7βH                                            0.2                                                                                                  BAPT4                                                                                               PAM    TAT                                                MVD1                                    HDR2   BAPT4
     TBT1                                                                                                                 T7βH2                                                MVD2                                 GGPPS                                                                                                                        TDS1  DBTNBT                                                               100                                                                                                                 BAPT2                                            0.0                                                MVD3                                                                                              DBTNBT                                                                                                                               T5αH1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   score                                               1                                                 2 3                                                                                                                        T5αH3                                                                                                          1                                                MVD4                                                                                           GGPPS                                                                                                                                T10βH                                           module                                                                                                                  T5αH2                                                               1 2 3                    TDS2DBATTAX19TDS1TATT10βHT2αHT5αHBAPT2GGPPST13αHPAMT7βHBAPT4TBT1DBTNBT                                                                                                                                                                                                  gene
                                                                                                               0.0    0.2    0.4              0    25    50    75   100
                                                                                   module usage        gene rank in module


Figure 2. Identification of taxane biosynthetic gene modules. (a) Schematic of Taxol biosynthesis and previously
hypothesized gene order. (b) Correlation between known Taxol genes using mpXsn data. To identify substructures, genes
were hierarchically clustered (scipy fcluster, euclidean distance) on both axes. (c) Schematic for matrix factorization.
mpXsn data factorized using consensus non-negative matrix factorization (cNMF)30. (d) Heatmap showing known Taxol
biosynthetic genes’ rank in each of the modules produced by matrix factorization. (e) Same as d, but displaying only the
three modules enriched in Taxol genes (hereafter referred to as modules 1, 2, 3). (f) Heatmap of Taxol modules showing
module rankings for the two isoprenoid pathways in the primary metabolism potentially upstream of the Taxol biosynthesis.
Only the MEP pathway is co-expressed with the first Taxol module, supporting its role in synthesizing Taxol precursors. (g)
All gene modules ranked by total number of 2-ODDs, P450s and acetyltransferases in the top 100 genes of each module.
(h) Module usage of each cell, which is analogous to gene expression, plotted onto the single nuclei transcriptomic UMAP.
Taxol modules 1-3 are expressed in non-overlapping cell states, and were primarily identified in different experiments. (i)
Unfiltered list of top genes in each module, plotted as module rank and score. Green: previously identified genes associated
with Taxol biosynthesis, orange: new biosynthetic genes identified in this study.


[PDF physical page 18]
      bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                                available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.


                                                                                                                                      boost a                                    b                   c                                                                                                                       cytoTDS                                                                                                                          TAT    DBAT
         GGPP                                                                        mοdule 1                   T5αH   T10βH   T13αH
        TDS                                                               8      TDS2       knownnew genesgenes
                                    T5αΗ side products                         DBAT        other genes                        x17                    10  9    7                                                                                                                          + FOTO1                                                                         TDS2                    T5αH                                                                                                                                                    *                                                                                                                         x13                                          O                                                          O                                                                                                                                                                                                                       - FOTO1                           (alone)
                     1 2             13                                                                               T5αH2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   area 30                      H  4 5                                                                                                                                          *                                                                            O                          score  6
                                                                               H                 H                                                                                                                                           x10                                                                            TDS1                                           H                                                            H
                                                                                   T10βH                                    peak                                                                                                                            20                         **              taxadiene (1)           OCT (2’a)      iso-OCT (2’b)            2’c                     gene  4  FoTO1        T5αH                                                                            T5αH3
      +FoTO1                        HO                               AcO                      T9αH-750C                            10                       TAT               DBAT                     T10βH               T13αH                           2         T5αH1 TAT                                                                                           normalized

                           OH
                      H                                                 H                                                              OAc         HO           H      OAc                                              10
                 H                           H                              H                      0      20     40     60                    5α-ol (2)        (3)          (4)
             taxadien-5α-ol (2)                        (3)                                 (4)                            gene rank
 d                                         taxadien-5α-ol (2)                   2’d    e
                                    GGOH                   taxadiene (1)                                                                                                                                                                         5a-ol (2) *                                                       2’e                                                2’a
                                                                                                                                                        2’d (derived from 2)
                                    2’b                         2’c                                                                                                                                                              2’e (putative isomer of 2)
     +  + +

                                                                                                         OCT (2’a) *
                                                                                                                                                                        undesired
     +  +   -                                                                                                                                iso-OCT (2’b) *    side
                                                                                                                                                              2’c *              products
     +   -   -                                                                                                                                                    others
                                                                                                                               7.5E5
 +                                                                                                         integrated peak area                       * previously characterized
            10              11             12             13             14                T5αH  FoTO1                               retention time (min)       boostcytoTDS

                                                                                       construct                                                                                                                                construct                                                           KD (μM)                                                                                            KD (μM)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         vehicle (1)                                                                        0.47                                                                                                               0.61  f         N-term   g             h                                                                                                    mTurq-FoTO1           j                                                                    mTurq-FoTO1        i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            taxadiene                                                                                                                                      DMSO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         caryophyllene
                                                                             +                                                                               +                                             taxadien          >10.00    mTurq-∆C-FoTO1           >10.00    mTurq-∆C-FoTO1             kDa -IgG +
                                                                                                                                                           55                      OCT (2’a)   -5α-ol (2)                                                                                                                        HA (T5aH)                                                                         940  binding                           940  binding
                     ΔC-FoTO                                                       T5αH                             930  TDS2                                                        Input  4334
                                                                                                        [‰] 930                                                 [‰]                                                    V5 (FoTO1)
                     ΔΝ-FoTO                                                                            920                                       26
                       FoTO1                                                                                  FNorm 920                                                                                  FNorm  910                                       55
                                                                                                                        HA (T5aH)
                      GFP                                                                                                                 900                                                                                                                                                           43                                                                                                                           V5FoTO1                                                                         910
                                                                                                                 890                                     3E6        1.5E7                                                                                                                                                           34                 V5 (FoTO1)                                                                                                                                                                                         IP: (FoTO1)
                                                                                                                                                           26
              C-term                                                          10-9  10-8  10-7  10-6  10-5  10-4             10-9  10-8  10-7  10-6  10-5  10-4
                                                                 [FOTO1 ligand]                   [FOTO1 ligand]


Figure 3. Characterization of FoTO1 (Facilitator of Taxane Oxidization 1). (a) Early Taxol biosynthetic pathway and the
 divergence by T5αH to form multiple side-products, including previously characterized 2’a, 2’b, and 2’c. Blue shade
 highlights the biosynthetic pathway toward Taxol via 1-4. (b) Rank and score of genes in Taxol module 1 as well as known
 Taxol genes. (c) Bar graph showing the FoTO1-induced fold change in end products’ peak area of subpathways when
 transiently expressed  in N. benthamiana leaves. Fold change  is calculated by quantifying 2~4 GCMS  total ion
chromatogram (TIC) peak area and normalized to the -FoTO1 condition. Data are shown as the mean ± standard deviation.
n = 3 biological, independent leaf samples. Statistical analyses were performed using a two-sided, unpaired Welch’s t-test.
 * indicates p-value < 0.05, ** indicates p-value < 0.01. (d) GCMS TIC of N. benthamiana leaves transiently expressing
 combinations of diterpenoid boost enzymes and cytosolic TDS as the background, T5αΗ, and FoTO. Peaks 2’a-2’e are
 side-products of T5αH; 2’d, while structurally uncharacterized, can be derived by feeding taxadien-5α-ol (2) to leaves
 expressing T5αH.13 (e) Bar graph of total oxidized taxanes for +T5αH and +T5αΗ+FoTO1 condition. Data are shown as
 the mean ± standard deviation. n = 6 biological, independent leaf samples. (f) Structure of FoTO1 generated by AlphaFold3.
 (g) Bar graphs showing integrated peak area of taxadien-5α-ol (2) and side product OCT (2’a) when N- or C-terminal
 truncated FoTO1 is transiently expressed in N. benthamiana leaves together with boost and cytosolic TDS. Expression of
FoTO1 and GFP in the same condition are used as positive and negative control, respectively. Data are shown as the mean
± standard deviation, n = 3 biological replicates. (h) Quantification of binding between purified T5αΗ and FoTO1 or ∆
C-FoTO1 using microscale thermophoresis. (i) Quantification of binding between purified TDS2 and FoTO1 or ∆C-FoTO1,
as in (h). N-terminal transmembrane tags of T5αΗ and TDS2 are removed for purification purpose. Data are shown as the
mean ± standard deviation, n = 3. (j) Immunoblot analysis of the co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) of T5αH-HA (prey) by
V5-FoTO1 (bait) in N. benthamiana leaves expressing both proteins. Incubating lyates with 400 uM taxadiene (1) for 15
 minutes prior to co-IP increases the pulldown of T5αH by FoTO1 while incubating with a DMSO vehicle or a mock terpene,
 caryophyllene, does not.


[PDF physical page 19]
     bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                                available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

   a           module     b                                       d                    T7AT     6O5ATOT7O5A
                  1 2 3                                                                                                                                                                                                  (8-Bz)   (9-Bz)                                                                    3O3A                                                                                                                            Τ7βH                                                                                                                            TOT
                                                                                                               AcO                                                                                                                            6O4A           TDS1                                                                                                                                   7O4A                                                                                        T9αH-725A                 5O4A
           TDS2                                           TAX19                     TAT
           TDS2                                                                                                                                     ?                                                                                   +   -   -
          FoTO1                                                                           AcO           H      OAc
                                                                                                      H           T5αH1
                                                                                      4O4A        +   - +           T5αH2                                     3O2A            4O3A
                                                                                                                                                    OAc                                                                                                               OAc                                                                                                               AcO                                                                                                                                             AcO                                                                                    AcO      T9αH-750C           T5αH3                                     TDS,                                  FOTO
                                                                                                                                                                                                        10 9                                                                                                                                                                  9                                                                                TAX19                                                             TAT                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7       +  +  -            TAT                                       T5αΗ,                                             TAT,
           T10βH                                     T10βH,                                         DBAT,                                                                                                                                                                   1e5                                                                                                                                                                             6e5                                                                                                                                                                                      5e5                                                                                                                                                                                                        1  2                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4 5  OAc                                                                                   +                                                                                      +                                                                                        +   1e5                                                                                                   OAc  HO                                                                                                                              OAc     AcO 13                                                                   HO                                                                                                           H                                                                                                                                      H                                                                                  H       T9αH-750C                                     T13αH                                                                                                                                                                                            10                                                                                                                                 H                                                                              H                                                                                                      H                                                                                                                                                                                                retention                                                                                                                                                                                        time                                                                                                                                                                                                    (min)   5          DBAT                    (pathway                                                     to 4)                                                                                                                                        taxusin                                                                                                                                                                (6)                                                                      4                                                                                           5                                                                                                                    TOT                                                                                                                                         T7AT        T9αH-725A                                                                                                                              6O4A          T13αH1                                             8e5                  7e5                    6e5                   pathwayto       m/z: 621.2677 637.2626  663.2783 679.2732
          T13αH2                +    -+  -   -
           TAX19                                                     e                       baccatin VI (11-Bz)
           T7βH1                +  +   -   -                                                                                                                                                   677.2571           T7βH2
           T2αH                            +                                                       -  +                                                               -                   427.2462                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  485.2517                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         527.2623                                                                                                                                        13β-taxusin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                617.2355            TBT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         pathway                                                                                                                                                                                       (6’)                                                                                                       m/z                                                                                                                                           m/z                                                                                                                                                                                 m/z                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        737.2787                            +  +                                                           -  +           T7AT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  reconstituted                               gene rank                                                                                                                                                                                                                            557.2139
           TOT2            1                            +    -  + +                                                                                                                                                                                                                            557.2154         T1βH-184                                 50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        737.2797                   4                                                               8       9                                                                                      7                                                                                              8         T1βH-686                                                                                                                                                                                                                                617.2374                                 100        to                                                                                                               retention                                                                                                               time                                                                                                                       (min)                standard
                                                                                                             8                                                                                                                     9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              standard                                677.2587
                                                                                                                                   by                                                                                             NMR                                                  pathway T9αH-750CT9αH-725ATAX19                                                             confirmed
   c
                              4O3A              5O4A      6O4A       6O5A                7O5A                8O5A               8O6A
                                                AcO    OAc    T2αH      AcO    OAc                       AcO    OAc OAc                    AcO    OAc OAc                    AcO    OAc OAc                  AcO    OAc OAc
          pathway to 4                      TBT              Τ7βH T7AT                    7    TOT                 T1βH                 TAX19
        + T9αH-750C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4 5                                                                                                                  2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1                                                                                                                                                                                         O         (pathway                                                                                                                                                               O       AcO 13                                                                                                                                   O         HO                      to 5)           HO                                                               OAc    HO                                                                                           OAc        HO                                                                                                                            OAc        HO                                                                                                                                                                                                 H                                                                                                                                                                     H                                                  H                                                                            H                                                                                                         H                                                                                                                                       H                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OAc                                                                                                                                                                                          OAc                                                                                                                                                         OAc                                                                                                                                                              OR                                                                        OR                                                                                                                                                                                     OH OR                                                                       H                                                                                                     H  OR                                                                                                                                   H  OR                                                                                                                                                           OH                                              H
                                         5
                                                     Ac (7-Ac)  Bz (7-Bz)        Ac (8-Ac)  Bz (8-Bz)        Ac (9-Ac)  Bz (9-Bz)         Ac (10-Ac) Bz (10-Bz)      Ac (11-Ac) Bz (11-Bz)
                                                                                                                                                                                                        baccatin VI
        +    -   -   -   -   -  -  7e5               2e5      4e5              9e5      7e5             9e5       9e5             6e5      1e5
        +  +   -   -   -   -  -
                                                           -
        +  + +   -   -   -  -                                                           -   485.2517                                                                       543.2572                                  605.2728                                                                   601.2626                                  663.2783                                                                 617.2576                                   679.2732                                                                 633.2525                                  695.2681
        +  + + +   -   -                                                                                                                             2e5      9e4
                                                             m/z                          m/z             m/z                         m/z             m/z                        m/z             m/z                        m/z             m/z
        +  + + + +   -                                                                            +        +  + + +   -  +                                                                            +          675.2630                                  737.2787
      5                                                                                                       7                                                                                                                8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     standard         to              ΤΒΤ                                                                                                          retention                                                                                                          time                                                                                                                   (min)       +                                                                                                                     9             6     7    7.5    8.5            5.5       6.5    7     8TAX19   m/z5.5    6.5 m/z  7        +                    T7AT TOTT1βH-184T1βH-686    7     8              8     9       7     8           6          pathway T2αΗΤ7βH                                                                                                                                                                                         8


Figure 4. Discovery and characterization of T9αH, T7AT, and two T1βΗs. (a) Heat map showing the ranks of new T9α
H and T1βHs and other Taxol biosynthetic genes in the three modules. T9αH-725A is the T9αH independently reported by
other groups.8–10 (b) Proposed biosynthetic pathway from 4, the latest intermediate we reported recently,13 to taxusin (6)
and the corresponding extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) of products 4-6 when the indicated sets of genes were
expressed in N. benthamiana leaves. Blue shade highlights the biosynthetic pathway toward Taxol, which only involves 4
and 5. (c) Proposed biosynthetic pathway from 5 to baccatin VI (11-Bz) and the corresponding EICs of intermediates when
the indicated sets of genes were expressed in N. benthamiana leaves. Blue shade highlights the biosynthetic pathway
toward Taxol. Structures of 5, 7-Ac, 7-Bz, 8-Ac, 8-Bz, 9-Ac, 9-Bz, 10-Ac, 10-Bz, 11-Ac are proposed based on functions
of enzymes previously characterized (TAT, TAX19, T2αH, TBT, T7βH, and TOT) and described in this study (Τ9αH-750C,
T7AT, and T1βH). TAX19 are used to generate known 13-O-acetylated products, including taxusin (6) and baccatin VI
(11-Bz), for structural analysis. (d) EICs of expected products when the pathway to 6O4A is expressed with TOT, T7AT, or
both in N. benthamiana. In the absence of T7AT, no significant 6O4A depletion or product formation by TOT is observed.
(e) MSMS fragmentation patterns of heterologously produced baccatin VI (11-Bz) in N. benthamiana compared to that of
11-Bz standard. MSMS fragmentations were generated using [M+Na]+ (m/z = 737.2788) as the precursor ion and
fragmented with a collision energy of 30 eV.


[PDF physical page 20]
     bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                                available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

 a                                              baccatin VI  b                         C-13α acetoxy taxanes            e             f
                                   8O6A                                                     (11-Bz)                                                                                   OAc                                                                                                 OH                                                                                                                           OH                                                                            AcO                                                                                                          AcO                                                                                                                                       AcO                                                                                                                                                O                                                                                      OAc                                                                                                                    OAc                                                                                                                             OH                                                                                                                             gene                                                                                                                                                     rank                                                                                                                                               module    6A
                                                                                                           10                                                                                                               9                                                                                                                                                       OH                                                                                                                     7                                                                                                                                                                                   in module                                                                      DeAc898                                                                                             DeAc1023                                                                                                                                             1 2 3                                   8-Bz                                                 10-Bz                                                                                                                        5                                            TOT                                                     T1βH                                                                                                                                                                                  NH2                                                                                                                     4                                                                                                  13                                                                                                            1  2    5A                                                                            O                                                                                                                             O                                                                                                                                                    Phe                          taxusin                                                                                                                     TDS1                                                                                                                                                          100                                                                 AcO                                                                                             AcO                                                                                                    O      AcO                                                                           H                                                                                                      H                                                                                                                                H                                          9-Bz                  4O4A                                                                                      OAc                                                                                                                    OAc                                                                                                                                                 OAc                                                                                   OBz                                                                                                                OBz                                                                                                                                              OBz                                                                                                                                        T9ox                                                                    OH                                                                                              OH                                                                                                                       OH                                                                                                      PAM                                                                                                                                                          200                                                                                                       T7AT                                   (6) 7-Bz T7αH                                                                  T9ox
    4A                                                                baccatin VI (11-Bz)                12              9DHAB (13)                            PAM
                            T9αH   T2αH  TBT      deacetylations                                                                                                               NH2  O                 BAPT2    3A                                                                                                                 BAPT4
                                                                                             1e6                                                                                                               4e5                                                                                                                                 1e5                                               +                                                                                       -                                                                                           -     Acylations                           5                                                                                                                                                        OH                Enzyme                                         O                                                                                                              DBTNBT                                                        baccatin                                                                                                            III    +                                              TAT                                           AcO                                              OH
                      T13αH                                           8O3A-2H                                                                   (16)    2A                                                               10                                                                  9                                                                                                                                        AAE-867.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (PF00501)                                                                         7                                                                                                                                                                β-Phe                                               +                                                  +                                                                                           -                                             +                      4                                                                                       -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   737.2787                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 695.2681                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               653.2576                                                DBAT                                                                           5                                                                                                                                      AAE-6613.2                                                                                                              PCL               T10βH                                                                        4                                                     13                                                               1  2                                                O    1A                                                                                                                                                       m/z                                                                                                                                                                                    m/z                                                                                                                                                                                                                  m/z                                                                                                                                     (AAE-                                                                                                                                      AAE-1850.4                                HO                                             +                                               +                                                  +                                             H                                                                                       - +                  3                                                                                                                                                      867.5)                                                     OAc                          TAT                                                  OBz                                                                                                 7                                                                                                          8                                                                                                             6                                                                                                                       7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Activating                                        OH                                                                                                                                      AAE-3377.4          2                                                                                                                              standard                                                                  GFP                                                                                                                                                                               NH2  O                                                                                                                                 retention                                                                                                                               time                                                                                                                                         (min)                                                                                                                                        AAE-11131.4
 taxadiene         1O  2O  3O  4O                         5O  6O  7O  8O                                                                                                         feeding   DeAc898DeAc1023                                     5         6                                 OCoA        Acyl candidates    AAE-502.7     (1)                                                       (+ketone)                            Oxidations                                              8O-2H    11-Bz

                                                                                                                                                                                      AcO   O  OH    T2’αHc                            AcO    OAc OAc  DeAc898     AcO   OH OAc                 AcO   O  OAc  DeAc1023     AcO   O  OH

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bz
                                                                                                                                                                                             NH  O      pathway                                           (T9dA)                9        T9ox                       (T7dA)                       7                 BAPT          NH2  O               DBTNBT
       to 10-Bz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2’
                                                                                                                                                                    O                          3’                                                                                                                 O                                  O                                                                                                                                                                                      O                      HO                                       O      HO                                                               O      HO                                                                                                                                                                           H                                                                                        O      HO                                   H                                                              H                                                                                        H                                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                                                                                                                OAc                                          OAc                                                                       OAc                                                                                                     OAc                                                                                                                                                                                        OH                                                                                                                                                                OH  OBz                                                                                                                                  OAc                              OH  OBz                                                       OH  OBz                                                                                 OH  OBz                                                                                                           OH  OBz
                              10-Bz                    14                        15                   baccatin III (16)                             3’-N-debenzoyl-2’-deoxypaclitaxel (17)          Taxol (18)

                                                                                                                                                                                  baccatin III (16)                                         d           baccatin III (16)     g
       +    -   -   -      2e5                 5e4                5e5                2e5                                            549.2096                                          7e5                    4e5                                                                                                      + +   -
                                                                                                                                                         baccatin III (16)
       +  +   -   -                                                                                                                                         427.1720                                                                                                                                                      609.2307           feeding   + + +-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                pathway                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         reconstituted
       +          +             +                          -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      734.3178                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  609.2313                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               611.2470                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  609.2313                                                                                                                                                 695.2681                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         653.2576
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m/z 2e5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   m/z 2e5                                                                                                                        m/z                                                      m/z                                                                                       m/z       +          +             + +                                                                                                                                                       m/z                                       427.1721                   baccatin III (16) -   -   -
                                                                                                                                                      609.2299         pathway                                       6         7   5         6          6         7
                                                                                                      + + +-                                                                                             standard                                                                       retention time (min)                                                                                                                                                                                          5           6                                                                                                                                                                                                                4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    standard                     549.2089                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               retention time                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (min)     to                                                                                               5                                                                                                         6                                                                                                          PAM         10-BzDeAc898T9oxDeAc1023                                                                                                                                              BAPT2AAE-867.5                                      5    pathway


Figure 5. Discovery and characterization of two deacetylases, taxane 9-oxidase (T9ox), and β-phenylalanine-CoA
ligase (PCL) that complete the total biosynthesis of 3’-N-debenzoyl-2'-deoxypaclitaxel (17) in N. benthamiana. (a)
Simplified representation of biosynthetic transformations from taxadiene (1) to baccatin III (16) with coordinates showing
the decoration state (i.e. acylation and oxidation) on the taxadiene (1) scaffold. Importantly, two deacetylations and one
oxidation are required to go from intermediate 10-Bz to baccatin III (16). Taxanes with C-13 acetoxy, including taxusin (6)
and baccatin VI (11-Bz), are not biosynthetic intermediates to baccatin III (16). (b) Characterization of the two deacetylases,
DeAc 898 and 1023, by feeding baccatin VI (11-Bz) to N. benthamiana leaves expressing GFP, DeAc 898 and DeAc 1023.
EICs of 11-Bz, the corresponding mono-deacetylated product 12 and di-deacetylated product 9-dihydro-13-acetyl-baccatin
III (9DHAB, 13) are shown. (c) Proposed biosynthetic pathway from 10-Bz to baccatin III (16) via taxane 9α-O-deacetylase
(T9dA; DeAc 898), T9ox, and taxane 7β-O-deacetylase (T7dA; DeAc 1023) and the EICs of intermediates when the
indicated sets of genes were expressed in N. benthamiana leaves. (d) MSMS fragmentation patterns of heterologously
produced baccatin III (16) in N. benthamiana compared to that of 16 standard. MSMS fragmentations were generated using
[M+Na]+ (m/z = 609.2313) as the precursor ion and fragmented with a collision energy of 30 eV. (e) Proposed side-chain
formation and biosynthetic pathway from baccatin III (16) to Taxol. Phenylalanine aminomutase (PAM) `and PCL convert
phenylalanine (Phe)  to β-Phe-CoA, which  is  installed onto baccatin  III by baccatin III:3-amino-3-phenylpropanoyl
transferase (BAPT)  to  yield  3’-N-debenzoyl-2’-deoxypaclitaxel  (17). While taxane  2’α-hydroxylase  (T2’αΗ)46 and
3′-N-debenzoyl-2′-deoxypaclitaxel-N-benzoyl transferase (DBTNBT) have been previously reported, we were not able to
recapitulate their enzymatic activities to complete biosynthetic pathway to Taxol. Only DBTNBT showed activity, and low
efficiency suggests that the 2’α-hydroxylation may need to occur first. (f) Heatmap showing the ranks of T9ox, side-chain
enzymes  and PCL  candidates  in  gene  modules.  The  active PCL  (867.5)   is  indicated  in  magenta.  (g)
3’-N-debenzoyl-2’-deoxypaclitaxel (17) can be produced either by feeding baccatin  III (16) to N. benthamiana leaves
expressing the three side-chain biosynthetic genes (PAM, PCL, and BAPT) or by heterologously expressing the complete
biosynthetic gene set to baccatin III (16) plus the three side-chain biosynthetic genes. EICs of 16 and 17 are shown.


[PDF physical page 21]
     bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
     (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                                available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a                b   GGPPS      e                              Transformations catalyzed by multiple Taxus enzymes
            PCC rank of new           TDS1                                                                                 AcO   OH                    AcO    OAc OAc
                                    TDS2                Taxol genes to TDS
                                                                                                                                                                                            O                                    FoTO1
                                     T5αH1       0 FοTO1                                                                                                                                                            O                                                                                                                                                                                          O                                         TAT                                                                                                                                                              OAc    HO                                                                                                                  OH  RO                                                                                                                                                                  H                                                                                                                                        H                                                                                                                                                                                                  H           T9dA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       function                                      T10βH                                                                                                                                                                                       OAc                                                                                              H             H   H                                                                                                                                    H                                                                                                                                                        OH OR                                                                                                                                                                                              H                                                                                          H           T7dA                   T9αH-750C
    2000                           T13αH1DBAT                   TDS1           T5αH        T9αH-750C            T1βH-686                   TAT
                                     ΤΑΧ19                                                                                                                                                           elicited           PCL                   T9αH-725A
    4000                            T2αHTBT1
                                      T7βH1    rank       T9αH                                     T7AT
                                    TOT2    6000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  relative                                      T1βH-686
                                     T9dA           T1βH                                                        TDS2           T13αH        T9αH-725A            T1βH-184                 ΤΑΧ19                                     T7dA            T9ox                                        T9ox    8000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                expression                                  PAM        rankin module
                                    PCL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               expression   10000  T7AT                    BAPT2BAPT4          100
                bulk   mpXsn      DBTNBT          200
                                           1 2 3
c                dataset used                module          ID
     15                          %     77%          61%          14%              72%                    60%

  (16)    DW)10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Τ1βH-686 III                                                                                                                                                                                              T9αH-750C                                                             Τ1βH-184       (μg/g
      5                                            TDS1   baccatinyield                                              TDS2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         phylogeny
      0       H H H H H                                                                                               T9αH-725A
                       TAT                                           TBT             T5                           T2         TS FoTO1                          T10 DBAT T13 H-750C                               T7 T7A TOT H-686 T9dA T7dA T9ox pathway 2024 2023 needle
                                      T1                        T9                                                                   Jiang, Zhang, media           TPS                   P450                     2-ODD                  Acyltransferase
                                                     T.                                                                                                                                                                                          complete
d                              f            FοTO1,                                                         (T5αH),                                                    T13αH            taxadiene (1)                                                                                                                               T9dA,                                                TAT,                                                    T10βH,                                                                     AcO   OAc   T2αΗ,                                                                                                                                      AcO    OAc OAc                                                                                                                              T9ox    AcO   O  OH       T13αH                                                                                 TBT,      AcO    OAc OAc   T1βHTOT                                                                                                                   T7dA                                                                             7βH, T7AT                                             DBAT,                                               T9αΗ
       + FoTO1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10  9       7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                             H             HO           H      OAc     HO           H      OAc      HO           H     O      HO 13          1   2 H   4   O
     HO           H     OH                  taxadieneH      (1)                     H 5                         H 8-BzOBz                     OH10-BzOBz OAc                       baccatinOH   IIIOBz(16)OAc
              H                                                         HRMS                          HRMS                          HRMS                         HRMS/MS
         taxadien-5α,13α-diol           TDS                  TAX19                   C-13α-acetoxy taxanes                            PAM, PCL
                                                                                                                             BAPT, DBTNBT    T2’αH                                                                          T2αΗ,    +  + +   -   -    1e5                  GGPP                      AcO    OAc                                                                                 TBT,      AcO    OAc OAc  T9dA        AcO   OH OH                                                                                                                                                                            AcO   O  OH                                                                            7βH,                                                                             T7AT,
                                                                                          T7dA    +  +-   -  +   -
                                                                                                                                                                             Bz                                                                                           343.2041                                                       TOT, T1βH
    +    -   -  +   -   m/z               Genes                                                                                                       NH  O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2’                                                                                                                          O                                                 previously                                              known    +       +                 -            +              +                                                                                                                                                           O                                                                                       OAc      AcO                                                                                                  O     AcO                                                              AcO                                                                                                   H                                                                                                                             H                                                                                                                                           O                                                                        H                                                  anticipated                                                         discovery                                                                                                                                                                 H                            8.5                                      10.0                                                 11.5                                                                                                                 OAc                                                                                                                                              OAc                                                                                                           OBz                                          unexpected                                                          discovery                                                                                            OH                                                                                                                    OH  OBz                                                                                                                                                                                      OAc                                                                    H                                   retention                                        time (min)                                                                                                                                            OH                                                                                                                                                       OH  OBz                                              challenge reproducing                                                                                                          taxusin                                                                                                                               (6)                                                                                                                                  9DHAB                                                                                                                                                                                                           (13)                                                                                                                                              baccatin                                                                                                                                                    VI                                                                                                                                                        (11-Bz)     boost                 T5αH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Taxol (18)                                                                                 NMR,                                                                                 HRMS/MS                                                                                                                HRMS/MS                                                                                                                                             HRMS/MS                          T13αH                                TAX19      TDS FοTO1


Figure 6. An updated understanding of Taxol biosynthesis with newly discovered genes. (a) Ranks of new Taxol
biosynthetic gene discovered in this paper by Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) to TDS using either bulk or mpXsn
data. New data from mpXsn was crucial for prioritizing all new Taxol genes except T9dA. Newly discovered genes are
indicated in orange (anticipated discovery) and pink (unexpected discovery). (b) Heatmap showing the ranks of updated
Taxol biosynthetic pathway in the models. (c) Baccatin III (16) yields in μg/g dried weight (DW), quantified with standards
on a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Methods), of our 17-gene baccatin III pathway with each single-gene dropout
tested in N. benthamiana. All genes are crucial for significant baccatin III (16) yield except T5αH. Baccatin III (16) yields
from replicating published gene sets8,10 as well as from T. media needle are shown for comparison. Data are shown as the
mean ± standard deviation, n = 3 biological replicates. (d) EIC showing the di-oxidized taxadiene product when T13αΗ is
expressed with TDS, and its production is boosted by FoTO1 (Fig. S26). Adding TAX19, acyltransferase previously
characterized to be specific for taxane C-5α- and C-13α-O-acetylation,38 results in the production of a diacetoxytaxadiene
(Fig. S27). This leads us to propose that T13αH is able to produce taxadien-5α,13α-diol, thus complementing T5αH. (e)
Five pairs of functional redundant enzymes in the Taxol biosynthetic pathway with their single-cell expression patterns,
percentage identity (% ID) in protein sequence, and protein structures or phylogenetic trees shown. Crystal structure of
TDS1 (PDB 3P5P) and the AlphaFold3 predicted structure of TDS2 are shown. Phylogenetic trees of the three main
tailoring enzyme families involved in Taxol biosynthesis — P450s, 2-ODDs, and acyltransferases. Protein sequences from
each family were aligned using Clustal Omega, and the phylogenetic trees were constructed using the neighbor-joining
method in Geneious Prime with 1,000 bootstrap replicates. AtC4H, AtGA20ox1, and HvACT were selected as outgroups for
each family. (f) Summary of the Taxol biosynthesis and the reconstituted C-13α-acetoxy taxane biosynthesis in this study.
Blue shade indicates our reconstituted pathway  to baccatin  III (16) and the proposed transformations  to Taxol.
Co-expression of TAX19 with partial pathways leads to C-13α-acetoxy taxanes including taxusin (6), baccatin VI (11-Bz),
and 9DHAB (13) that can be confirmed with chemical standards (Fig. 4e, S9, S19). Structures are proposed based on high
resolution MS (HRMS), confirmed by NMR, and/or confirmed by HRMS/MS comparison to standards. Dotted arrow
indicated previously reported biosynthetic transformations that we failed to reproduce.


[PDF physical page 22]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



  METHODS

   Chemical and biological materials
   Chemical standards are purchased from the following vendors (with catalog number listed):
    taxusin (TargetMol; TN6763), 1-hydroxybaccatin I (LKT Labs; T0092), baccatin VI (Santa Cruz
    Biotechnology; sc-503244), 10-deacetylbaccatin III (Sigma-Aldrich; D3676), baccatin III
   (MedChemExpress; HY-N6985), 9-dihydro-13-acetylbaccatin III (TargetMol; T5132).
    Taxadien-5α-ol is synthesized as previously described.14 Taxus media var. hicksii was obtained
   from FastGrowingTrees.

   Preparation of tissue and single-nuclei sequencing
    Nuclei extraction buffer (NIB) consisted of 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 0.8 M sucrose,
   0.1% Triton X and (for density matching to prevent nuclei settling during flow sorting) 1%
   Dextran T40 and 2% Ficoll. On the day of use, NIB was supplemented with 1 mM dithiothreitol.
     All nuclei extraction steps were conducted at 4°C and wide bore pipette tips were used when
    handling nuclei. Steps between tissue harvesting and loading into the Chromium device were
   completed within 90 minutes to avoid RNA loss. To isolate nuclei, approximately 1g of Taxus
   media tissue was removed from the plant and immediately placed in a petri dish with 10mL NIB.
   Tissue was chopped at ~200 rpm with a fresh razor blade for 5 minutes until most large tissue
   was broken down, and then gently rocked at 4°C for 15 minutes. To remove large debris,
    disrupted tissue was then passed through a pre-wet 100μm cell strainer stacked atop a 40μm
    cell strainer. Nuclei were gently pelleted at 300g at 4°C for 5 minutes and resuspended in 1 mL
   NIB with 5ng/uL 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, Thermo Fischer) and 5ng/uL propidium
    iodide. Using a Sony SH800 cell sorter with a 70μm chip, 140,000-200,000 nuclei were sorted
    into a tube containing 1mL PBS+ (PBS, 0.1% bovine serum albumin, 20 U/mL Invitrogen
   Ribonuclease Inhibitor). Gating strategy illustrated in Fig. S31. Nuclei were centrifuged at 300g
    at 4°C for 5 minutes, then gently resuspended in 40uL PBS+. Nuclei were immediately loaded
   onto a 10x Genomics Chromium controller and libraries were generated using v3 chemistry.
    Libraries were sequenced on an illumina NextSeq 3000.

   Multiplexed tissue elicitation
   For multiplexed elicitation experiment, Taxus needles were subjected to perturbation in
    deep-well 96-well plates with 200 uL MS media [7.5 g/L Murashige and Skoog macronutrients
    (Fischer), 3 g/L sucrose, pH 5.7]. Two needles (biological replicates) each from two
   developmental stages (young and mature) were treated with each elicitation condition (17
    conditions listed in Table S2) for each time point (1, 2, 3 and 4 days), resulting in 272 tissue
   samples (two replicates of 136 perturbations). To minimize contamination, needles were washed
    thoroughly in sterile water before moving to MS plates, which were sealed with breathable rayon
    film (VWR) and placed under 18 hour light cycles.

   Analysis of single-cell data
   Reads were mapped to the genomes of Taxus chinensis18 with STARsolo54 (STAR ...
   --runThreadN 32 --alignIntronMax 10000 --soloUMIlen 12 --soloCellFilter EmptyDrops_CR
    --soloFeatures GeneFull --soloMultiMappers EM --soloType CB_UMI_Simple). Ambient RNA


[PDF physical page 23]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



   was removed with cellbender55. Using the doubletdetection library56, doublets were removed, as
    well as cells with outlier numbers of reads or where most reads were the most expressed genes
   (pct_counts_in_top_20_genes < 30). Genes were removed from analysis if expressed in fewer
   than 50 cells. For integrated UMAP plots, scVI was used to integrate cells from multiple
    single-cell experiments29. Scanpy57 was used for processing and plotting post-filtered nuclear
    transcriptomes. For co-expression analysis and gene-gene correlation calculations,
   scVI-normalized transcriptomes were clustered into by leiden clustering 57 of the, and then raw
   reads from each cluster were pooled to yield pseudo-bulk transcriptomes. These pseudobulk
    transcriptomes were used to calculate gene-gene correlations. For module analysis, raw reads
   were analyzed by consensus non-negative matrix factorization to yield gene modules and their
   usage across cells.30

   Bulk RNA-seq analysis
  Raw fastq files for six previous studies18,58–62 were downloaded from NCBI, cleaned with
    trimmomatic63 and aligned to the T. chinensis genome18 (STARmap64). Gene-gene correlation
   was conducted with numpy. Mutual rank (mr), used to calculate the gene linkage maps (Fig. 1d)
     is defined as:
                                        𝑚𝑟𝑖𝑗 =  𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖𝑗* 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑗𝑖
   Where rankij indicates the Pearson correlation rank of gene i to gene j.

   Cloning of Taxus genes
   The cloning of cytosolic diterpenoid boost genes (tHMGR and GGPPS), cytosolic TDS1 and
   TDS2, T5αH, TAT, T10βΗ, DBAT, T13αΗ, and TAX19 genes are described in previous
    studies.14,65 Candidate genes are amplified from T. media gDNA or cDNA (generated with
    SuperScript IV, ThermoFischer) via PCR (PrimeStar, Takara Bio #R045B, primers in Table S9),
   and the PCR products were ligated with AgeI- and XhoI- (New England BioLabs) linearized
   pEAQ-HT vector66 using HiFi DNA assembly mix (New England BioLabs). Gene annotations
   used for cloning were taken from the T. chinensis genome18 by default, but were
   BLAST-searched against the T. media genome (NCBI PRJNA1136025) to determine if
    alternative gene models were available. Constructs were transformed into 10-beta competent E.
    coli cells (New England BioLabs). Plasmid DNA was isolated using the QIAprep Spin Miniprep
    Kit (Qiagen) and sequence verified by whole-plasmid sequencing (Plasmidsaurus).

   Transient expression of Taxus genes in N. benthamiana via Agrobacterium-mediated
    infiltration
   pEAQ-HT plasmids containing the Taxus gene were transformed into Agrobacterium
   tumefaciens (strain GV3101) cells using the freeze-thaw method. Transformed cells were grown
   on bacteria screening medium 523-agar plates containing kanamycin and gentamicin (50 and
   30 μg/mL, respectively; same for the 523 media below), at 30 °C for 2 days. Single colonies
   were then picked and grew overnight at 30 °C in 523-Kan/Gen liquid media. The overnight
    cultures were used to make DMSO stocks (7% DMSO) for long-term storage in the −80 °C
    fridge. For routine N. benthamiana infiltration experiments, individual Agrobacterium DMSO
    stocks were streaked out on 523-agar containing kanamycin and gentamicin and grew for 1~2
   days at 30 °C. Patches of cells were scraped off from individual plates using 10 μL inoculation


[PDF physical page 24]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



   loops and resuspended in 1~2 mL of Agrobacterium induction buffer (10 mM MES pH 5.6,
   10 mM MgCl2 and 150 μM acetosyringone; Acros Organics) in individual 2 mL safe-lock tubes
    (Eppendorf). The suspensions were briefly vortexed to homogeneity and incubated at room
   temperature for 2 h. OD600 of the individual Agrobacterium suspensions were measured, and
    the final infiltration solution where OD600 = 0.2 for each strain (except for TDS, T7AT, and T7dA,
   whose OD600 were 0.6, 0.4, and 0.1, respectively) was prepared by mixing individual strains
   and diluting with the induction buffer. Leaves of 4-week old N. benthamiana were infiltrated
   using needleless 1 mL syringes from the abaxial side. Each experiment was tested on leaf-6, 7,
   and 8 (numbered by counting from the bottom) of the same N. benthamiana plant as three
    biological replicates.
   For the reconstitution of pathways that involve TBT, the following modifications were made to
    the procedure above to increase production of the desired benzoylated products: N.
   benthamiana plants were watered with 2 mM benzoic acid in water (buffered to pH 5.6) a day
    prior to Agrobacterium infiltration, 1 mM benzoic acid was added to the induction buffer and pH
    adjusted to 5.6 before being used for the resuspension of Agrobacterium and preparation of the
     final infiltration solution.


   Metabolite extraction of N. benthamiana leaves

   N. benthamiana leaf tissue 5-days post Agrobacterium infiltration was collected using a leaf disc
    cutter 1 cm in diameter and placed inside a 2 mL safe-lock tube (Eppendorf). Each biological
    replicate consisted of 4 leaf discs from the same leaf (approximately 40 mg fresh weight). The
    leaf discs were flash-frozen and lyophilized overnight. Analysis of the more hydrophobic
    metabolites, e.g. compound 1~6, are done by GCMS while analysis of the more hydrophilic
    metabolites, e.g. 4~18, are done by LCMS. To extract metabolites, ethyl acetate (ACS reagent
    grade; J.T. Baker) or 75% acetonitrile (HPLC grade; Fischer Chemical) in water 500 μL was
   added to each sample along with one 5 mm stainless steel bead for GCMS or LCMS analysis,
    respectively. The samples were homogenized in a ball mill (Retsch MM 400) at 25 Hz for 2 min.
    After homogenization, the samples were centrifuged at 18,200 × g for 10 min. For GCMS
   samples, the supernatants were transferred to 50 μL glass inserts placed in 2 mL vials and
    subjected to GCMS instrument. For LCMS samples, the supernatants were filtered using 96-well
    hydrophilic PTFE filters with 0.45 μm pore size (Millipore) and subjected to LCMS instrument.


  GCMS analysis
  GCMS samples were analyzed using an Agilent 7820 A gas chromatography system coupled to
   an Agilent 5977B single quadrupole mass spectrometer. Data were collected with Agilent
   Enhanced MassHunter and analyzed by MassHunter Qualitative Analysis B.07.00. Separation
   was carried out using an Agilent VF-5HT column (30 m × 0.25 mm × 0.1 μm) with a constant flow
    rate of 1 ml/min of helium. The inlet was set at 280 °C in split mode with a 10:1 split ratio. The
    injection volume was 1 μl. Oven conditions were as follows: start and hold at 130 °C for 2 min,
   ramp to 250 °C at 8 °C/min, ramp to 310 °C at 10 °C/min and hold at 310 °C for 5 min. Post-run
    condition was set to 320 °C for 3 min. MS data were collected with a mass range 50–550 m/z
   and a scan speed of 1562 u/s after a 4-min solvent delay. The MSD transfer line was set to
    250 °C, the MS source was set to 230 °C and the MS Quad was set to 150 °C.


[PDF physical page 25]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.





  LCMS analysis
  LCMS samples were analyzed on either or both of our two instruments: (1) an Agilent 1260
  HPLC system coupled to an Agilent 6520 Q-TOF mass spectrometer or (2) and Agilent 1290
  HPLC system coupled to an Agilent 6546 Q-TOF mass spectrometer. Typically, the 6520 system
   shows better sensitivity for the more hydrophobic metabolites, e.g. 4~6, while the 6546 system
   works better for the more hydrophilic, highly modified taxanes. Data were collected with Agilent
   MassHunter Workstation Data Acquisition and analyzed by MassHunter Qualitative Analysis
    10.0. Separation was carried out using a Gemini 5 μm NX-C18 110 Å column (2 × 100 mm;
   Phenomenex) with a mixture of 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in
    acetonitrile (B) at a constant flow rate of 400 μL/min at room temperature. The injection volume
   was 2 μl or 1 uL for the 6520 or 6546 system, respectively. The following gradient of solvent B
   was used: 3% 0–1 min, 3%–50% 1–2 min, 50%–97% 2–12 min, 97% 12–14 min, 97%–3%
   14–14.5 min and 3% 14.5–21 min (6520 system) and 3% 0–1 min, 3%–50% 1–5 min, 50%–97%
   5–10 min, 97% 10–12 min, 97%–3% 12–12.5 min and 3% 12.5–15 min (6546 system). MS data
   were collected using electrospray ionization (ESI) on positive mode with a mass range
   50–1200 m/z and a rate of 1 spectrum/s (6520 system) or Dual AJS ESI on positive mode with a
   mass range 100-1700 m/z and a rate of 1 spectrum/s (6546 system). The ionization source was
    set as follows: 325 °C gas temperature, 10 L/min drying gas, 35 psi nebulizer, 3500 V VCap,
   150 V fragmentor, 65 V skimmer, and 750 V octupole 1 RF Vpp (6520 system) or 325 °C gas
    temperature, 10 L/min drying gas, 20 psi nebulizer, 3500 V VCap, 150 V fragmentor, 65 V
   skimmer, and 750 V octupole 1 RF Vpp (6546 system).

   Quantification of baccatin III (16)
   Samples in Fig. 6c was analyzed by an Agilent 1290 HPLC system coupled to an Agilent 6470
     triple quadrupole (QQQ) mass spectrometer to accurately quantify the concentration of baccatin
      III. Data were collected with Agilent MassHunter Workstation Data Acquisition and analyzed by
   MassHunter Quantitative Analysis 10.1. Separation was carried out using a ZORBAX RRHD
    Eclipse Plus C18 Column (2.1 x 50 mm, 1.8 µm; Agilent) with a mixture of 0.1% formic acid in
   water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B) at a constant flow rate of 600 μL/min at 30°C.
   The injection volume was 0.5 μL. The following gradient of solvent B was used: 30% 0–1 min,
   30%–100% 1–5 min, 100% 5–6.5 min, 100%–30% 6.5–7 min and 30% 7–8 min. MS data were
    collected using AJS ESI on positive mode. Multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) scan was used to
   monitor 609.2 to 549.2 ion transition at 24 eV collision energy as quantifier and 609.2 to 427.1
    ion transition at 32 eV collision energy as qualifier. The ionization source was set as follows:
   250 °C gas temperature, 12 L/min drying gas, 25 psi nebulizer, 300 °C sheath gas temperature,
   12 L/min sheath gas flow, 3500 V VCap, 0 V nozzle voltage.

   Extraction and purification of taxanes from N. benthamiana
   N. benthamiana plants were infiltrated with combinations of biosynthetic genes indicated in
   Table S8 for the purification of taxusin (6), taxusin (6’), 1β-hydroxytaxusin (6-O1), and
   15-hydroxy-11(15→1)abeo-taxusin (6-O2). Lyophilied N. benthamiana materials were cut into
    small pieces and extracted with 1 L ethyl acetate (ACS reagent grade; J.T. Baker) in a 2 L flask
    for 48 h at room temperature with constant stirring. Extracts were filtered using vacuum filtration


[PDF physical page 26]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



   and dried using rotary evaporation. Two rounds of chromatography were used to isolate
   compounds of interest. Chromatography conditions for each compound are summarized in
   Table S8. In short, the first chromatography was performed using a 7-cm-diameter column
   loaded with P60 silica gel (SiliCycle) and using hexane (HPLC grade; VWR) and ethyl acetate
   as the mobile phases. The second chromatography was carried out on an automated Biotage
    Selekt system with a Biotage Sfar C18 Duo 6 g column using Milli-Q water and acetonitrile as
    the mobile phases. Fractions were analyzed by LCMS to identify those containing the
   compound of interest. Desired fractions were pooled and dried using rotary evaporation (first
   round) or lyophilization (second round). Purified products were analyzed by NMR.

  NMR analysis of purified compound
   CDCl3 (Acros Organics) was used as the solvent for all NMR samples. 1H, 13C, and 2D-NMR
    spectra were acquired on a Varian Inova 600 MHz spectrometer at room temperature using
  VNMRJ 4.2, and the data were processed and visualized on MestReNova v14.3.1-31739.
   Chemical shifts were reported in ppm downfield from Me4Si by using the residual solvent
   (CDCl3) peak as an internal standard (7.26 ppm for 1H and 77.16 ppm for 13C chemical shift).
   Spectra were analyzed and processed using MestReNova version 14.3.1-31739.

   Taxane feeding experiments
   Taxus genes were expressed in N. benthamiana leaves using the Agrobacterium-mediated
     infiltration method described above. At 3-days post Agrobacterium infiltration, taxanes [purified
   3O2A (4), taxusin (6), 10-deacetylbaccatin III, or 9-dihydro-13-acetylbaccatin III (13); unless
    otherwise specified, 100 uM solution after diluting 10 mM DMSO stock was used] were fed into
    the leaves. Approximate 150 μL solution was used per leaf to yield a circle with a diameter
   around 3 cm, which was marked for reference. After 18–24 h, four leaf discs were harvested
    within the marked area with a 1-cm diameter cutter and LCMS samples were prepared following
    the aforementioned methods.

   Construction of phylogenetic tree
   Sequences from Taxus chinensis genome were selected based on PFAM to identify 672 P450s
   (PF00067), 218 2-ODDs (PF03171), and 195 acyltransferases (PF02458). P450s are further
    filtered to those longer than 300 aa (467 P450s). Multiple sequence alignment for each family
   was performed using Clustal Omega, and the phylogenetic trees were constructed using the
    neighbor-joining method in Geneious Prime (v2024.0.4) with 100 bootstrap replicates for initial
    analysis. Arabidposis thaliana cinnamate 4-hydroxylase (AtC4H, accession NP_180607.1),
    Arabidposis thaliana gibberellin 20-oxidase1 (AtGA20ox1, accession NP_194272.1), and
   Hordeum vulgare agmatine coumaroyltransferase (HvACT, accession AAO73071.1) are used as
   outgroup for the P450, 2-ODD, and acyltransferase family, respectively. All analyses were
   conducted with default settings unless otherwise specified. Representative genes from major
   clades of the initial analyses and the Taxol biosynthetic genes were then selected to construct
    the final phylogenetic trees (Fig. 6e) using the neighbor-joining method with 1,000 bootstrap
    replicates.

    Purification of proteins and binding assays


[PDF physical page 27]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



     All proteins were purified from standard pET28a vectors expressed in BL21DE3 cells (NEB,
   C2527H). FoTO1 and FoTO1∆Cterm were purified as C terminal fusions:
   His6-3xFLAG-TEV-mTurq2-GSG-FoTO1. T5αH and TDS were purified with N-terminal
    purification tags(His6-3xFLAG-TEV-enzyme) with N-terminal signal peptides removed (T5αH:
   47aa removed, TDS2: 60aa removed). Proteins were purified as previously described67, with
    post-lysis steps conducted at 4°C. Briefly, 1 L of cells were grown to OD600 of 0.4-0.5, induced
    with 0.3 mM IPTG and expressed for 16hr overnight at 18°C. Cell pellets were lysed in lysis
    buffer (1mg/mL lysozyme, HALT protease cocktail (Thermo Scientific), 1 μL/mL NEB DNAse I)
   by sonication, clarified by centrifugation for 1hr at 8000g. Proteins were purified on
    pre-equilibrated Ni-NTA beads (NEB) and exchanged into a protein storage buffer (10 mM
   HEPES-KOH pH 8.0, 50 mM KCL, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA). Purified proteins
   were quantified by Bradford assay, and SDS-PAGE gels were used to verify protein size and
    correct protein concentration.
   For each multiscale thermophoresis (MST) experiment, one protein was first labeled with
   Nanotemper His-tag labeling kit (RED-tris-NTA v2, # MO-L018) for 30 minutes at room
   temperature according to reagent protocols. MST experiments were performed in PBS with 0.05
  % Tween-20 with labeled query protein (T5αH or TDS labeled) at 100 nM and a titration series
    of target protein.

   Co-Immunoprecipitation
    Nicotiana benthiana leaves were harvested four days post-infiltration. Leaf tissue was
   homogenized in liquid nitrogen and resuspended in extraction buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150
  mM NaCl, 0.6% NP-40, 0.6% CHAPS, 1 mM β-mercaptoethanol [citation below]). Lysates were
    kept on ice and centrifuged at 20,000g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The protein content of the
    clarified extract was determined via Bradford Assay (Abcam #119216). 10 uL of protein G
   coated magnetic beads (Invitrogen #10003d) were washed twice in binding buffer (50 mM
   Na2HPO4, 25 mM citric acid, pH 5.0) prior to an hour long room temperature incubation under
    agitation with 1 uL antibody. Lysates were incubated with the indicated compounds for 15
   minutes under agitation. Antibody-bound beads were then washed twice in extraction buffer and
   incubated for 15 minutes under agitation at room temperature with lysate corresponding to 100
   ug of total protein content. Following incubation, bead complexes were washed three times in
    extraction buffer and mixed with LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen #NP0007) for subsequent
    analysis by immunoblotting.



   Immunoblotting
   Lysates were separated for 1.5 hours at 80 V on a NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen #NP0321) prior to
    transfer onto a PVDF membrane using a BioRad Trans-Blot Turbo system (BioRad #1704150).
   Immunoblots were incubated with indicated antibodies for three hours at room temperature
   under agitation. Blots were subsequently washed and incubated with HRP-Protein G (Genscript
   #M00090) for one hour, then imaged on the iBright FL1500 Imaging System (Invitrogen
   #a44241). Extraction buffer was adapted from previously published procedure68.


[PDF physical page 28]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



   References

    1.  Newman, D. J. & Cragg, G. M. Natural products as sources of new drugs from 1981 to

       2014. J. Nat. Prod. 79, 629–661 (2016).

    2.  Weng, J.-K., Philippe, R. N. & Noel, J. P. The rise of chemodiversity in plants. Science 336,

       1667–1670 (2012).

    3.   Schiff, P. B. & Horwitz, S. B. Taxol stabilizes microtubules in mouse fibroblast cells. Proc.

         Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 77, 1561–1565 (1980).

    4.  Lange, B. M. & Conner, C. F. Taxanes and taxoids of the genus Taxus - A comprehensive

        inventory of chemical diversity. Phytochemistry 190, 112829 (2021).

    5.  Howat, S. et al. Paclitaxel: biosynthesis, production and future prospects. N. Biotechnol. 31,

       242–245 (2014).

    6.  Min, L. et al. Strategies and lessons learned from total synthesis of Taxol. Chem. Rev. 123,

       4934–4971 (2023).

    7.   Li, C. et al. A Cytochrome P450 Enzyme Catalyses Oxetane Ring Formation in Paclitaxel

        Biosynthesis. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed Engl. 63, e202407070 (2024).

    8.   Jiang, B. et al. Characterization and heterologous reconstitution of biosynthetic enzymes

        leading to baccatin III. Science 383, 622–629 (2024).

    9.  Yang, C. et al. Biosynthesis of the highly oxygenated tetracyclic core skeleton of Taxol. Nat.

      Commun. 15, 2339 (2024).

    10. Zhang, Y. et al. Synthetic biology identifies the minimal gene set required for paclitaxel

        biosynthesis in a plant chassis. Mol. Plant 16, 1951–1961 (2023).

    11. Zhao, Y. et al. Oxetane Ring Formation in Taxol Biosynthesis Is Catalyzed by a Bifunctional

       Cytochrome P450 Enzyme. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 146, 801–810 (2024).

    12. Mutanda, I., Li, J., Xu, F. & Wang, Y. Recent advances in metabolic engineering, protein

        engineering, and transcriptome-guided insights toward synthetic production of Taxol. Front.

        Bioeng. Biotechnol. 9, 632269 (2021).


[PDF physical page 29]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



    13. Biggs, B. W. et al. Overcoming heterologous protein interdependency to optimize

       P450-mediated Taxol precursor synthesis in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.

        113, 3209–3214 (2016).

    14. Liu, J. C.-T., De La Peña, R., Tocol, C. & Sattely, E. S. Reconstitution of early paclitaxel

        biosynthetic network. Nat. Commun. 15, 1419 (2024).

    15. Ajikumar, P. K. et al. Isoprenoid pathway optimization for Taxol precursor overproduction in

        Escherichia coli. Science 330, 70–74 (2010).

    16. Edgar, S. et al. Mechanistic Insights into Taxadiene Epoxidation by

        Taxadiene-5α-Hydroxylase. ACS Chem. Biol. 11, 460–469 (2016).

    17. Wang, Y.-F. et al. Natural taxanes: developments since 1828. Chem. Rev. 111, 7652–7709

        (2011).

    18. Xiong, X. et al. The Taxus genome provides insights into paclitaxel biosynthesis. Nat Plants

         7, 1026–1036 (2021).

    19. Caputi, L. et al. Missing enzymes in the biosynthesis of the anticancer drug vinblastine in

       Madagascar periwinkle. Science 360, 1235–1239 (2018).

    20. Nett, R. S., Lau, W. & Sattely, E. S. Discovery and engineering of colchicine alkaloid

        biosynthesis. Nature 584, 148–153 (2020).

    21. Ramírez-Estrada, K. et al. Transcript profiling of jasmonate-elicited Taxus cells reveals a

       β-phenylalanine-CoA ligase. Plant Biotechnol. J. 14, 85–96 (2016).

    22. Yew Genomics Resource. http://langelabtools.wsu.edu/ygr/.

    23.  Thibivilliers, S., Anderson, D. & Libault, M. Isolation of Plant Root Nuclei for Single Cell

     RNA Sequencing. Current Protocols in Plant Biology 5, e20120 (2020).

    24. Jeon, J. E. et al. A Pathogen-Responsive Gene Cluster for Highly Modified Fatty Acids in

       Tomato. Cell 180, 176–187.e19 (2020).

    25. Mehta, N., Meng, Y., Zare, R., Kamenetsky-Goldstein, R. & Sattely, E. A developmental

        gradient reveals biosynthetic pathways to eukaryotic toxins in monocot geophytes. bioRxiv


[PDF physical page 30]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



        (2023) doi:10.1101/2023.05.12.540595.

    26.  Dixit, A. et al. Perturb-Seq: Dissecting Molecular Circuits with Scalable Single-Cell RNA

         Profiling of Pooled Genetic Screens. Cell 167, 1853–1866.e17 (2016).

    27. Joung, J. et al. A transcription factor atlas of directed differentiation. Cell 186, 209–229.e26

        (2023).

    28. Srivatsan, S. R. et al. Massively multiplex chemical transcriptomics at single-cell resolution.

       Science 367, 45–51 (2020).

    29. Lopez, R., Regier, J., Cole, M. B., Jordan, M. I. & Yosef, N. Deep generative modeling for

         single-cell transcriptomics. Nat. Methods 15, 1053–1058 (2018).

    30.  Kotliar, D. et al. Identifying gene expression programs of cell-type identity and cellular

          activity with single-cell RNA-Seq. Elife 8, (2019).

    31. Celedon, J. M. & Bohlmann, J. Oleoresin defenses in conifers: chemical diversity, terpene

       synthases and limitations of oleoresin defense under climate change. New Phytol. 224,

       1444–1463 (2019).

    32. Hefner, J. et al. Cytochrome P450-catalyzed hydroxylation of taxa-4(5),11(12)-diene to

        taxa-4(20),11(12)-dien-5alpha-ol: the first oxygenation step in taxol biosynthesis. Chem.

         Biol. 3, 479–489 (1996).

    33. Mori, T. et al. Molecular basis for the unusual ring reconstruction in fungal meroterpenoid

        biogenesis. Nat. Chem. Biol. 13, 1066–1073 (2017).

    34. Cao, F. et al. Coordination of polyketide release and multiple detoxification pathways for

         tolerable production of fungal mycotoxins. Angew. Chem. Weinheim Bergstr. Ger. 135,

        (2023).

    35. Zhao, Q., Leung, S., Corbett, A. H. & Meier, I. Identification and characterization of the

        Arabidopsis orthologs of nuclear transport factor 2, the nuclear import factor of ran. Plant

        Physiol. 140, 869–878 (2006).

    36. Block, M. A. & Jouhet, J. Lipid trafficking at endoplasmic reticulum-chloroplast membrane


[PDF physical page 31]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



        contact sites. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 35, 21–29 (2015).

    37. Hedden, P. The Current Status of Research on Gibberellin Biosynthesis. Plant Cell Physiol.

        61, 1832–1849 (2020).

    38. Chau, M., Walker, K., Long, R. & Croteau, R. Regioselectivity of

        taxoid-O-acetyltransferases: heterologous expression and characterization of a new

        taxadien-5alpha-ol-O-acetyltransferase. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 430, 237–246 (2004).

    39. Chau, M., Jennewein, S., Walker, K. & Croteau, R. Taxol biosynthesis: Molecular cloning

       and characterization of a cytochrome P450 taxoid 7 beta-hydroxylase. Chem. Biol. 11,

       663–672 (2004).

    40. Chau, M. & Croteau, R. Molecular cloning and characterization of a cytochrome P450

        taxoid 2alpha-hydroxylase involved in Taxol biosynthesis. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 427,

       48–57 (2004).

    41. Walker, K. & Croteau, R. Taxol biosynthesis: molecular cloning of a benzoyl-CoA:taxane

        2alpha-O-benzoyltransferase cDNA from taxus and functional expression in Escherichia

          coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97, 13591–13596 (2000).

    42.  Al-Hilfi, A., Li, Z., Merz, K. M., Nawarathne, I. N. & Walker, K. D. Biocatalytic and

        Regioselective Exchange of 2-O-Benzoyl for 2-O-(m-Substituted)Benzoyl Groups to Make

        Precursors of Next-Generation Paclitaxel Drugs. ChemCatChem 16, e202400186 (2024).

    43. Hodgson, H. et al. Plants utilize a protection/deprotection strategy in limonoid biosynthesis:

     A ‘missing link’ carboxylesterase boosts yields and provides insights into furan formation. J.

      Am. Chem. Soc. 146, 29305–29310 (2024).

    44. Walker, K., Long, R. & Croteau, R. The final acylation step in taxol biosynthesis: cloning of

        the taxoid C13-side-chain N-benzoyltransferase from Taxus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.

        99, 9166–9171 (2002).

    45. Srividya, N. et al. Biochemical characterization of acyl activating enzymes for side chain

        moieties of Taxol and its analogs. J. Biol. Chem. 295, 4963–4973 (2020).


[PDF physical page 32]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



    46. Sanchez-Muñoz, R. et al. A Novel Hydroxylation Step in the Taxane Biosynthetic Pathway:

     A New Approach to Paclitaxel Production by Synthetic Biology. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 8,

       410 (2020).

    47. Nevarez, D. M., Mengistu, Y. A., Nawarathne, I. N. & Walker, K. D. An N-aroyltransferase of

        the BAHD superfamily has broad aroyl CoA specificity in vitro with analogues of

        N-dearoylpaclitaxel. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131, 5994–6002 (2009).

    48. Wheeler, A. L. et al. Taxol biosynthesis: differential transformations of taxadien-5 alpha-ol

       and its acetate ester by cytochrome P450 hydroxylases from Taxus suspension cells. Arch

       Biochem Biophys 390, 265–278 (2001).

    49. Boccia, M. et al. A scaffold protein manages the biosynthesis of steroidal defense

        metabolites in plants. Science eado3409 (2024).

    50. Kennedy, D. et al. Characterization of G3BPs: tissue specific expression, chromosomal

         localisation and rasGAP(120) binding studies. J. Cell. Biochem. 84, 173–187 (2001).

    51. Reuper, H., Amari, K. & Krenz, B. Analyzing the G3BP-like gene family of Arabidopsis

        thaliana in early turnip mosaic virus infection. Sci. Rep. 11, 2187 (2021).

    52. Ha, N. C., Choi, G., Choi, K. Y. & Oh, B. H. Structure and enzymology of

        Delta5-3-ketosteroid isomerase. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 11, 674–678 (2001).

    53. Yeh, A. H.-W. et al. De novo design of luciferases using deep learning. Nature 614,

       774–780 (2023).

    54. Kaminow, B., Yunusov, D. & Dobin, A. STARsolo: accurate, fast and versatile

        mapping/quantification of single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-seq data. bioRxiv (2021)

        doi:10.1101/2021.05.05.442755.

    55. Fleming, S. J. et al. Unsupervised removal of systematic background noise from

        droplet-based single-cell experiments using CellBender. Nat. Methods 20, 1323–1335

        (2023).

    56. Gayoso, A. & Shor, J. JonathanShor/DoubletDetection: Doubletdetection v4.2. (Zenodo,


[PDF physical page 33]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



        2022). doi:10.5281/ZENODO.2678041.

    57. Wolf, F. A., Angerer, P. & Theis, F. J. SCANPY: large-scale single-cell gene expression data

        analysis. Genome Biol. 19, (2018).

    58. Kuang, X., Sun, S., Wei, J., Li, Y. & Sun, C. Iso-Seq analysis of the Taxus cuspidata

        transcriptome reveals the complexity of Taxol biosynthesis. BMC Plant Biol. 19, 210 (2019).

    59. Yu, C. et al. Role of female-predominant MYB39-bHLH13 complex in sexually dimorphic

       accumulation of taxol in. Hortic Res 9, uhac062 (2022).

    60. Olsson, S. et al. De novo assembly of English yew (Taxus baccata) transcriptome and its

        applications for intra- and inter-specific analyses. Plant Mol. Biol. 97, 337–345 (2018).

    61. Mubeen, S., Li, Z.-L., Huang, Q.-M., He, C.-T. & Yang, Z.-Y. Comparative transcriptome

        analysis revealed the tissue-specific accumulations of taxanes among three experimental

         lines of Taxus yunnanensis. J. Agric. Food Chem. 66, 10410–10420 (2018).

    62. Zhou, T. et al. Transcriptome analyses provide insights into the expression pattern and

       sequence similarity of several taxol biosynthesis-related genes in three Taxus species.

     BMC Plant Biol. 19, 33 (2019).

    63. Bolger, A. M., Lohse, M. & Usadel, B. Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence

        data. Bioinformatics 30, 2114–2120 (2014).

    64. Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21 (2013).

    65. De La Peña, R. & Sattely, E. S. Rerouting plant terpene biosynthesis enables momilactone

       pathway elucidation. Nat Chem Biol 17, 205–212 (2021).

    66. Sainsbury, F., Thuenemann, E. C. & Lomonossoff, G. P. pEAQ: versatile expression vectors

         for easy and quick transient expression of heterologous proteins in plants. Plant Biotechnol

       J 7, 682–693 (2009).

    67. Skerker, J. M., Prasol, M. S., Perchuk, B. S., Biondi, E. G. & Laub, M. T. Two-component

        signal transduction pathways regulating growth and cell cycle progression in a bacterium: a

        system-level analysis. PLoS Biol. 3, e334 (2005).


[PDF physical page 34]
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.06.622305; this version posted November 16, 2024. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
                                          available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.



    68. Burbulis, I. E. & Winkel-Shirley, B. Interactions among enzymes of the Arabidopsis

        flavonoid biosynthetic pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 96, 12929–12934 (1999).