
[PDF physical page 1]
                          DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201900352        Full Papers


Characterization of an Orphan Type III Polyketide Synthase
Conserved in Uncultivated “Entotheonella” Sponge
Symbionts

Silke Reiter,[a, b] Jackson K. B. Cahn,[a] Vincent Wiebach,[a] Reiko Ueoka,[a] and Jçrn Piel*[a]



Uncultivated bacterial symbionts from the candidate genus    theonella” PKS (cep) cluster encodes the type III PKS CepA and
“Entotheonella” have been shown to produce diverse natural   the putative methyltransferase CepB. Herein, the characteriza-
products previously attributed to their sponge hosts. In addi-    tion of CepA as an enzyme involved in phenolic lipid biosyn-
tion to these known compounds, “Entotheonella” genomes    thesis is reported. In vitro analysis showed a specificity for alkyl
contain rich sets of biosynthetic gene clusters that lack identi-    starter substrates and the production of  tri- and tetraketide
fied natural products. Among these  is a small type III poly-   pyrones and tetraketide resorcinols. The conserved distribution
ketide synthase (PKS) cluster, one of only three clusters present    of the cep cluster suggests an important role for the phenolic
in all known “Entotheonella” genomes. This conserved “Ento-    lipid polyketides produced in “Entotheonella” variants.


Introduction


Type III polyketide synthases (PKSs) generate a wide range of    ther modify the polyketides during or after chain elongation.
cyclic compounds, including chalcones, stilbenes, flavonoids,   Type III PKSs combine all basic PKS enzymatic functionalities in
a-pyrones, and resorcinols.[1] Originally thought to be limited   a single catalytic center of a small homodimeric 40–47 kDa
to plants, diverse type III PKSs from bacteria have been report-   enzyme. They do not necessarily require an acyl carrier protein
ed over the last two decades.[1a,2] Their biosynthetic products    (ACP), but can incorporate units  directly from CoA, unlike
have a multitude of important functions, for example in pro-   other known PKS types.
viding precursors for antibiotics, such as in vancomycin biosyn-     We, and  collaborators, have  recently  identified  bacterial
thesis,[3] as alternative electron acceptors in mycobacterial res-   sponge symbionts of the candidate genus “Entotheonella” as
piration,[4] or in conferring antibiotic resistance.[5] Polyketides    rich producers of bioactive metabolites.[7] These unusual  fila-
are assembled from simple acyl coenzyme A (CoA) building   mentous bacteria belong to the proposed candidate phylum
blocks in repeated rounds of decarboxylative Claisen-like con-    “Tectomicrobia”,  which  exclusively  comprises  uncultivated
densations. For type III PKS products, structural diversity is de-   members, and represent the  first chemically  rich producer
fined by the choice of starter (e.g., acetyl, cinnamoyl, or fatty   taxon from microbial dark matter. Marine sponges and their
acyl) and extender units (most commonly malonyl or methyl-    bacterial communities are in the focus of research as a drug-
malonyl), as well as by different cyclization modes through    discovery resource and ancient models  for animal–bacteria
Claisen condensation, aldol condensation, or lactonization.[1a,2,6]    symbioses.[7a] For the sponge chemotype Theonella swinhoei Y,
In addition to these PKS-catalyzed reactions, auxiliary enzymes,   a variant with a yellow interior, we traced almost  all of  its
such as methyltransferases (MTs) or oxidoreductases, can fur-   many bioactive natural products to the producer “Candidatus
                                                               Entotheonella factor” and its close relative “Ca. Entotheonella
                                                         gemina” (Table 1).[7b,c] In contrast, the symbiont “Ca. Entotheo-
[a] Dr. S. Reiter, Dr. J. K. B. Cahn, V. Wiebach, Dr. R. Ueoka, Prof. Dr. J. Piel
                                                                        nella serta” is a source of natural products in chemically dis-   Department of Microbiology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
    Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 4, 8093 Zerich (Switzerland)
    E-mail: jpiel@ethz.ch
                                                                            Table 1. Sponges and their “Entotheonella” symbionts.
[b] Dr. S. Reiter
     Institute for Insect Biotechnology, Justus Liebig University Giessen                                                                  Sponge     Collection “Entotheonella”  Known natural products
    Heinrich-Buff-Ring 26–32, 35392 Giessen (Germany)                                                                                                phylotype
    Supporting information and the ORCID identification numbers for the
                                                                                                                     T. swinhoei  Japan       “E. factor”,        polytheonamides, onnamides,    authors of this article can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/
                                                                 Y                            “E. gemina”       theopederins, orbiculamides,    cbic.201900352.
                                                                                                                    cyclotheonamides, pseudo-
  T 2019 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.
                                                                                                                theonamides, nazumamide A
    This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons At-
                                                                                                                     T. swinhoei  Japan       “E. serta” TSWA1  misakinolides, theonellamides
    tribution Non-Commercial License, which permits use, distribution and re-
                                                 WA
    production in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and
                                                                                                                     T. swinhoei   Israel        “E. serta” TSWB1,  swinholides, theonellamides
     is not used for commercial purposes.
                                                   WB                    “Entotheonella”
    This article is part of a Special Issue on Microbial Biosynthesis and Inter-                      TSWB2
    actions. To view the complete issue, visit our homepage


ChemBioChem 2020, 21, 564 – 571                               564   T 2019 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


[PDF physical page 2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14397633,                                                                Full Papers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2020,
                                                                                                                                             4,
tinct sponges T. swinhoei WA and WB (white interior).[7b–d,8] It is   nomic sequence data of the Israeli WB chemotype.[7c] Single-
likely that many natural products of “Entotheonella” are in-   copy phylogenetic markers suggested that this sponge con-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Downloaded
volved in host defense, which  is a role often suspected or    tained an “E. serta” variant, denoted TSWB1, with about 99%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          from
shown for toxic compounds of sessile invertebrates.[8–10]           nucleotide identity to “E. serta” TSWA1, and an additional new
  The “Entotheonella” genomes known to date contain large    “Entotheonella” phylotype that is herein provisionally referred
sets  of orphan  biosynthetic gene  clusters (BGCs)  that are    to as “Entotheonella” TSWB2 (Table S1). However, the function-
mostly unique to one particular “Entotheonella” variant and    ally identical read coverage and nucleotide frequencies of the
lack  characterized  products.[7b–d,8d]  Herein, we examine the   two “Entotheonella” phylotypes prevented separation of these
BGCs that are conserved among “Entotheonella” and might   genomes by binning methods. The cep clusters were identified
contribute functions of broader importance to these poorly   by performing tblastn searches on the assembled contigs of
understood symbionts.[3–5,11] Of the three identified BGC fami-   the binned two-genome dataset; the putative Cep cluster of
lies, we focus on functional analyses of the conserved “Ento-    “E. serta” TSWB1 has >99% nucleotide identity to  “E. serta”
theonella” PKS (cep) cluster; this  is a type III PKS system of   TSWA1, whereas that of “Entotheonella” TSWB2 has 78–79%
which we have identified five orthologous versions. In vitro    identity (Table S2).
enzyme characterization suggests that the products of  this       All five cep BGCs form 1.8 kb operons that contain the PKS-
cluster are quinones with long-chain fatty acyl starter moieties,  MT gene pair, but are otherwise located in different genomic
which are reminiscent of mycobacterial redox cofactors.[4]        environments (Figure 2).[7b] The cepA and cepB genes are either                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cbic.201900352,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Wiley
Results and Discussion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Online
The    cep cluster
                    is one of only three conserved “Entotheonel-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Libraryla” BGCs          in T. swinhoei
                                                                                                                                             on
In our dataset on T. swinhoei Y, we detected only three gene
clusters that were shared among its symbionts “E. factor” and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [30/10/2025].close relative “E. gemina” (Figure 1).[7b] One was the cep BGC
                                                                          Figure 2. Schematic depiction of cep clusters and surrounding genomic re-              See
                                                                            gions in different “Entotheonella” variants. Gray arrows indicate cepA type III             the
                                                                  PKS genes and cepB MT genes; white arrows indicate putative non-PKS                                Terms
                                                                          genes; black centered lines represent genome sequence that are 3 kb up-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and
                                                                 and downstream, if available. Accession numbers: “E. serta” TSWA1
                                                                      LC043436; “E. serta” TSWB1 MG844359; “E. factor” KI931731; “E. gemina”                                                                           KI929875; “Entotheonella” TSWB2 MK988560.                                                                                                                                                                              Conditions


                                                              separated by one base pair (“E. serta” TSWA1, “E. serta” TSWB1)
                                                                 or overlap by 8 bp  (“E. factor”,  “E. gemina”, “Entotheonella”
                                                           TSWB2). Amino acid and nucleotide sequence identities were
Figure 1. Gene clusters and gene cluster fragments present in the genomes   >73% between  all PKS and MT homologues,  respectively
of E. factor (blue) and E. gemina (yellow); thus suggesting minimal chemical     (Table S2), strongly suggesting that the five cep clusters are
overlap (green). Gene clusters were detected by using antiSMASH v4 and
                                                                orthologous. Their presence in  all examined “Entotheonella”
confirmed by manual inspection. In some cases, a shared cluster was not de-
tected by antiSMASH due to assembly gaps, but could be clearly identified     variants and the wide geographical distribution of the sponge
by a BLAST search of each gene cluster against the opposing genome.[7b]       hosts suggests that the PKS product is important for the bacte-NRPS, nonribosomal peptide synthetase; RiPP, ribosomally synthesized and       ria. Examination of the genomic regions up- and downstream                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
post-translationally modified peptide.                                                                                                              on                                                                    of the cep cluster (if the sequence was available) did not reveal
                                                               other genes typically involved in polyketide biosynthesis and                    Wiley
encoding a type III PKS (CepA) and a putative MT (CepB), the   showed high variability, which indicated that the BGC consist-                        Online
second a monomodular NRPS system, and the third a putative   ed of only cepA and cepB. CepB resembles members of the S-
carotenoid-type terpene BGC (Figure S1 in the Supporting In-   adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent MT superfamily and                           Library
formation). The small BGC overlap is striking, considering the    contains the  glycine-rich SAM binding motif conserved  in            for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rules
large number of natural product clusters. Focusing on the cep   these enzymes.[12] Querying the Swiss-Prot database with CepB        of
cluster for further analyses, we examined symbionts from a    yielded MenG from Staphylococcus species and PigF from Ser-                use;
broader range of sponges for the occurrence of this BGC. This    ratia sp. ATCC 39006 as the most similar proteins, with se-        OA
search identified three further cep-type clusters in the sponges   quence identities between 26 and 28% and poor coverage                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     articles
T. swinhoei WA and WB that were collected in Japan and Israel,    (Table S3). MenG is a C-methyltransferase (C-MT) that converts            are
respectively             (Table                         1). The                WA cep variant                                   was                                              present                                             on a   1,4-dihydroxy-2-naphthoate                                                                                                  into menaquinol,[13]                                                                                                    whereas                                                                                                                      PigF                               governedcosmid isolated               from                     a metagenomic                                              library                                                of                                          an enriched                                                                                           is an O-methyltransferase (O-MT)                                                                                                        that methylates                                                                                                                hydroxy-
                                                                                                                                             by
bacterial cell pellet of the sponge and assigned to the sym-    bipyrrole carbaldehyde to the methoxy product.[14] Thus, the            the
biont “E. serta” TSWA1.[7c] Two cep clusters existed in metage-   moiety methylated by CepB remained unclear.                                                                                                                              applicable

ChemBioChem 2020, 21, 564 – 571       www.chembiochem.org        565   T 2019 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Creative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              License


[PDF physical page 3]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14397633,                                                                Full Papers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2020,
                                                                                                                                             4,
  Sequence alignments of the CepA homologues show Cys,    in ArsC, Leu266 in Pks18) is produced.[1c,18] This site aligns with
His, and Asn residues at positions equivalent to the conserved   Trp243 in all CepA variants (Figure S2), which suggests resorci-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Downloaded
catalytic triad of type III PKSs (Figure S2), which  is important    nols as conserved “Entotheonella” polyketides. The alignment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          from
for the condensation activity.[1a] The closest homologue in the    also shows an Ala residue for  all CepA variants  (i.e., Ala309
Swiss-Prot/UniProt database was the Pks18 a-pyrone synthase    CepAfactor) (Figure S2) at a position equivalent to an Arg residue
conserved   in  the  Mycobacterium   tuberculosis  complex   involved in ACP binding in all three major PKS types (types I, II,
(Table S4). Pks18 generates alkyl  tri- and tetraketide pyrones   and III).[1a,b,19] Interestingly, in bacterial type III PKSs this residue
(Figure 3) with a high specificity for long-chain starter substra-     is almost always an Arg or a  Lys.[1a] At least one bacterial
                                                    enzyme with an Arg  site (SCO7671, Streptomyces coelicolor)
                                                     was confirmed to use ACP-bound  starters.[4] Bacterial type III
                                                          PKSs featuring a Lys were reported to use ACP- and/or CoA-
                                                   bound substrates or to directly cooperate with type I fatty acid
                                                               synthases (ArsB and C), although ACP interactions have not
                                                      been studied in every case.[1a,b,20] By containing an Ala at this
                                                                        location,  all five CepA variants resemble plant type III PKSs,
                                                         which use CoA- rather than ACP-bound units.[1a] Among 324
                                                                       bacterial type III PKS sequences used by Shimizu et al. to estab-
                                                                                 lish a functional classification based on phylogeny, only eight                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cbic.201900352,
                                                      homologues showed this plantlike feature.[6c] However, none of
                                                              these Ala-bearing bacterial type III PKSs have been functionally                    Wiley
                                                                  described, to date. In summary, based on our bioinformatic                        Online
                                                                     analyses, we suspected that CepA was most likely a resorcinol                            Library                                                              synthase that accepted long-chain fatty acid starters directly
                                                                                                                                             on
                                                         from CoAs. Because no orthologues with comparably high sim-
                                                                                       ilarity scores were found in cultivable and genetically accessi-                                                                  ble organisms, we decided to assess the CepA function in                                                   [30/10/2025].
                                                                                vitro.                                                                                                     See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and
                                                            Expression and in vitro analysis of CepA
                                                  Due to the lack of culturable heterologous hosts related to                                       Conditions
Figure 3. Reactions catalyzed by Pks18 and other type III PKSs that produce     “Entotheonella”, we chose to express cepA from  “E. factor”
either pyrones (Pks18, BpsA, ArsC) or resorcinols and pyrones (Pks11,
                                                        TSY1 (cepAfactor) in Escherichia coli for in vitro characterization.ArsB).[1c,4,17,18] The Ars enzymes are two related type III PKSs, which both
occur in the same A. vinelandii strain. R: long-chain alkyl residues, Enz,        Sequences were amplified, as described below, from enriched
enzyme.                                                metagenomic DNA by using PCR primers with appropriate
                                                                          restriction  sites (Table S5). The amplified  cepAfactor gene was
tes.[1c,4,15] In Pks18, a substrate-binding tunnel appears to facili-   cloned into the expression vector pHis-8 to create recombinant
                                                         genes that coded for N-terminally octahistidinyl-tagged pro-tate the binding of long-chain alkyl starter units.[16] Three resi-
                                                                                         teins.[21]  In preliminary  tests, purified recombinant  CepAfactordues (Thr144, Cys205, and Ala209) are crucially involved in
                                                     was incubated with a range of starter test substrates and ma-determining the tunnel volume and are therefore thought toinfluence substrate preference. A similar substrate profile was                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
shown for the Bacillus subtilis enzyme BpsA,[17] which produces                                                                            on
a mixture of alkyl pyrones and alkyl resorcinols and features a                                                                                                                                                                                               Wiley
Pks18-like substrate-binding tunnel with Thr, Cys, and Phe resi-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Online
dues at the corresponding  positions.[17] The CepA enzymes
contain identical residues to those of BpsA, with the exception                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Library
of “E. factor”, which features a Leu in place of Phe (Thr137,                                                                                                                   for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rules
Cys198, Leu202; Figure S2). Therefore, we suspected a similarly                                                                            of
structured tunnel, and thus, substrate range for CepA.                                                                                                                                                                            use;
  Phenolic  lipid synthases, such as Pks18 and BpsA, are a                                                                            OA
group of type III PKSs that produce pyrones or resorcinols by                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     articles
using long-chain acyl-CoAs rather than malonyl-CoA or aromat-                                                                                                                   are
ic  molecules             as starter                       building blocks                                         (Figure                                                                       3).[2b]                                            The                                                           pres-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  governedence      or absence                  of a tryptophan                                  residue                                               in the                                                    active                                                       center
                                                                          Figure 4. Structures of potential PKS starters used as test substrates in this          by
has been proposed as the most important determinant of     study. SCoA: coenzyme A thioester.“(3)” indicates a starter substrate for                   the
whether a resorcinol (e.g., Trp281 in ArsB) or a pyrone (Gly284    which incorporation could be detected.                                                                                                                                                                                                     applicable

ChemBioChem 2020, 21, 564 – 571       www.chembiochem.org        566   T 2019 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Creative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              License


[PDF physical page 4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14397633,                                                                Full Papers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2020,
                                                                                                                                             4,
lonyl-CoA as an extender substrate. Saturated and unsaturated
                                                                            Table 2. Theoretical and measured high-resolution masses of detected
straight-chain CoA derivates, as well as aromatic CoA deriva-                                                                                products. The m/z values refer to the [M@H]@ ions.                                                                                                                                               Downloaded
tives, were tested as starter substrates (Figure 4). The assay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          from
was monitored by detection of free thiol groups, arising from    Compound   Formula      m/z measured   m/z calculated  D (ppm)
hydrolytic CoA release, with 5,5’-dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid)         1          C20H33O3     321.2435        321.2435         0
(DTNB).[22] In addition to different starter test substrates, the         2          C22H35O4     363.2541        363.2541         0
                                                                     3          C21H35O2     319.2642        319.2643        @0.31enzyme was assayed with either a mixture of malonyl-CoA and
                                                                     4          C21H35O3     335.2593        335.2591           0.6
methylmalonyl-CoA or with only malonyl-CoA.  It was shown         5          C21H33O3     333.2436        333.2435           0.3
that type III PKSs 10 and 11 from mycobacteria incorporated         1         13C4C16H33O3   325.2560        325.2569        @2.77
methylmalonyl-CoA and that tetraketides with incorporated         2         13C6C16H35O4   369.2731        369.2742        @2.98
methylmalonyl-CoA favored aldol condensation, relative to tet-
raketides  elongated  with  malonyl-CoA   alone.[4]  For  our
enzyme, no difference was observed for DTNB assays with CoA   palmitoyl-CoA as a starter (Figure S4). A possible reason for the
mixtures versus malonyl-CoA alone (Figure S3H–I).                acetyl-CoA and cinnamoyl-CoA samples being  negative,  in
  A moderate increase in free thiols was observed for reac-    contrast to the DTNB assays, might be unspecific hydrolysis by
tions containing either acetyl-CoA, cinnamoyl-CoA, or palmi-   the enzyme without successive elongation.  In the reaction
toyl-CoA as starters and malonyl-CoA as extenders (Figure S3).   with palmitoyl-CoA (Figure S4C), new products were observed
No conversion was detected with malonyl-CoA as the sole    at m/z 321.2435 (1) and 363.2541 (2), which corresponded to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cbic.201900352,
thioester (Figure S3E). Ethyl acetate extracts of the assays con-   molecular  formulae  of  C20H33O3 and  C22H35O4,  respectively
taining different starter test substrates (Figure 4) and malonyl-    (Table 2 and Figure S5).                                                                                                                           Wiley
CoA as the elongation substrate were analyzed by means of      Taking into account the available substrates, these predicted                        Online
HPLC–ESI-MS. Using a python script to analyze the resulting   formulae were in accordance with the use of malonyl-CoA as                           Library
data, we detected new products, compared with the boiled   the sole elongation unit and palmitoyl-CoA (C16) as the starter,        on
and no-enzyme controls, only for the assay mixture containing   corresponding to a cyclic triketide (2Vmalonyl-CoA+1Vpalmi-                                                   [30/10/2025].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Conditions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rules
                                                                                                                                             of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          use;
                                                                                                                                             OA
Figure 5. Pyrone and resorcinol formation by CepA. A) Summed extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) of all proposed product ions under optimized enzymatic                                  articles
reaction conditions with palmitoyl- and malonyl-CoA. B) Proposed structures for 1–5; 1 and 2 are major products detected in preliminary and optimized func-            are
tional assays; 3–5 are minor products only detected under optimized reaction conditions. C) EICs for 2, 3, and 5 for time-course experiments, suggesting
rapid formation of resorcinol (3) and the delayed occurrence of quinone (5). A sample of 100 mL was taken every 30 min over a total of 6 h. Multiple peaks in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     governed
the chromatogram of 2 are most likely the two keto–enol tautomers.[23] The prominent peak corresponds to the proposed structure shown in B). Multiple            by
peaks in the chromatogram of 5 are most likely a result of two possible regioisomers, namely, ortho- and meta-quinones, and their tautomers. For negative               the
control and boiled enzyme control data, as well as data on compounds 1 and 4, see Figures S17 and S18.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     applicable

ChemBioChem 2020, 21, 564 – 571       www.chembiochem.org        567   T 2019 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Creative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              License


[PDF physical page 5]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14397633,                                                                Full Papers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2020,
                                                                                                                                             4,
toyl-CoA) and a cyclic tetraketide (3Vmalonyl-CoA+1Vpalmi-   Structure elucidation of in vitro products
toyl-CoA), respectively (Figures 3 and 5B). The presence of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Downloaded
three and four oxygen atoms, as well as the mass difference to   For structure elucidation of major product 1 by means of NMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          from
the hypothetical linear polyketides, corresponding to the loss    spectroscopy,  it was purified by means of HPLC.  It had a
of one H2O equivalent, supported the pyrone structure. At first   molecular formula of C20H34O3, which was suggested by HPLC–
glance, these results are inconsistent with the bioinformatic   ESI-MS (m/z 321.2435, [M@H]@, D0 ppm; see Figure S5). The
prediction  of CepA being a  resorcinol  synthase. However,   1H NMR spectrum and HSQC data suggested the presence of
pyrone formation has also been observed to occur sponta-   one ethyl group, two sp2-methines, and a long methylene
neously,[1c] and resorcinol synthases often show a shifted prod-   chain unit (Figures S9 and S10). Two units, a and b, were deter-
uct range towards pyrones in  vitro, compared with that in   mined from COSY data (Figures S11 and S14). 13C-labeling stud-
vivo.[1c,18] To obtain further evidence for the structure by means    ies showed, by analysis of the 13C NMR spectrum, the incorpo-
of NMR spectroscopy, we aimed to increase the activity of the    ration of four 13C atoms in compound 1 (Figures S12 and S14).
enzyme by optimizing buffer conditions at different salt con-   The multiplicity pattern of these 13C NMR signals suggested
centrations and pH values. Under the best conditions (pH 6   the connection of C1@C4, which was also supported by HMBC
and 500 mm phosphate buffer), we observed, in addition to    correlations from H-2 to C-1 and C-4 and from H-4 to C-2 (Fig-
increased levels of 1 and 2, new ions at m/z 319.2642  (3),    ures S13 and S14). Unit a was connected to C-4 through C-5
335.2593 (4), and 333.2436 (5; Figures 5A and S5). The predict-   by HMBC correlations from H-6 to C-4 and C-5, and from H-7
ed molecular formulae, C21H35O2, C21H35O3, and C21H33O3, sug-    to C-5.  Finally, the length of the methylene chain and the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cbic.201900352,
gested the formation of tetraketides.                          pyrone cyclization were deduced from the molecular formula.
  The odd carbon number and lower relative oxygen content     The structure of the less abundant tetraketide pyrone 2 was                    Wiley
indicated intramolecular decarboxylative resorcinol formation    elucidated  by  means  of  MS/MS.  The  neutral  loss  of                        Online
(3) and, for 4 and 5, spontaneous oxidation (Table 2 and Fig-   238.2342 Da, corresponding to the linear part of the molecule                            Library
ure S6);[1c,4,17] this is in agreement with the bioinformatic pre-    (C16H30O, calculated mass 238.2297), gave the most abundant        on
diction.                                                         ion at m/z 125.0228, corresponding to the cyclic part (C6H5O3@,
  Although product levels for 1 and 2 were increased in the    calculated mass 125.0244) of 2 (Figure S15). The structure ofoptimized assays, it was not possible to purify sufficient mate-   the cyclic section of 2  is further substantiated by additional                                                   [30/10/2025].
rial for NMR spectroscopy based structure elucidation. To facili-   fragments shown in Figure S15. Compounds 3–5 (m/z 319.26,            See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the
tate NMR spectroscopy studies, the assay was repeated with    335.26, and 333.24, respectively) were compared with the re-
malonyl-CoA with a  fully 13C-labeled malonyl group. Corre-    tention times of a standard (5-pentadecylbenzene-1,3-diol, CAS                    Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and
spondingly, ions with m/z 325.2560 and 369.2731, supporting    3158-56-3, Brunschwig, Switzerland) and its autoxidation prod-
the incorporation of two (1) and three (2) labeled extender    ucts (Figure S6). The proposed structures of 4 and 5 appearunits, respectively, were observed in the extract (Table 2 and   more likely due to the observation of additional peaks in the                                       Conditions
Figure S7). NMR spectroscopy based structure elucidation in   standard spectra that are identical in retention times to those
the case of 13C-labeled compound 1 and MS/MS analysis in the   observed in the assay extracts.
case of compound 2 supported the tri- and tetraketide struc-
tures proposed in Figure 5B; analytical details are described in
                                              Conclusion
the next section. In these experiments, the structures of 3–5
could not be determined because of the very small amounts   The cep cluster is one of only three BGCs conserved among
produced. The proposed structure for 3 was supported by a    five  different “Entotheonella”  variants  that  inhabit sponges
comparison of retention times obtained by means of HPLC–   from distant geographical regions. By investigating the orthol-
ESI-MS to a commercial standard of 5-pentadecylbenzene-1,3-   ogous type III PKS clusters, we hoped to gain the first insightsdiol (Figure S8A). Furthermore, the standard contained impuri-    into the as-yet unknown chemical functions and conserved                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
ties  attributed  to  autoxidation  products 4 and  5, which   metabolic features of these hidden natural product factories.        on
showed mass spectra and retention times identical to those of   Our in vitro experiments demonstrate that CepAfactor acts as a                    Wiley
the assay products (Figure S8B and C). More details on struc-   phenolic lipid synthase, processing long-chain fatty acid acyl-                        Online
tural elucidation are provided in the next section. Thus, the   CoA and malonyl-CoA thioesters. The product range includes
combined data support the CepA-catalyzed formation of resor-    tetraketide resorcinols, as suggested by the presence of a tryp-                            Library
cinols in addition to pyrones. The product range observed   tophan residue in the active site at a position critical for aldol            for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rules
under optimized reaction conditions  is  similar to that de-   condensation, as well as tri- and tetraketide a-pyrones. Resorci-        of
scribed  for  BpsA.[17]  Furthermore,  time-course  experiments    nol synthases often show a shifted product profile towards py-                use;
showed a rapid increase in pyrone and resorcinol products not   rones in vitro relative to in vivo activity.[1c,18] The ratio of resor-        OA
observed in the boiled enzyme and no enzyme controls (Fig-    cinols to pyrone derailment products depends on the spatial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     articles
ure S17). Quinol and quinone formation (4 and 5) were de-    constraints in the active-site cavity of the enzyme. In the active            are
layed,      increasing                  at                    reaction                           times of                                around 90                                               to                                           150 min, re-    site                                                                        of ArsB,                                                                       a resorcinol                                                                                      synthase                                                                                       from                                                                                                       Azotobacter                                                                                                                                        vinelandii,
spectively           (Figures             5C                   and S18B),                                supporting                                          a                                          nonenzymatic                                                                 Ser158,                                                                    Leu219,                                                                   and Thr235                                                                                  form a                                                                                                                       steric                                                                                                                wall responsible                                                                                                                                            for                               governed
                                                                                                                                             by
autoxidation route (Figures S6 and S8).                                   strict resorcinol formation.[1c] It is possible that the divergence            the
                                                                         in “Entotheonella” PKSs from the ArsB residues to cysteine and                                       applicable

ChemBioChem 2020, 21, 564 – 571       www.chembiochem.org        568   T 2019 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Creative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              License


[PDF physical page 6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14397633,                                                                Full Papers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2020,
                                                                                                                                             4,
isoleucine/valine residues perturbs this organization, causing    rithm, followed by ClustalW implemented in the Geneious soft-
the more relaxed product range for CepA. In addition, the MT    ware. For alignments containing more than 100 sequences, a third                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Downloaded
CepB might be needed to increase product fidelity of CepA.   round of ClustalW alignment was added. To determine sites corre-
                                                                        lated with the cyclization specificity, all five CepA sequences from                fromUnfortunately, extensive trials to establish functional CepB in
                                                                     “Entotheonella” were aligned with ArsB and ArsC from A. vinelandii
vivo or in vitro were unsuccessful.
                                                         and Pks18 from M. tuberculosis. CepA sequences were aligned with
  The in vivo biological function of CepA in “Entotheonella”                                                               Pks18 and BspA (B. subtilis 168) for the analysis of residues possibly
species remains unknown, but a range of functions have been    involved in substrate binding. To analyze ACP-binding capacity,
ascribed to phenolic lipids from plants, fungi, and cultivated   sequences were aligned with CHS2 from Medicago sativa, as well
organisms, including, but not limited  to, anticancer, anti-in-    as with 132 experimentally characterized type III PKSs or a repre-
flammatory,  genotoxic,  and  antibiotic   activities.[24,25] Many    sentative set of 696 nonredundant type III PKSs from the KEGG
                                                                    database, as used by Shimizu et al.[1a,6c,19]other known functions of phenolic lipids are as primary, rather
than secondary, metabolites; this hypothesis would be in align-    Overall cluster detection for comparison of BGCs was performed
ment with the observed conservation of the cep gene cluster.   by using antiSMASH v4 and confirmed by manual inspection.[32]
In mycobacteria, alkylquinones act as alternative electron carri-
                                                                   Cloning,  expression, and  purification: The cepA gene  fromers in microaerophilic cell respiration.[4] The products of ArsB
                                                                                       “E. factor”  (cepAfactor) was  PCR-amplified from  filament-enriched
and another type III PKS, ArsC, are the main components of                                                         metagenomic DNA by using the primers listed in Table S5.[7b,c] The
Azotobacter cyst membranes, and the activity of these enzymes                                                         gene was introduced by restriction digest and subsequent ligation
is essential to the encystment process.[27] A related function of    into pHis8,[16] which yielded the plasmid pHis_cepAfactor for the pro-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cbic.201900352,
phenolic  lipids  is present  in Streptomyces  griseus,  in which    duction of N-terminally His8-tagged protein. After introduction into
products  of  type III  PKSs  provide  antibiotic  resistance by     E. coli BL21 (DE3), cells were grown at 378C in terrific broth (TB)                    Wiley
changing the composition of the membrane.[5] Because  all   medium until an OD600 of 1.2 was reached. Cells were incubated                        Online
sequenced “Entotheonella” species are symbionts of marine   on ice up to 2 h before protein expression was induced with iso-
                                                                      propyl-b-d-thiogalactoside (IPTG; 0.1 or 0.5 mm). Cells were grown                            Librarysponges, the conserved CepA pathway may also serve to help
                                                                              for 24 h or 3 days at 168C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation,        on
facilitate symbiosis, either directly or indirectly, for example, as
                                                             snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for better lysis, and either used di-
a signaling molecule, which  is the case for Rhizobium–plant                                                                               rectly or stored at @808C. For lysis, cells were thawed on ice, resus-symbiosis mediated by flavonoids.[11]                         pended in cell lysis buffer (50 mm sodium phosphate buffer with                                                   [30/10/2025].
  Phenolic lipids are not unknown in the extracts of marine   300 mm, NaCl, 20 mm imidazole, and 10% glycerol), and lysed by            See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the
sponges;  alkyl and alkenylresorcinols resembling those pro-    sonication. Cell debris and insoluble components were sedimented
duced herein have been detected  in Haliclona  sponges.[28]   by centrifugation. The supernatant was incubated with Ni2+-NTA                    Terms
                                                                            resin (Macherey–Nagel, Deren, Germany). The resin was washed se-            andHowever, they have not been detected in theonellid sponges,
                                                                         quentially with  three  different  buffers containing  20,  30, and
nor were we able to detect cep-type compounds in Theonella
                                                           40 mm imidazole before eluting the target protein with 250 mmextracts, either directly or by molecular network  analysis.[29]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Conditions
                                                                   imidazole (see Figure S16) The protein was dialyzed into 100 mm
This might be due to low abundance in the overall sponge                                                            phosphate buffer, pH 8, overnight at 48C by using a 6–8 kDa cutoff
holobiont or structural differences, for example, regarding the   membrane (Socochim SA, Lausanne, Switzerland). The resulting
as-yet unknown starter, that might also influence the cycliza-    elution fractions were analyzed by means of SDS-PAGE and the
tion pattern. For instance, Hug and co-workers recently dem-    concentration was determined with the Nanoquant protein quanti-
onstrated, in a myxobacterial system, that type III PKS com-    tation reagent  (Roth,  Karlsruhe, Germany) by using a Thermo
pounds produced in vitro might have significant differences   Nano-drop spectrophotometer and bovine albumin as the stan-
                                                                       dard. The major band observed by SDS-PAGE was in good accord-
from the authentic product for precisely this reason.
                                                             ance with the predicted size of the recombinant protein of about
  “Entotheonella” have attracted interest as a chemically tal-
                                                           42 kDa.
ented taxon rich in structurally and biosynthetically unusualmetabolites.[30] The cep cluster  is a rare deviation from the   Enzymatic assay for CepAfactor: The reactions to determine starter                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
otherwise nonoverlapping natural product potential of known   and  elongation  unit  specificity  contained 100 mm  phosphate        on
                                                                               buffer, pH 8, and  either malonyl-CoA (300 mm) or malonyl-CoA“Entotheonella” species. The functional information provided                                                                                                                                                                                               Wiley
                                                                   (300 mm) and methylmalonyl-CoA (300 mm) as extender units, as
herein will help to elucidate the ecological role of this poly-                                                                       well as either a pool of starter units (100 mm each) or a single start-                        Online
ketide in this intriguing, yet poorly understood, group of sym-                                                                          er                                                                         substrate                                                                                (100                                                                       mm;                                                                                           Figure                                                                                                                                  4).                                                                                                    Reactions                                                                                                were                                                                                                         performed                                                                                                                                                  in a                           Librarybiotic bacteria.                                                                               total                                                              volume of                                                                         200                                                                            mL and                                                                                  were                                                                                               incubated                                                                                                                              for                                                                                                   3 h                                                                                                                                 at 378C. Starter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    for
                                                                         units were kindly provided by the group of Erb.[33] Reactions for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rules
                                                                   time-course experiments and isolation of polyketides contained        of
Experimental Section                                   phosphate buffer (500 mm, pH 6) with malonyl-CoA (300 mm) and                use;
                                                                  palmitoyl-CoA (100 mm). The time-course experiments and larger        OA
Bioinformatic analysis: Blast searches to find cep-like clusters in    scale reactions for preparative HPLC were performed in 3 mL. For                               articlesother  “Entotheonella” genomes were performed by using the    the time-course experiments, a sample of 100 mL was taken every
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    are
tblastn search tool implemented in the molecular biology analysis   30 min for a total of 6 h. A concentration of 0.425 mgmL@1 Ni2+-pu-
suite Geneious version 7.1.8 (http://www.geneious.com) with the     rified enzyme was used in each reaction. Reactions were stopped                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     governed
“Ca. E. factor” genes as a query sequence.[31] For comparison, multi-   by freezing at @208C. Negative controls contained either phos-        by
sequence alignments were created. Two consecutive alignment   phate buffer (100 mm, pH 8) or boiled enzyme (10 min 998C), in-            the
rounds were performed by using the Geneious alignment algo-    stead of enzyme. To increase the catalytic activity of the enzyme,                                       applicable

ChemBioChem 2020, 21, 564 – 571       www.chembiochem.org        569   T 2019 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Creative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              License


[PDF physical page 7]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14397633,                                                                Full Papers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2020,
                                                                                                                                             4,
buffer concentrations between 100 and 800 mm were tested, as   and advice on protein work. This work was supported by the
well as pH values ranging from 5.8 to 8.0. Optimal conditions were    Swiss National Science Foundation (205321_165695) and the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Downloaded
determined to be pH 6.0 and 500 mm phosphate buffer. Malonyl-   Helmut Horten Foundation.
CoA, methylmalonyl-CoA, and palmitoyl-CoA were obtained from                                                                                                                                                         from
Sigma–Aldrich (USA). Detection of free thiols was performed as de-
scribed by Ellman.[34] Aliquots (10 mL) of starter unit assay solution   Conflict of Interest
were mixed with 2.4 mm DTNB (5 mL) in 100 mm phosphate buffer.
Adsorption was measured at l=412 nm by using a Thermo Nano-
                                                           The authors declare no conflict of interest.
drop instrument.

Isolation and identification of compounds: Reactions were ex-
                                                       Keywords: Entotheonella    ·   lipids    ·  natural  products    ·tracted with ethyl acetate (3V with either 200 mL or 3 mL, depend-
ing on the reaction volume). The organic layers were pooled and    polyketides · sponge symbionts
evaporated, and the residue was dissolved in methanol (60 mL) for
reversed-phase HPLC–ESI-MS analysis. Samples were run on a Ki-       [1] a) M. B. Austin,  J. P. Noel, Nat. Prod. Rep. 2003, 20, 79–110; b) S. Gre-
netex 2.6 mm XB-C18 100 a column (4.6V150 mm; Phenomenex)        schow, T. J. Buchholz, W. Seufert, J. S. Dordick, D. H. Sherman, ChemBio-
with 5 min at 5% methanol+0.1% formic acid (FA) in water+       Chem 2007, 8, 863–868; c) R. Satou, A. Miyanaga, H. Ozawa, N. Funa, Y.
0.1% FA followed by a gradient (5 to 100%) methanol+0.1% FA        Katsuyama, K. Miyazono, M. Tanokura, Y. Ohnishi, S. Horinouchi, J. Biol.
                                                                        Chem. 2013, 288, 34146–34157.
in water+0.1% FA over 10 min followed by 10 min at 100% meth-
                                                                                                  [2] a) B. S. Moore,  J. N. Hopke, ChemBioChem 2001, 2, 35–38; b) Y.  Li, R.
anol (0.1% FA) and 5 min of 5% methanol+0.1% FA in water+
                                                                                            Meller, Phytochemistry 2009, 70, 1850–1857; c) N. Funa,  Y. Ohnishi,  I.
0.1% FA with a flow rate of 0.5 mLmin@1. HPLC–ESI-MS spectra                                                                                                                 Fujii, M. Shibuya, Y. Ebizuka, S. Horinouchi, Nature 1999, 400, 897–899.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cbic.201900352,
were obtained from a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass       [3] a) H. Chen, C. C. Tseng, B. K. Hubbard, C. T. Walsh, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.                    Wiley
spectrometer set to negative-ion mode and coupled to a Dionex       USA 2001, 98, 14901–14906; b) V. Pfeifer, G. J. Nicholson, J. Ries, J. Reck-
UltiMate  3000 UHPLC  system  (Thermo  Scientific).  Preliminary         tenwald,  A. B.  Schefer,  R. M. Shawky,  J. Schroder, W. Wohlleben,  S.                        Online
HPLC–MS data were analyzed by using a Python script, created by          Pelzer, J. Biol. Chem. 2001, 276, 38370–38377.
Lackner, based on the eMZed[35] framework, by comparing the MS       [4] A. Anand, P. Verma, A. K. Singh, S. Kaushik, R. Pandey, C. Shi, H. Kaur, M.                           Library
data of the active enzyme sample with controls to determine  if         Chawla, C. K. Elechalawar, D. Kumar, Y. Yang, N. S. Bhavesh, R. Banerjee,        on
                                                                                    D. Dash, A. Singh, V. T. Natarajan, A. K. Ojha, C. C. Aldrich, R. S. Gokhale,
any of the products were formed. A list of calculated masses for
                                                                                    Mol. Cell 2015, 60, 637–650.
products likely to be formed from the added substrates was used                                                                                                  [5] M. Funabashi, N. Funa, S. Horinouchi, J. Biol. Chem. 2008, 283, 13983–                                                   [30/10/2025].as a query. Candidates for the list were narrowed down by prelimi-
                                                                               13991.                                                                                               See
nary substrate screening assays (see above). MS2 spectra were ob-       [6] a) B. S. Moore, C. Hertweck, J. N. Hopke, M. Izumikawa, J. A. Kalaitzis, G.            the
tained      under             the same                         conditions,                                 with                                     normalized                                                            collision                                                             ener-                                                                                             Nilsen,                                                                                                                                    T. O’Hare,                                                                                                                                                        J. Piel,                                                                                                                                                         P. R. Shipley,                                                                                                                                                            L.                                                                                                                           Xiang, M. B.                                                                                                                                                Austin,                                                                                                                                                                                                                      J. P.
                                                                                                                                                      Noel, J.                    Terms                                                                                        Nat. Prod.                                                                                       2002, 65,                                                                                         1956–1962;                                                                                                                         b) Y.                                                                                                                Katsuyama,                                                                                                                                                                                            Y.                                                                                                                                            Ohnishi,                                                                                                                                Methodsgies (NCE)          ranging                 from                     30 to 85%.                              The                                             triketide pyrone                                              was                                                                   puri-
fied by means of semipreparative HPLC on an Agilent 1260 infinity         Enzymol. 2012, 515, 359–377; c) Y. Shimizu, H. Ogata, S. Goto, ChemBio-            and
instrument coupled to an Agilent G1315D DAD by using a Kinetex       Chem 2017, 18, 50–65.C18 column (10V250 mm; Phenomenex) with a gradient  (5 to       [7] a) M. W. Taylor, R. T. Hill, J. Piel, R. W. Thacker, U. Hentschel, ISME J. 2007,                                       Conditions
                                                                                                          1, 187; b) M. C. Wilson,  T. Mori, C. Reckert, A. R.  Uria, M. J.  Helf,  K.
100%) of methanol (0.1% FA) in water (0.1% FA) over 30 min fol-
                                                                                   Takada, C. Gernert, U. A. Steffens, N. Heycke, S. Schmitt, C. Rinke, E. J.
lowed by 40 min in 100% methanol+0.1% FA (1 mLmin@1). The
                                                                                                Helfrich, A. O. Brachmann, C. Gurgui, T. Wakimoto, M. Kracht, M. Crese-
compound was detected at l=288 nm and fractions checked for                                                                      mann, U. Hentschel,  I. Abe, S. Matsunaga, J. Kalinowski, H. Takeyama, J.
the presence of the compound by means of HPLC–ESI-MS. The sol-            Piel, Nature 2014, 506, 58–62; c) R. Ueoka, A. R. Uria, S. Reiter, T. Mori, P.
vents were evaporated and the residue was dissolved in methanol.        Karbaum, E. E. Peters, E. J. Helfrich, B. I. Morinaka, M. Gugger, H. Takeya-
The compound was further purified isocratically with 85% metha-        ma, S. Matsunaga, J. Piel, Nat. Chem. Biol. 2015, 11, 705–712; d) T. Mori,
nol+0.1% FA in water+0.1% FA (1 mLmin@1) by using a Kinetex              J. K. B. Cahn, M. C. Wilson, R. A. Meoded, V. Wiebach, A. F. C. Martinez,
C18 column (4.6V250 mm; Phenomenex). Solvent was evaporated           E. J. N. Helfrich, A. Albersmeier, D. Wibberg, S. Datwyler, R. Keren, A.
and the residue was dissolved in [D6]DMSO.                                      Lavy, C. Reckert, M. Ilan,  J. Kalinowski, S. Matsunaga, H. Takeyama,  J.
                                                                                                            Piel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2018, 115, 1718–1723.
NMR spectroscopy analysis: NMR spectra were recorded on a       [8] a) C. A. Bewley, D. J. Faulkner, Angew. Chem.  Int. Ed. 1998, 37, 2162–Bruker Avance III spectrometer equipped with a cold probe at         2178; Angew. Chem. 1998, 110, 2280–2297; b) J. W. Blunt, B. R. Copp,                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
600 MHz for 1H and 150 MHz for 13C at 298 K. Chemical shifts were        W. P. Hu, M. H. Munro,  P. T. Northcote, M. R. Prinsep, Nat. Prod. Rep.        on
                                                                                                   26, 170–244;                                                                                                                             c) C.                                                                                                             Gurgui,                                                                                                                                                                                J. Piel,                                                                                                             Methods                                                                                                                                      Mol.                                                                                                                                                                                  Biol. 2010,referenced  to  the  solvent  signals  at dH=2.50 ppm and dC=        2009,                                                                                                                                                             668,                    Wiley                                                                       247–264;                                                                                                  d) G. Lackner,                                                                                                                                         E.                                                                                                                                           E. Peters,                                                                                                                                                         E. J.                                                                                                                                                 Helfrich,                                                                                                                                                                                                            J.  Piel,                                                                                                                                                              Proc. Natl.
39.51 ppm for [D6]DMSO. LC–ESI-MS was performed on a Thermo
                                                                                  Acad. Sci. USA 2017, 114, E347–E356.                                                                                                                OnlineScientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer (see Figures S5 and S7–
                                                                                                  [9] a) R. J. Capon, Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2001, 633–645; b) V. J. Paul, M. P. Pugli-
S14).                                                                                                                            si, R. Ritson-Williams, Nat. Prod. Rep. 2006, 23, 153–180; c) J. R. Pawlik,                            Library
                                                                                      BioScience 2011, 61, 888–898.                                                                 for
                                                                                       [10] M. P. Puglisi,  J. M. Sneed, R. Ritson-Williams, R. Young, Nat. Prod. Rep.                    rulesAcknowledgements                                                  2019, 36, 410–429.                                                    of
                                                                                           [11] X. Perret, C. Staehelin, W. J. Broughton, Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 2000,                use;
                                                                                            64, 180–201.                                                          OAWe thank Prof. Julia Vorholt and Dr. Tobias Erb for kindly provid-
                                                                                       [12]  J. L. Martin, F. M. McMillan, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2002, 12, 783–793.
ing the starter substrates, Dr. Yugo Shimizu for sharing the type     [13] A.  Koike-Takeshita,  T. Koyama,  K. Ogura,  J.  Biol. Chem. 1997,  272,                               articles
III PKS sequences used in his publication, and Dr. Ana Fl#via Can-        12380–12383.                                                                                     are
ovas Martinez for help with MS-based structure elucidation. We     [14] A. K. Harris, N. R. Williamson, H. Slater, A. Cox, S. Abbasi,  I. Foulds, H. T.
                                                                            Simonsen,  F. J. Leeper, G. P. Salmond, Microbiology 2004, 150, 3547–also owe great thanks to Dr. Gerald Lackner for providing the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  governed
                                                                                 3560.                                                                by
Python script and the expertise to use  it. We thank Prof. Mi-     [15] a) T. Garnier, K. Eiglmeier, J. C. Camus, N. Medina, H. Mansoor, M. Pryor,            the
chael F. Freeman and Dr. Anna L. Vagstad for valuable discussion           S. Duthoy, S. Grondin, C. Lacroix, C. Monsempe, S. Simon, B. Harris, R.                                       applicable

ChemBioChem 2020, 21, 564 – 571       www.chembiochem.org        570   T 2019 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Creative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              License


[PDF physical page 8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14397633,                                                                Full Papers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2020,
                                                                                                                                             4,
     Atkin, J. Doggett, R. Mayes, L. Keating, P. R. Wheeler, J. Parkhill, B. G. Bar-     [26]  P. N. Le¼o, M. Costa, V. Ramos, A. R. Pereira, V. C. Fernandes, V. F. Domin-
       rell, S. T. Cole, S. V. Gordon, R. G. Hewinson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA         gues, W. H. Gerwick, V. M. Vasconcelos, R. Martins, PLoS One 2013, 8,    2003, 100, 7877–7882; b) R. Rukmini, V. M. Shanmugam, P. Saxena, R. S.         e69562.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Downloaded
     Gokhale, R. Sankaranarayanan, Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D 2004, 60, 749–     [27] N. Funa, H. Ozawa, A. Hirata, S. Horinouchi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA                from
     751.                                                                     2006, 103, 6356–6361.
[16] R. Sankaranarayanan, P. Saxena, U. B. Marathe, R. S. Gokhale, V. M. Shan-     [28] R. Barrow, R. Capon, Aust. J. Chem. 1991, 44, 1393–1405.
    mugam, R. Rukmini, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 2004, 11, 894–900.                 [29] M. Wang, J. J. Carver, V. V. Phelan, L. M. Sanchez, N. Garg, Y. Peng, D. D.
[17] C. Nakano, H. Ozawa, G. Akanuma, N. Funa, S. Horinouchi, J. Bacteriol.        Nguyen, J. Watrous, C. A. Kapono, T. Luzzatto-Knaan, C. Porto, A. Bousli-
    2009, 191, 4916–4923.                                                      mani, A. V. Melnik, M. J. Meehan, W.-T. Liu, M. Crusemann,  P. D. Bou-
[18]  P. Saxena, G. Yadav, D. Mohanty, R. S. Gokhale, J. Biol. Chem. 2003, 278,         dreau, E. Esquenazi, M. Sandoval-Calderon, R. D. Kersten, et al., Nat. Bio-
    44780–44790.                                                                       technol. 2016, 34, 828–837.
                                                                                       [30] M. Jaspars, G. Challis, Nature 2014, 506, 38–39.[19]  Y. M. Zhang, M. S. Rao, R. J. Heath, A. C. Price, A. J. Olson, C. O. Rock,
                                                                                       [31] M. Kearse, R. Moir, A. Wilson, S. Stones-Havas, M. Cheung, S. Sturrock, S.      S. W. White, J. Biol. Chem. 2001, 276, 8231–8238.
                                                                                Buxton, A. Cooper,  S. Markowitz, C. Duran,  T. Thierer, B. Ashton,  P.[20] A. Miyanaga, N. Funa, T. Awakawa, S. Horinouchi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
                                                                                        Meintjes, A. Drummond, Bioinformatics 2012, 28, 1647–1649.
    USA 2008, 105, 871–876.
                                                                                       [32] M. H. Medema, K. Blin, P. Cimermancic, V. de Jager, P. Zakrzewski, M. A.
[21]  J. M. Jez, J. L. Ferrer, M. E. Bowman, R. A. Dixon, J. P. Noel, Biochemistry
                                                                                    Fischbach, T. Weber, E. Takano, R. Breitling, Nucleic Acids Res. 2011, 39,
    2000, 39, 890–902.
                                                                W339–W346.
[22] G. L. Ellman, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 1958, 74, 443–450.
                                                                                       [33] D. M. Peter, B. Vogeli, N. S. Cortina, T. J. Erb, Molecules 2016, 21, 517.
[23] C. C. Zhou, D. R. Hill, Magn. Reson. Chem. 2007, 45, 128–132.
                                                                                       [34] G. L. Ellman, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 1959, 82, 70–77.
[24] a) M. Stasiuk, A. Kozubek, Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2010, 67, 841–860; b) T. P.
                                                                                       [35]  P. Kiefer, U. Schmitt, J. A. Vorholt, Bioinformatics 2013, 29, 963–964.
     Martins, C. Rouger, N. R. Glasser, S. Freitas, N. B. de Fraissinette, E. P. Bal-
     skus, D. Tasdemir,  P. N. Le¼o, Nat. Prod. Rep. 2019, https://dx.doi.org/                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cbic.201900352,
    10.1039/C8NP00080H.                                                 Manuscript received: May 29, 2019
                                                                           Revised manuscript received: August 19, 2019                                                                                     Wiley[25]  J. J. Hug, F. Panter, D. Krug, R. Meller, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2019,
     46, 319–334.                                                      Accepted manuscript online: August 20, 2019                                                                                                      Online
                                                                               Version of record online: October 22, 2019
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Library
                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [30/10/2025].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Conditions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                                                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rules
                                                                                                                                             of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          use;
                                                                                                                                             OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     articles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     governed
                                                                                                                                             by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  applicable

ChemBioChem 2020, 21, 564 – 571       www.chembiochem.org        571   T 2019 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Creative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              License