
[PDF physical page 1]
    Natural Product
    Reports

     REVIEW                                                               View Article Online
                                                                                                                            View Journal | View Issue

                     Actinomycetes: still a source of novel antibiotics


            Cite this: Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34,    Olga Genilloud
           1203



                                            Covering: 2006 to 2017

AM.                                       Actinomycetes have been, for decades, one of the most important sources for the discovery of new
                                                   antibiotics with an important number of drugs and analogs successfully introduced in the market and still
                                        used today in clinical practice. The intensive antibacterial discovery eﬀort that generated the large7:49:08                                    number of highly potent broad-spectrum antibiotics, has seen a dramatic decline in the large pharma

                                                industry in the last two decades resulting in a lack of new classes of antibiotics with novel mechanisms
3/5/2025                                           of action reaching the clinic. Whereas the decline in the number of new chemical scaﬀolds and the
on                                           rediscovery problem of old known molecules has become a hurdle for industrial natural products
                                             discovery programs, new actinomycetes compounds and leads have continued to be discovered and

                                         developed to the preclinical stages. Actinomycetes are  still one of the most important sources of

                                          chemical diversity and a reservoir to mine for novel structures that is requiring the integration of diverseDownloaded
                                                     disciplines. These can range from novel strategies to isolate species previously not cultivated, innovative

                                      whole cell screening approaches and on-site analytical detection and dereplication tools for novel2017.
                                      compounds, to in silico biosynthetic predictions from whole gene sequences and novel engineered

                                          heterologous expression, that have inspired the  isolation of new NPs and shown  their potentialAugust
                                                application in the discovery of novel antibiotics. This review will address the discovery of antibiotics from18
on                                       actinomycetes from two diﬀerent perspectives including: (1) an update of the most important antibiotics
                                                 that have only reached the clinical development in the recent years despite their early discovery, and (2)
           Received 10th April 2017
                                       an overview of the most recent classes of antibiotics described from 2006 to 2017 in the framework of
          DOI: 10.1039/c7np00026jPublished                                         the diﬀerent strategies employed to untap novel compounds previously overlooked with traditional

               rsc.li/npr                          approaches.

           1.    Introduction                                     1.  Introduction
           2.   Recent antibiotics in the pipeline and in the clinic: new
              analogs of revisited old classes                           Actinomycetes have been one of the most prolic sources of
           3.   Recent    antibiotic    discovery   approaches   from   novel antibiotics, including the most important antimicrobial
              actinomycetes                                       drug classes such as b-lactams, tetracyclines, rifamycins, ami-
           3.1.  Phenotypic whole cell target based screening paradigms    noglycosides, macrolides, and glycopeptides. Most antibiotic
           3.2.  Screening for potentiators and adjuvants for combination   classes in use were discovered more than forty years ago and
               therapies                                                 since then a large majority of the new approved drugs have been
           3.3.  Targeting specic antibiotic classes                     based on chemical modications of existing scaﬀolds to combat
           4.   Mining the environment for new chemical diversity         clinical resistance.  All classes of antibiotics have seen the
           5.   Improved isolation methods to capture bacterial diversity  emergence of resistance in bacteria compromising their use,
           6.   Genome targeted antibiotic discovery                     with antibiotics of the same class exhibiting rapid cross resis-
           7.   Outlook                                                 tance to that class of drugs. Today multidrug resistance repre-
           8.   Conicts of interest                                       sents one of the major challenges to treat infectious diseases,
           9.   Acknowledgements                                   both in community and hospital-acquired infections, and limits
          10.  References                                              the management of bacterial infections. Most of research eﬀorts
                                                                  were focused for many years on Gram positive bacteria, espe-
                                                                                        cially Staphylococcus aureus MRSA, but very limited options have
                                                               been developed against multidrug resistant Gram negative
             Fundaci´on MEDINA, Avda Conocimiento 34, 18016 Granada, Spain. E-mail: olga.   bacteria, frequently associated with high mortality rates and few
            genilloud@medinaandalucia.es



             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1203


[PDF physical page 2]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review


         treatment options in hospital-acquired infections. Now even   production of new natural products among microbial strains,
           last resorts antibiotics such as colistin and polymyxin B are   especially within the actinomycetes. These talented lamenting
          facing resistances.1 Major concerns are related to the emergence   bacteria, that had been shown to produce only a limited
          of multi-drug  resistances  in a number  of key pathogens  number of molecules in traditional fermentation conditions,
          (Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneu-  were found to encode a large diversity of biosynthetic genes,
         moniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and  opening new opportunities to identify microbial strains with
          Enterobacter  spp.)  and  the  lack  of  novel  antimicrobial   the capacity to synthetize novel classes of compounds yet to be
        compounds in development to combat these  infections.2–6   discovered.10,11 Natural products research has evolved with the
          Antibacterial discovery eﬀorts have seen a continued decline in   introduction of new culturing techniques and cell separation
         the large pharma in the last two decades where the limited  methods enabling the cultivation and domestication in labo-
        number of new scaﬀolds and the rediscovery problem of old   ratory conditions of new members of the microbial communi-
       known molecules has been an important hurdle to sustain   ties previously underexplored.12,13 In parallel new tools and high
           active NPs discovery programs. Today we are confronted with   throughput methods have been developed to mine genomes
         important scientic challenges to dene new approaches to  and predict the chemical structures from genomic sequences,
         ght multidrug resistant pathogens and with a limited number   to activate silent clusters and enable pathway engineering and
AM.       of large pharma companies still active in the area with capacity   to directly express metagenome gene clusters in heterologous
7:49:08       towithdevelopthe brokencompoundseconomicto themodelmarket.associatedThis situationto the togethercosts of  newpermittingchassis.14–19the transitionThe integrationto a newof allparadigmthese newforadvancesthe earlyis
          antibiotic development and the limited nancial return on   discovery  of new  antibiotics  that  is  being  developed by
         investment, has resulted not only in a lack of discovery of new   a number of pioneering research groups and small companies.3/5/2025          classes of antibiotics with new mechanisms of action, leading to
on
          serious diﬃculties for advancing novel compounds for clinical
                                                     2.  Recent antibiotics in the pipeline         development.7 Diﬀerent international public-private partner-
         ships  and  government  supported  initiatives  have  been and in the clinic: new analogs ofDownloaded      launched in the last few years to cope with some of these  revisited old classes
2017.       diﬃcultiescompounds,to butll gapslimitedin theeﬀortsvalue chainare beingof developmentfocused onofearlynew  Chemical modications of existing chemical scaﬀolds have
August       discoveryIn contrastprograms.8,9to the unfavorable antibiotic discovery environ-  beenspectrumthe sourcesantibioticsof anda largecontinuenumberto deliverof highlynewerpotentdrugsbroad-that
18      ment, recent advances in exploring microbial diversity and the   provide temporary coverage for resistant organisms.20,21 The
on
          increasing numbers  of  available  microbial genomes have   potency and selectivity observed in natural products is the result
          revealed the remarkably rich biosynthetic potential for the   of an extended evolutionary selection to create biologically
                                                                                active molecules with the required properties to interact andPublished
                                                                               potentially inhibit biological targets. These structure–function
                                      Olga Genilloud has a PhD  in   relationships have been oen an inspiration for medicinal
                                       Chemistry   (Biochemistry  and   chemists  to  design  innovative  therapeutic  agents when
                                       Molecular  Genetics)  from  the   synthetic libraries fail to deliver the desired scaﬀolds. Natural
                                        Universidad       Complutense,   products have been frequently used as starting points for the
                                    Madrid and she has worked in  development of new drug candidates as reected in the struc-
                                           the discovery and biosynthesis of   ture  of  novel compounds  that  were  recently  launched.
                                        secondary metabolites, both in  Furthermore many natural products that were discontinued
                                           the academia (Hospital Ram´on y  due to toxicity, poor solubility or pharmacokinetics, or limited
                                            Cajal, Madrid 1984–1988; Har-  spectrum of activity are still opportunities for development and
                                       vard  Medical  School,  Boston,   have been revisited with totally new approaches by application
                                       1987) and in the pharmaceutical   of new technologies.
                                           industry (Merck Sharp & Dohme      Since 2006 only two rst in class antibiotics derived from
                                        Research  Labs  Spain,  1989–   microbial natural products and only targeting Gram positive
         2008) as group leader of the bacterial natural products drug   bacteria, have been launched  worldwide. Retapamulin  is
          discovery program. In 2008 she assumed the leadership to establish   a semi-synthetic natural product approved for topical use in
          Fundaci´on MEDINA from the MSD-Spain R&D Center. Currently  2007 and is derived from the fungal terpenoid pleuromutilin
          she is Scientic Director at Fundaci´on MEDINA and Head of the   rst described in 1950. Fidaxomicin is a molecule derived from
          Microbiology department. Her main research interests are focused   tiacumicin and approved for the treatment of C. diﬃcile-medi-
         on the production of novel microbial natural products, the explo-   ated colitis in 2011.22,23 Fidaxomicin (OPT-80, Dicid™) was
          ration of novel microbial diversity to deliver novel chemistry, and   rst reported in 1975 as the antibiotic lipiarmycin produced by
          the development of molecular and chemical tools to support natural   a  strain  of  Actinoplanes  deccanensis  (Fig.  1).24–26 This  18-
          products drug discovery and the identication of potential new  membered macrolide antibiotic is a RNA-polymerase inhibitor
          therapeutic applications.                                       with narrow spectrum activity against Gram positive aerobes


         1204  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017


[PDF physical page 3]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

         Review                                                                                                    Natural Product Reports





AM.
7:49:08
3/5/2025
on
Downloaded
2017.
August
18
on
Published





             Fig. 1  Antibiotics in the market (2006–2016).



        and anaerobes, including Clostridium  diﬃcile, and limited   preventing cross-resistance between two drug classes with the
           activity against Gram negative facultative species (i.e., Enter-  same target.28
          obacteriaceae, P. aeruginosa) and anaerobes, such as Bacteriodes     The current pipeline of natural products antibiotics derived
           spp.27 The low solubility and poor absorption of daxomicin  from actinomycetes that have recently reached the market or are
        and its low MIC against C. diﬃcile (0.125 mg mL  1), became an   in clinical development include compounds that were inspired
         advantage  to  treat  intestinal  infections by  this pathogen.   by known classes of old antibiotics and that have reached
          Resistant mutations have mapped daxomicin RNA polymerase   clinical trials only aer years of development. These semi-
         binding  site  to a diﬀerent  site from  that  of  rifamycins,   synthetic approaches to generate new analogs were aimed at



             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1205


[PDF physical page 4]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review


         improving the spectrum of activity and pharmacokinetic prop-   bacteria.32  The   lipoglycopeptide   oritavancin   (Orbactiv,
            erties, overcoming resistance and reducing side eﬀects. Three  LY333328) was derived from the vancomycin-like glycopeptide
          semi-synthetic glycopeptide derivatives aﬀecting peptidoglycan  chloroeremomycin discovered by Eli Lilly.33 The compound is
          biosynthesis were approved for clinical use in the last years: two   alkylated on the vancosamine amine with a hydrophobic
          lipoglycopeptides derived from vancomycin, telavancin and   chlorophenyl-benzyl moiety and shows eﬃcacy in acute bacte-
          oritavancin, approved in 2009 and 2011 respectively, followed   rial skin and skin structure infections (ABSSSI) caused by Gram
         by approval of dalvabancin, an analog of teicoplanin (Fig. 1) in   positive pathogens. Dalvabancin (Dalvance, BI-397) was origi-
           2014.29–31  Telavancin  (Vibativ, TD-6424) was developed by   nally developed by Lepetit Research Centre and nally brought
         Theravance from vancomycin by addition of a decylaminoethyl   to the clinic by Allergan. Dalvabancin  is an analog of the
           lipophilic substituent on the vancosamine amino group to   teicoplanin-like glycopeptide A40926 complex produced by
          increase membrane interactions, and a hydrophilic (phospho-  Nonomuraea sp. and is produced by amidation of the C-terminal
         methyl) aminomethyl moiety  at the para  position  of the   acid  group  with  N,N-dimethyl-1,3-diaminopropane.  Dalva-
         aromatic  ring  on  the  C-terminal  dihydroxyphenylglycine   bancin inhibits peptidoglycan synthesis by binding to the
          residue. Telavancin has improved potency compared to vanco-   precursor lipid II and was approved for treatment of Gram
        mycin against a range of Gram positive bacteria, including   positive acute  bacterial skin and skin  structure  infection
AM.       vancomycin-resistant strains, and FDA approval was granted in   (ABSSSI) with  S. aureus, Enterococcus  faecalis and diﬀerent
7:49:08      2009infectionsfor treatment(CSSSI)  ofcausedcomplicatedby  susceptibleskin and Gramskin structurepositive  thromycinspecies of Streptococci.(CEM-101)  isThea proteinsemi-syntheticsynthesis2-uoroketolideinhibitor soli-
3/5/2025
on
Downloaded
2017.
August
18
on
Published





             Fig. 2  Antibiotics in clinical trials (2006–2016) (I).



         1206  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017


[PDF physical page 5]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

         Review                                                                                                    Natural Product Reports


         developed by Cempra with broad-spectrum antibacterial activity   development. Omadacycline (amadacycline, PTK-0796), sarecy-
          against many ketolide and macrolide resistant strains of Neis-   cline and eravacycline are three semi-synthetic tetracyclines in
           seria gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia trachomatis and Mycoplasma geni-   late stage development (Fig. 2).35–38 Omadacycline is an amino-
          talium, for the treatment gonorrhea (Fig. 1).34 Eight analogs of   methylcycline  developed by  Paratek  Pharmaceuticals  with
         diﬀerent structural classes are in diﬀerent phases of clinical   broad-spectrum antibacterial activity by inhibition of protein





AM.
7:49:08
3/5/2025
on
Downloaded
2017.
August
18
on
Published





             Fig. 3  Antibiotics in clinical trials (2006–2016) (II).



             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1207


[PDF physical page 6]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review


          synthesis through enhanced ribosome binding. The antibiotic  and inhibits the elongation factor Tu, and never followed clinical
          received a fast track designation by FDA in 2015 and is in later  development due to solubility problems. Distamycin A has also
          stages of clinical development. Sarecycline (PTK-AR01) is being  been  used  as  inspiration  to  develop  MGB-BP-3,  a  novel
          evaluated in phase-III trials for the treatment of acne vulgaris  compound with Gram positive activity that is being developed in
         whereas the uorocycline-type tetracycline derivative eravacy-   clinic by MGB Biopharma to treat CDI. Distamycin A has also
          cline (TP-434) developed by Tetraphase Pharmaceutics has  been  used  as  inspiration  to  develop  MGB-BP-3,  a  novel
         a broad spectrum activity including tetracycline-specic eﬄux  compound with Gram positive activity that is being developed in
           resistant mutants. The compound is being evaluated in phase-   the clinic to treat CDI by MGB Biopharma.
             III trials for the IV treatment of community-acquired compli-     Despite the current progress of these compounds to the
         cated intra-abdominal infections  (cIAIs). Surotomycin (MK-   clinic, the pipeline of molecules in earlier stages of discovery
         4261, CB-183,315) is a semi-synthetic daptomycin derivative  has not been replenished yet. Further modications of existing
         developed by Cubist Pharmaceuticals with improved activity   antibiotics have become increasingly challenging, and the
          against daptomycin-resistant S. aureus, E. faecalis and E. fae-   discovery of novel scaﬀolds with completely new mechanisms of
          cium, and C.  diﬃcile, and  it apparently shares the same   action is still urgently needed to address clinical needs. Despite
       membrane depolarization mechanism of action (Fig. 2).39,40 The   the challenges, the last decade has seen new and diﬀerent
AM.     compound is active against resistant C. diﬃcile with MICs below   discovery eﬀorts to describe novel natural products scaﬀolds,
7:49:08     #1metronidazolemg mL 1 andagainstshowsC.greaterdiﬃcileactivityisolatesthanandvancomycinis more activeand  anddistributedmore specicallygroup of bacteriathose hasfrombeenactinomycetes.shown to be Thisan untappedbroadly
          against vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE). CB-183,315   resource with an unprecedent diversity of biosynthetic path-
          also had  excellent  activity  against  methicillin-resistant  S.  ways awaiting to be exploited to identify novel scaﬀolds that3/5/2025          aureus (MRSA), other Clostridium spp., and Peptostreptococcus   could address the emergence  of multidrug  resistances  to
on
           spp.40 Plazomicin (ACHN-490) is a semi-synthetic aminoglyco-   current antibiotics.
          side  derivative  of  sisomicin  with  broad-spectrum  activity
          against both Gram  positive and Gram  negative  bacteria  3.  Recent antibiotic discoveryDownloaded        (Fig. 2).41 Plazomicin was developed by Achaogen, and is being
          evaluated for the treatment of complicated urinary tract infec-  approaches from actinomycetes
2017.       tions (cUTI) and  pyelonephritis, and carbapenem-resistant
                                                                                                   It has been  extensively discussed  that most  of the high
          Enterobacteriaceae of ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP),
                                                                  throughput  screening   initiatives  relying  upon  in   vitroAugust       hospital   acquired   infections  (HAP)  and  bloodstream
                                                                    biochemical assays and  large synthetic  libraries  to detect
18        infections.22
on                                                                                   activity on dened targets failed to deliver new leads that could
           Within the class of lantibiotics, NVB302 is one of the deriv-
                                                                be developed into the clinic.4,48 The selection of essential target
           atives from deoxyactagardine B obtained at Novacta from Acti-
                                                                               bacterial genes and the development of a rational design of
          noplanes liguriae and currently under development (Fig. 3).42Published                                                                          inhibitors of these targets narrowed the scope of the antibac-
        NVB302 is active against Gram positive bacteria and binds to
                                                                                        terial screens that selected for molecules that could not pene-
           lipid II at a site diﬀerent from the binding site of vancomycin
                                                                                   trate the bacterial membranes to reach their targets when tested
        and related glycopeptides, what determines the activity against
                                                           on whole cells. In contrast, a variety of screening strategies
      MDR strains. NVB302, is not absorbed and is currently in clin-
                                                                 based on whole cell assays were successfully implemented in
           ical phase I for the treatment of C. diﬃcile infection given its
                                                                       the last decade and have contributed to the discovery of novel
         high selectivity for C. diﬃcile over other members of the normal
                                                                              antibacterial molecules when used in conjunction with micro-
         gut ora, which may  translate  into improved therapeutic
                                                                                 bial natural products. These approaches have included classical
          properties. Other lantibiotics include the labyrinthopeptins,
                                                                     empiric whole-cell assays looking to extend the use of well-
         a novel class of carbacyclic lantibiotics produced by a strain of
                                                                          established compounds in the  clinic with new synergistic
         Actinomadura namibiensis and moderate antimicrobial activity
                                                                     combinations, and more sophisticated target-based whole cell
         with MICs against S. aureus (3 to 12 mg mL  1), S. pyogenes
                                                                         assays aiming at identifying novel classes of molecules with new
           (3 mg mL  1) and S. faecium (6 mg mL  1) (Fig. 3) and class I
                                                      mode of action, and have revisited resistance-based approaches
           lantibiotic is NAI-107, produced by a Microbispora sp. and iso-
                                                                 aiming at identifying new analogs of known classes for chem-
          lated from a screening program directed at detecting cell wall
                                                                                      ical development.45,47 Diﬀerent strategies have been introduced
          inhibiting compounds active against S. aureus and inactive
                                                                             to  exploit  the  established  microbial  culture and  extracts
          against isogenic L-forms  (Fig.  3).43–46 NAI-107  is  currently
                                                                              collections  enriched  in  actinomycetes and  involving  the
         a developmental candidate for the treatment of nosocomial
                                                                   continued search for novel scaﬀolds and potential new analogs.
          infections by MDR Gram positive pathogens.45,46
            Other compounds are only being developed for topical treat-
                                                                                     3.1.  Phenotypic whole cell target based screening paradigms        ment of acne such as CB-06-01 (NAI-003, BIK-0376, NAI-Acne), an
        amide derivative of the cyclic thiazolyl peptide GE2270A isolated  The development of whole  cell target based assays, more
        from the fermentation of a strain of Planobispora rosea and  amenable to be used with crude extract libraries of natural
         developed by Cassiopea S.p.a. (Fig. 3).22 CB-06-01 has a broad   products, have represented a change in the paradigm of anti-
         spectrum activity against Gram positive bacteria and anaerobes   biotic research (Table 1). Conditional expression of antisense


         1208  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017


[PDF physical page 7]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

         Review                                                                                                    Natural Product Reports


           Table 1  Antibiotics from terrestrial actinomycetes identiﬁed by diﬀerent screening approaches


            Antibiotic          Structural class      Antibiotic MOA                Producing species           Discovery tool               Reference

           Platensimycin    New ketolides        Fatty acid synthesis inhibition   Streptomyces platensis        Antisense screening         52 and 53
         and platencin
          Lucensimycins     Polyketide           Protein synthesis inhibition     Streptomyces lucensis         Antisense screening         59–61
          Okilactomycins    Spirotetronate       Protein synthesis inhibition     Streptomyces scabrisporus     Antisense screening         64
          Kibdelomycin    New class        DNA replication inhibition      Kibdelosporangium sp.         S. aureus tness test         66
          Krysinomycin      Cyclodepsipeptide   Imipenem synergist             Streptomyces fradiae         b-Lactam synergism         72
           Actinocarbasin    Lipoglycopeptide    Imipenem synergist             Actinoplanes ferrugineus      b-Lactam synergism         72
        M131             Lipoglycopeptide    Imipenem synergist             Semi-synthetic compound   b-Lactam synergism         72
          Cyslabdan        Labdane-diterpene  Imipenem synergist             Streptomyces sp.            b-Lactam synergism         75
            Antibiotic A201A   Anthracyclinone     Rifampicin adjuvant            Streptomyces lysosupericus   Sensitized deletion mutants  80
          Thiazomycin       Thiazolylpeptide     Protein synthesis inhibition     Amycolatopsis fastidiosa      Resistance-based screening   85 and 86
           Philipimicin       Thiazolylpeptide     Protein synthesis inhibition     Actinoplanes philippinensis    Resistance-based screening   90
          Pekiskomycin     Glycopeptide          n.d.; Gram positive              Actinomycetes                Resistance-based screening   91
AM.
7:49:08     RNA has been one of the most successful methods used for   excellent in vivo eﬃcacy in an S. aureus mouse model of infec-
          silencing essential gene expression and selectively decrease the   tion when infused intravenously. Platensimycin and platencin
         production of targeted gene products, sensitizing the strains to   inhibit  the  acyl enzyme  intermediate  of  the  fatty  acid3/5/2025        an inhibitor that targets the depleted gene product. The S.  condensing enzyme with diﬀerent specicity as determined in
on
          aureus antisense target-based screening strategies developed by   the cell-free enzyme FASII assays.55 Platensimycin specically
           Elitra  Pharmaceuticals were  applied  at Merck  as unique   targets the elongation b-ketoacyl-acyl  carrier protein (ACP)
          discovery platforms to identify novel antibacterials directly from   synthase I/II, FabF/B, while platencin has a dual mode of actionDownloaded       microbial extracts.49 The use of optimized agar-diﬀusion two-  and targets both FabF/B and the initiation b-ketoacyl-ACP
2017.        plateing thediﬀerentialtarget genesensitivityantisenseassaysRNA withand theS. aureusother cellslackingexpress-anti-
         sense           RNA expression,                              permitted                                         the                                              identication                                                              of diﬀerentAugust        new antibiotics                        scaﬀolds                               produced                                         by                                                    strains of Streptomyces
18      and involved among others in fatty acid synthesis, protein
on
         ribosomal proteins and protein translocation.50,51
            Platensimycin and platencin (Fig. 4), are two of the most
          relevant antibiotics identied in the last decade using thePublished
          antisense approach screening on a library of 250 000 natural
         product extracts.52,53 Both molecules present novel scaﬀolds and
         share a 3-amino-2,4-dihydroxy benzoic acid unit diﬀering in
           their ketolide portions. Platensimycin contains a pentacyclic
         motif with a cyclic ether ring, whereas platencin contains
         a unique tetracyclic motif without the ether ring. In fact pla-
         tensimycin is not a rare antibiotic and it was repeatedly detected
         during the screening in as many a 0.5% of the extracts tested
        and identied by using a rapid LC-MS dereplication method.54
         Platensimycin was originally isolated from Streptomyces pla-
           tensis MA7327 from South Africa and later identied to be
         produced by a large number of diﬀerent Streptomyces platensis
          strains isolated from diverse geographical origins. In contrast
          platencin was only naturally produced by the strain MA7339
          isolated in Spain. The strains of Streptomyces platensis MA7327
        and  Streptomyces  platensis MA7339 have been  extensively
         studied for the production of these specic inhibitors of fatty
          acid condensing enzyme. Both compounds show potent broad-
         spectrum Gram positive antibiotic  activities with low MIC
          values (0.06–2 mg mL  1) against major drug-resistant bacteria,
         such as MRSA and vancomycin resistant Enterococci (VRE), and
        show no cross-resistance with other classes of commercially
          available antibiotics.52,53 Furthermore both compounds have    Fig. 4  Novel classes of antibiotics from whole cell antisense screening
                                                                                         strategy.



             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1209


[PDF physical page 8]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review


         synthase III, FabH.52,53 The high specicity of platensimycin for  enzyme (FabH; IC50 67 mM). A bacterial type I diperpene syn-
         the elongation condensing enzyme FabF (IC50 48 nM) contrasts   thase has been identied in the gene clusters involved in
         the almost limited activity against the initiation condensing   synthesis of platensimycin and platencin.56 The production is





AM.
7:49:08
3/5/2025
on
Downloaded
2017.
August
18
on
Published





             Fig. 5 RNA translation inhibitors from whole cell antisense screening strategy.



          1210  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017


[PDF physical page 9]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

         Review                                                                                                    Natural Product Reports


            strictly regulated and the deletion of the gene ptmR1, encoding   discovery of kibdelomycin, the rst new structural class of
         a pathway specic regulator, permitted to overproduce both   bacterial DNA gyrase inhibitors discovered in many decades.66
          antibiotics reaching  yields higher than 300 mg L 1 and  Kibdelomycin is a potent inhibitor of the bacterial type-II top-
         250 mg L  1, respectively.57 The heterologous expression of the   oisomerases, the DNA gyrase subunit GyrB and the topoisom-
           cluster in S. lividans has permitted to unlock production and to   erase IV subunit ParE, and shows broad spectrum Gram positive
           identify ve new congeners of platencin.58 Later studies have   antibacterial activity. Kibdelomycin is produced by the strain
        shown that the platensimycin and platencin gene clusters are   Kibdelosporangium sp. MA7385, and presents four structural
         spread across many strains of Streptomyces platensis.56           motifs with a central 4-hydroxy decalin tetramic acid core con-
           Lucensimycins and okilactomycins (Fig. 5) are RNA trans-   nected to a novel 6-methyl-2-methoxy-3-acetoxy-4-carbamoyl-
          lation inhibitors that were identied from the screening of   epiallose  residue by an  N-glycosidic  linkage and  to  3-a-
           extracts on a sensitized rpsD strain using a diﬀerential sensi-   aminoethyl-3,6-dideoxy  hexopyranose  by  an  O-glycosidic
            tivity two-plate whole cell assay. The rpsD gene encodes the   linkage, and a 3,4-dichloro-5-methyl pyrazole-2-carboxylic acid
          bacterial ribosome protein S4, an essential component of the   linked to this second sugar.66 Kibdelomycin is a completely
         30S ribosomal subunit in S. aureus and rpsD antisense expres-   novel structure compared to other bacterial gyrase inhibitors such
         sion sensitizes the strain against RNA translation inhibitors.   as novobiocin, chlorobiocin and coumermycin A1, and the related
AM.      Lucensimycins are a family of seven related polyketides with  compound amycolamycin.67 Kibdelomycin mode of action  is
7:49:08      weaklucensisantibioticMA7349.59–61activityLucensimycinsproduced by A–Bthe strainbind weaklyof Streptomycesto the S4   similarsubunitstoofcoumarintopoIV andantibioticof DNA novobiocingyrA, involvingas itthetargetsinhibitionthe twoof
          protein and display weak antibiotic activity, whereas lucensi-   the ATPase activity of DNA gyrase and topoIV. Macromolecular
        mycin C, an ultimate intermediate of lucensimycin A is 80-fold   synthesis analysis conrmed that kibdelomycin inhibited DNA3/5/2025           less active than lucensimycin A and does not show any selec-   synthesis (IC50 0.03 mg mL  1) in S. aureus with more than 100-fold
on
            tivity  against rpsD  versus  other  antisense  strains. These   selectivity over RNA, peptidoglycan, phospholipids, and protein
        compounds  are  distantly  related  to  cytotoxic  antibiotics   synthesis. Kibdelomycin has a potent antibacterial activity against
         delaminomycins A–C previously described from a strain of   wild-type S. aureus strains (MIC 2 mg mL  1) and methicillin-Downloaded       Streptomyces albulus.62 Among all the related molecules, lucen-   resistant  S. aureus (MIC  0.5 mg mL  1), as  well as against
         simycin E shows the best activity with MICs of 38 mg mL 1   the Gram  positive pathogens  Streptococcus pneumoniae and
2017.       against S. aureus and 8 mg mL                                               1 against Streptococcus pneumo-   Enterococcus faecalis, (MICs of 1 and 2 mg mL  1, respectively) and
August        niae.identifyTheokilactomycinsame two-plateandantisensethe fourRpsDcongenersscreeningokilactomycinpermitted toA,   the2 mg Gram-negativemL  1).66 Kibdelomycinpathogen,has Haemophilusno activity againstinuenzae,other Gram-(MIC
18       B, C and D from a strain of Streptomyces scabrisporus.63 Oki-   negative wild-type pathogens such as Escherichia coli (MIC >
on         lactomycin is an old known molecule produced by a strain of  64 mg mL  1), although some inhibitory eﬀect is observed on
          Streptomyces griseoavus subsp. zamamiensis that was originally   a permeable and eﬄux pump mutant E. coli envA1, tolC (MIC
         described as a weak antibiotic against Gram positive bacteria  32 mg mL  1). The activity of kibdelomycin is also drasticallyPublished
         with MICs ranging from 12.5 to 50 mg mL  1, and cytotoxicity   reduced in the presence of 50% human serum. Recent proling
          against some leukemia cell lines.64 Okilactomycin remained the   studies performed with a large collection of clinical strains has
        most active compound inhibiting Streptococcus pneumoniae  shown a potent activity of kibdelomycin against Acinetobacter
        (MIC of 8–16 mg mL  1), Enterococcus faecalis (MIC of 16 mg mL  1)   baumannii with MIC of 0.125 mg mL 1 and only weak activity
        and Bacillus subtilis (MIC of 4–16 mg mL  1). Okilactomycin as   against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, although the molecule is not
          well as okilactomycin A and C have been shown to present   subject to eﬄux in Pseudomonas.68 The demethylated congener
          preferential inhibition for RNA synthesis rather than protein   kibdelomycin A  exhibits  higher MIC  values  (16 mg mL  1)
          synthesis.                                              compared to kibdelomycin, suggesting the key role of the C-44
          The antisense technology was the basis for the development   methyl group for whole cell activity.69 Kibdelomycin shows no
          of the S. aureus tness test, a whole-cell empiric combined test   cross-resistance with other gyrase inhibitors when tested against
          against the whole genome that has represented a major shiin   novobiocin and ciprooxacin resistant S. aureus strains, and has
         the way the antimicrobial discovery from natural products   a very low frequency of resistance (<5   10  10), compared to
         crude extracts. The S. aureus tness test consisted of a collection   novobiocin (10  8) suggesting a diﬀerent binding than that of
          of 245 inducible S. aureus antisense RNA strains engineered for  known GyrB inhibitors.
         reduced expression of a single target corresponding to essential
         genes and was used to generate proles of strain sensitivities
                                                                                     3.2.  Screening for potentiators and adjuvants for         specic for the mechanism of action of the compounds.65 The
                                                                 combination therapies         approach required a preliminary selection of antibacterial hits
        from an empiric screening looking for activity against S. aureus,   Another strategy has been the identication of new molecules
          that were later analyzed for the mode of action with a simulta-   that could potentiate or enhance the activity of existing anti-
        neous antisense screen for all essential bacterial gene targets.   bacterial agents. Many screening approaches have looked for
         Within this framework the screening of a library of more than   molecules to be developed as combination therapies to extend
         500 000 natural product extracts followed by mode of action   the life-cycle of compounds currently facing emerging resis-
          analysis and HRMS follow-up of the most potent hits led to the   tances  in  the  clinic. The  objective has been  to  identify


             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1211


[PDF physical page 10]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review


        compounds engaging multiple targets at one time and leading  promoted the active search for new inhibitors of cell wall
          to synergistic bactericidal eﬀects and decreased resistance rates   biosynthesis that could potentiate b-lactams activity against
          (Table 1).                                      MRSA and restore b-lactam activity,70,71 two imipenem syner-
          One of the best examples is MRSA resistance to b-lactams   gistic compounds, krisynomycin and  actinocarbasin, were
          that is frequently associated to the expression of the penicillin   identied from a high throughput screening of microbial
         binding protein PBP2A and its low acylation by b-lactams. The   natural products extracts following this approach and using
          observation that b-lactam susceptibility can be restored by   a MRSA agar-based assay looking for synergizers of imipenem.72
          antibiotics  that  target  peptidoglycan  synthesis  pathways   Krisynomycin is a novel cyclodepsipeptide isolated from the





AM.
7:49:08
3/5/2025
on
Downloaded
2017.
August
18
on
Published





             Fig. 6  Antibiotic synergists.



          1212  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017


[PDF physical page 11]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

         Review                                                                                                    Natural Product Reports


          strain Streptomyces fradiae MA7310, whereas actinocarbasin is   a library of 30 000 small molecules against E. coli has identied
         a lipoglycopeptide isolated from the strain Actinoplanes ferru-   several synergistic combinations that overcome the intrinsic
          gineus MA7383 (Fig. 6). Both molecules have activity against   resistance of Gram-negative bacteria to novobiocin, alter cell
       MRSA and can restore the susceptibility to imipenem against  shape and induce changes in small molecule transport. Among
         the MRSA strain COL with potentiating concentrations of kri-   these compounds were identied well known actinomycetes
         synomycin and actinocarbasin 16-fold below the native MIC   natural products such as echinomycin, rosamicin or rifabutin,
          values of 64 and 8 mg mL  1, respectively.72 Actinocarbasin is   a member of the rifamycin family of antibiotics.79 The intrinsic
           structurally similar to previously described arylomycins but is   resistance of Gram negative bacteria to rifampicin due to
          polysulfated, glycosylated and presents diﬀerent side chains,  reduced outer membrane permeability has been addressed
        and contrarily to arylomycins, is active against MRSA. As ary-   recently in an attempt to identify synergistic adjuvants. The
         lomycin and  other  lipoglycopeptides,  actinocarbasin  was   screening of a collection of actinomycetes fermentation extracts
         proposed as an inhibitor of type 1B signal peptidase SpsB,   in the presence of subinhibitory concentrations of rifampicin
         a conserved and essential cell surface protease. SpsB cleaves the  and using a rifampicin-sensitized strain of E. coli with enhanced
         amino-terminal signal peptide from most secreted proteins and   small molecule permeability led to the rediscovery of antibiotics
            is required for protein secretion, what has attracted signicant  301A1 and 301A2 as active adjuvants in combination with
AM.       attention as a drug discovery target, being accessible to inhib-   rifampicin (Fig. 6).80 Antibiotic 301A1 belongs to the anthracy-
7:49:08        itorslocalization.73without theWhenneedproledfor cellularusingpenetrationthe S. aureusgiventnessits surfacetest   clinonequickly eﬄuxedfamily, andfromis Gramactive negativeagainst Grambacteria.positiveAntibioticbacteria301A1but
         both molecules were shown to target SpsB and their mode of   presents an aglycone structurally related to nogalamycin, and
          action was conrmed by the in vitro inhibition of SpsB activity.   a positively charged bicyclo amino sugar (Fig. 6). Structure3/5/2025        SpsB is involved in the secretion of proteins such as peptido-   activity relationship studies have shown that removal of the
on
          glycan hydrolases, explaining that both krisynomycin and acti-   sugar moiety attached to one end of the aglycone abolishes the
         nocarbasin are potent inhibitors of b-lactamase secretion. In   adjuvant activity of antibiotic 301A1, and this loss of activity
          addition SpsB has been suggested to play a role in regulating the  does not appear to be associated with a reduced permeability toDownloaded       enzymatic activity of membrane-bound enzymes that contribute   the drug. Furthermore this rifampicin adjuvant activity has
2017.       krisynomycinto the b-lactamandresistanceactinocarbasinphenotypeis ofspecicMRSA.72forThisthe synergyactivity ofof  beenwith linezolid.observed inTheA. lackbaumanniiof synergyand ofextendedother anthracyclines,to the combinationsuch
August       thepenicillins,b-lactamsandclasstwo ofotherantibiotics,carbapenemsincludingin additioncephalosporins,to imipe-   asin doxorubicinE. coli suggestsandthatdaunorubicin,this activitywithis notrifampicinclass related.or linezolidEﬄux
18      nem. The synthetic derivative of actinocarbasin M131 (Fig. 6)   assays in E. coli have shown that antibiotic 301A1 competes with
on        was synthesized following a similar approach used for the   linezolid for eﬄux by AcrAB–TolC, reducing the eﬄux rate and
          synthesis of arylomycin and is a mixture of diastereomers at the   increasing intracellular eﬀective levels of the antibiotic. These
          lysine stereogenic center.74 M131 presents improved antibacte-   results were conrmed with mutants over-expressing the AdeIJKPublished
            rial activity restoring imipenem susceptibility to MRSA COL at  eﬄux pumps.81 In the case of rifampicin that is a poor substrate
         0.125 mg mL  1, and is the only compound that has been studied   for this eﬄux pump, it has been suggested that the antibiotic
           for in vivo synergy in two murine models of MRSA infection.   binds to a second binding pocket in AcrAB occluding the access
         Free M131 blood concentrations did not reach the MIC level   of small molecules to the transporter.
           (1 mg mL  1) but were well above the MIC observed in the pres-
         ence of imipenem (0.125 mg mL  1). More interestingly M131
                                                                          8           3.3.  Targeting specic antibiotic classes         presented a very low frequency resistance in the 10   range.
         Another new potentiator of imipenem activity against MRSA is   Screening for antibiotic resistance to enrich in and identify
          cyslabdan, a diterpene isolated from the Streptomyces sp. K04-   diﬀerent class-related families of compounds has been inten-
         0144 at the Kitasato Institute (Fig. 6).75 Cyslabdan is the rst   sively used with natural products libraries to expand the chemical
         labdane-type diterpene isolated from a bacterium, and only   diversity and provide new chemical scaﬀolds  for  antibiotic
          previously described as a plant metabolite. The diterpene  development (Table 1). Thiazolylpeptides are a class of antibi-
          structure is connected to a N-acetyl-L-cysteine via a thioether   otics broadly distributed among actinomycetes and so far more
          linkage similar to totarol, another previously described b-lac-   than 90 structures have been reported with diﬀerent activities.82
        tam potentiator.75                                          These antibiotics are highly modied ribosomally synthesized
          More recent approaches to identify new antibiotic adjuvants   peptides that inhibit bacterial protein synthesis aﬀecting the
         have looked for expanding the prole against Gram negative   elongation factor Tu or the 23S rRNA and L11 protein. The class
         pathogens, and despite their lack of intrinsic antibiotic activity,   of nocathiacins is a family of thiazolylpeptides produced by
          recover the susceptibility against Gram negative pathogens. One   a large diversity of actinobacteria and with broad-spectrum Gram
          of the methods used was based on the antibiotic sensitivity   positive antibacterial  activities.83,84 Despite the poor physico-
         obtained aer deletion of a number of nonessential genes in   chemical properties, most notably the low-aqueous solubility of
       Gram negative bacteria to a number of antibiotics, including   these compounds that prevented them to be advanced as clinical
         those that only show eﬀectiveness against Gram positives.76–78   agents, they still remain very attractive given the potency and new
        The combined test of the aminocoumarin novobiocin with  modes  of  action.  The  interest  to  discover new  natural


             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1213


[PDF physical page 12]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review


          thiazolylpeptides with improved physical properties and spec-  Thiazomycin is a minor metabolite produced in addition to the
         trum, and with chemical functionalities that can provide oppor-   four known nocathiacins I–IV, and characterized by the presence
           tunities for chemical modications fostered diﬀerent screening   of an oxazolidine ring in the aminosugar portion (Fig. 7).85,86
         approaches. A rst strategy permitted the analytical identication   Thiazomycin was found to be the most potent compound of
          of thiazomycin, a new congener of nocathiacins from the analysis   this  class, inhibiting growth of MRSA with a MIC value of
          of the producer strain Amycolatopsis  fastidiosa ATCC202099.   0.008 mg mL  1. The compound targets de 50S subunit and shows





AM.
7:49:08
3/5/2025
on
Downloaded
2017.
August
18
on
Published





             Fig. 7  Antibiotics from resistance-based screening.



          1214  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017


[PDF physical page 13]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

         Review                                                                                                    Natural Product Reports


           selective inhibition of protein synthesis binding to ribosome   screening collections with novel or poorly represented strains
        and L11 protein, and strong in vivo eﬃcacy in an S. aureus  from unique microbial communities. Expanding the access to
        mouse model of kidney infection (ED99 0.78 mg kg  1).85,86   a wide diversity of unique habitats with rich microbial biodi-
         Thiazomycin resistance was mapped in the L11 protein as a four   versity has been pointed out as a requirement to ensure the
        amino acid deletion in the rplK gene that resulted in a 500-fold   isolation  of  novel  species  potentially  producing  novel
          increase in the MIC.87,88 A second screening approach involved   compounds.92,93  Productive  use  of  terrestrial and marine
         the use of a thiazomycin sensitive-resistant pair of S. aureus   microbial sources has been limited by the challenge of isolating
          strains in a two-plate agar-based assay format aimed at identi-  new species expected to produce novel compounds never
          fying inhibitors with activity by binding at the thiazomycin-   described even aer decades of intensive industrial microbial
         binding  site  of L11  protein. The  screening  of  microbial   natural products screening. These microorganisms have been
           extracts from 21 700 actinomycetes lead to the identication of   targeted among symbiotic communities, endophytic species or
         24 thiazolyl peptides produced by a large diversity of actino-   simply species that exist as part of complex microbial assem-
         mycetes  strains  including members  of  Streptomyces, Non-   blages that cannot be cultured in standard laboratory condi-
         omuraea,     Micromonospora,     Actinoplanes,     Nocardia,   tions or that require the interaction with other species for
          Actinokineospora and Amycolatopsis, and belonging to the a,   survival or the production of secondary metabolites.94 Envi-
AM.      d and e structural subseries class of thiazolyl peptides, being the  ronmental pressures and competition  for  survival are key
7:49:08       hydroxyl-pyridinezomycin the mostclasspotent.89representedAmongbythemulthiomycinthree novel andthiazolylthia-   drivingsmall diﬀusibleforces in signalingmicrobial moleculesecosystemsthatwhereregulatethe productiontheir inter-of
         peptides identied, only philipimycin was fully characterized   actions are determining the composition of this microbial
           (Fig. 7).90 The compound is produced by a strain of Actinoplanes  community and the induction of the production of biologically3/5/2025           philippinensis MA7347 presented a with broad spectrum Gram   active molecules.95,96 As a result of these eﬀorts new bioactive
on
          positive antibiotic activity with MIC values ranging from 0.015   molecules have been regularly described as produced by new
          to 0.125 mg mL 1 including a MRSA strain. Like other thiazolyl  and minor species of actinomycetes isolated both from terres-
         peptides philipimycin showed better potencies against Strepto-    trial and marine environments and belonging to a broad rangeDownloaded       coccus pneumoniae and Enterococcus  faecalis with MICs  of   of structural classes (Table 2).
         0.015 mg mL  1, and  exhibited  very good  activity  against    One of these examples is the case of two actinomycetes of the
2017.       vancomycin, linezolid, and macrolide resistant E. faecium (MIC   rare genus Planomonospora, Planomonospora sp. DSM 14920 and
August       inhibitor0.03 mg mLof protein1).90 Thesynthesiscompoundand exhibitedwas shownin vivoto beactivitya selective(ED50   Planomonosporathe lantibiotic planosporicinalba that were (Fig.identied8).97,98byTheVicuroncompoundto producewas
18       8.4 mg kg  1) in a mouse model of S. aureus infection.90          discovered from a library of 120 000 extracts from an enriched
on
              Similarly, a systematic approach using self-resistance was   collection of minor occurring actinomycetes screened using the
          applied for the discovery of glycopeptide antibiotic-producing   classical L form assay based on the diﬀerential activity against
          actinomycetes. The screening of a selection of 1000 actinomy-   S. aureus and its L-form. Planosporicin is a modied post-Published                                                               1          cetes for resistance to vancomycin at 20 mg mL   identied the   translationally   ribosomal   peptide   belonging   to   the
        new glycopeptide pekiskomycin, with an unusual peptide scaf-   actagardine/mersacidin  subgroup  of  type  B  lantibiotics
          fold and novel chemical modications (Fig. 7).91 The molecule   according to its structural and functional features, and contains
         has three intramolecular cross-links similar to those of vanco-   characteristic methyl-lanthionine and lanthionine bridges that
        mycin and is the rst naturally occurring sulfated glycopeptide   confer structural rigidity and protease resistance. Planosporicin
          that does not have a teicoplanin scaﬀold. Pekiskomycin lacks the   is active against Gram positive bacteria and inhibits cell wall
         N-methyl-Leu and an asparagine found in vancomycin in posi-   biosynthesis, and has been suggested to form a complex with
          tions 1 and 3, and presents N,N-dimethyl-Ala and glutamic acid,   lipid II. In addition to its antibiotic activity, planosporicin has
           respectively, at these positions, and shares with teicoplanin the  been shown to function as well as an extracellular signaling
          sulfation and a tyrosine instead of b-hydroxy-tyrosine at position   molecule to induce its own synthesis in the original producing
           2. The modest antibacterial a activity of pekiskomycin, with some   strain.99
         eﬀect against vancomycin-resistant Enterococci-type B, and its    New spirotetronates have continued to be identied studying
         weaker binding to the  N,N-diacetyl-Lys-D-Ala-D-Ala  tripeptide   novel minor genera of actinomycetes as well as exploring new
        compared to vancomycin suggested its role as signaling mole-   strains  from  underexploited  environments.  Spirotetronate
           cule. A similar approach using rifampin (20 mg mL  1) permitted   polyketides are well know metabolites produced by many acti-
          to identify 16 new resistant actinomycetes potentially producing  nomycetes and characterized by their potent antibacterial and
        new ansamycins, including geldanamycin.91                    antitumor activities and some of them have been studied in
                                                                 depth as potential leads in drug discovery. The spirotetronate
                                                                               class is characterized by a tetronic acid moiety spiro-linked to
       4.  Mining the environment for new      a cyclohexene ring connected to a trans-decalin system either by
      chemical diversity                                a ketone or by a carboxylic ester, and decorated by various deoxy
                                                                           oligosaccharides. More than 50 related spirotetronates have
         Bioprospecting  underexploited  environments  with  strong  been reported from actinomycetes, with tetrocarcin A, chloro-
          selecting factors has been an alternative strategy to enrich   thricin, and kijanimicin as representative members of this


             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1215


[PDF physical page 14]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review


           Table 2  Relevant antibiotics described from screens targeted at minor genera and marine actinomycetes


            Antibiotic                         Structural class          Antibiotic spectrum       Producing species                         Reference

           Planosporicin                     Lantibiotic          Gram positive            Planomonospora alba, Planomonospora sp.    97 and 98
         NAI 414 A/B                      Spirotetronate        Gram positive             Actinoallomurus sp.                       102
         Maklamicin                      Spirotetronate        Gram positive            Micromonospora sp.                      103
          Tetrodecamycins                Tetronate           Gram positive             Streptomyces nashvillensis                  104
          Marinopyrroles                Halogenated pyrrole   MRSA                     Streptomyces sp.                         107
          Anthracimycin                    Tricarboxilic         Gram positive             Streptomyces sp.                         108
          Salinamide F                   Depsipeptide        Gram positive/negative     Streptomyces sp.                         114
         Marinomycins A–D              Polyene polyol        Gram positive             Marinispora sp.                          115
           Lipoxazolidinone A–C           Oxazolidinone        Gram positive             Marinispora sp.                          116
          Lynamicins A–E                  Bis-indole pyrrole     Gram positive/negative    Marinispora sp.                          117
          Kocurin                          thiazolylpeptide      Gram positive             Kocuria lacustris/Micrococcus sp.            118 and 120
          Essramycin                     Triazolopyrimidine    Gram positive/negative     Streptomyces sp.                         123
          A-201A                         Nucleoside          Gram positive/negative    Marinaactinospora thermotolerans           124
         Micromonohalimanes A, B       Diterpenoid         MRSA                   Micromonospora sp.                      126
AM.       Napyradiomycins A80915 A/B    Meroterpenoid       Gram positive             Streptomyces sp.                         127 and 128
7:49:08       Diazaquinomycins H, J          Diazoanthracenes      M. tuberculosis            Micromonospora sp.                      129

           class. All these compounds are known to present broad anti-   Actinoallomurus uncovered the two new spirotetronate antibi-3/5/2025        bacterial activity against Gram positive bacteria but they also   otics, NAI-414-A and NAI-414-B (Fig. 8).102 NAI414-A is diﬀeren-
on      show in some of the classes important antitumor activities.100,101   tiated from other members of the spirotetronate class by the
        A screening for new bioactive compounds from the new genus   saturation of the C15–C16 bond in the backbone of the molecule,
Downloaded
2017.
August
18
on
Published





             Fig. 8  Antibiotics from minor genera.



          1216  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017


[PDF physical page 15]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

         Review                                                                                                    Natural Product Reports


         whereas NAI414-B has the additional feature of the unique tri-   marinopyrroles A and B (Fig. 9), a structural class of densely
          chlorinated  pyrrole moiety. Both NAI414-A and NAI-414-B   halogenated antibiotics with halogenated pyrrole subunits that
        showed minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) comparable   exhibit potent activity against MRSA (MIC # 0.6 mM) and cyto-
          to those of vancomycin. Both molecules present similar activity   toxic  activity against human  cell  lines.107 Anthracimycin  is
          against antibiotic resistant S. aureus strains irrespective of their   another new antibiotic isolated from the marine Streptomyces
          resistance phenotype (MIC range: 0.25–1 mg mL  1), and are   strain CNH365 isolated from marine sediments in California and
         aﬀected by the macrolide eﬄux system as shown in a S. pneu-   with potent activity against B. anthracis (MIC 0.031 mg mL  1)
         moniae mefE mutant. NAI414-A was found to be 250-fold less   (Fig. 9).108 Anthracimycin is a tricarbocyclic metabolite, with
          cytotoxic than adriamycin when tested against human micro-   a rare combination of 14-, 6-, and 6-membered rings of apparent
          vascular endothelial cells (IC50 9 mM), and NAI-414-B presented   polyketide origin. A similar carbon skeleton is found in chlor-
         a slightly higher cytotoxicity (IC50 2 mM). In an attempt to   otonil, a rare metabolite produced by the myxobacterium Sor-
        modulate halogenation during the biosynthesis by substituting  angium cellulosum. Anthracimycin inhibits DNA/RNA synthesis
        NaCl in the fermentation by KBr, mono and bi-brominated  and shows broad spectrum against Gram positive bacteria such
          derivatives were obtained in positions C-300 of the pyrrole and   as  Staphylococci,  Enterococci,  and  Streptococci  including
          in position C-400 that resulted to be less active compounds with   methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus  aureus, and a  dichloro
AM.       higher MICs values against S. aureus strains and Enterococcus   derivative at position C-4 has extended spectrum prole against
7:49:08      fromsp. Anotherthe endophyticnew spirotetronate,Micromonosporamaklamicin,sp. GMKU326was identiedisolated   inGram-negativethe presence pathogens.of mouse serumAntibioticwith aactivitylarge MICis largelyshi, butaﬀectedearly
        from the root of a leguminous plant collected in Thailand. This  eﬃcacy in vivo data have shown that anthracimycin provides
          spiroteronate can be diﬀerentiated by the trans-decalin unit and   protection in MRSA infected CD1 mice (90% survival) at doses3/5/2025         the tetronic acid moiety spiro-linked with a cyclohexene ring   of 10 mg kg  1.109
on
           (Fig. 8).103 The compound presents modest activity against the     Salinamide F is a new congener of the bicyclic depsipeptides
       Gram positive S. aureus and E. faecalis (MIC 13 mg mL  1) and is   salinamides A–E recently puried from the same marine-
          inactive against  E.  coli (MIC > 50 mg mL  1), and shows   derived Streptomyces strain CNB-091 producing salinamidesDownloaded       a moderate cell cytotoxicity against human cancer cell lines with  and isolated from a jelly-sh collected in the Florida Keys.110,111
2017.       IC50Tetrodecamycinsvalues ranging fromare members17 to 34 mM.of the tetronate family of   Salinamidesand present A–Esignicantwere describedantibacterialmore andthananti-inammatorytwenty years ago
August        ring.compoundsThey werecharacterizedrst reportedby ina 1994uniqueas producedve-memberedby a strainlactoneof   possessesproperties.112,113signicantSimilarlyRNAP-inhibitoryto  salinamideactivityA,butsalinamideonly limitedF
18       Streptomyces nashvillensis collected in Japan producing tetrode-   antibacterial activity against Gram positive and Gram-negative
on                                                                                                                                                  1
         camycin and  dihydrotetrodecamycin  with  strong  antibiotic   bacteria with MIC50 in the range of 12.5 to 25 mg mL  when
            activity against the sh pathogen Photobacterium damselae ssp.   tested against Enterococcus faecalis, H. inuenzae, and Neisseria
           piscicida (1.56–6.25 mg mL  1) as well as antibiotic activity against   gonorrhoeae.114 Salinamide F inhibits RNA polymerase throughPublished
         a number of strains of methicillin resistant S. aureus (MRSA),   the same binding site on RNAP as salinamides A and B. Inter-
          Micrococcus  luteus, and  Bacillus  subtilis (6.25–12.5 mg mL  1)   estingly the substitutions of the RNA polymerase b-subunit that
            (Fig.  8).104 A new  congener  of  the  tetrodecamycin  family,   confer high-level resistance to the RNA polymerase inhibitor
          13-dehydrotetrodecamycin,  has been  recently  isolated from   rifampin do not confer resistance to salinamide F, and as other
         a Streptomyces strain WAC04657 inhibiting S. aureus and other   salinamides, does not interact with the rifampin binding site on
       Gram positive bacteria in co-culturing experiments (Fig. 8). The  RNA polymerase. Hormaomycins B and C are new chlorinated
           antibiotic lacks a hydroxyl group at C-13 on the decalin ring that   cyclic depsipeptides discovered from the marine mudat-
           results in some improved activity against MRSA and other Gram   derived Streptomyces SNM55 collected in Korea. They belong
           positive organisms compared to tetrodecamycin.105                 to the hormaomycin class that was originally isolated from
          The marine environment has been intensively explored as   Streptomyces griseoavus in 1990.115,116 Hormaomycin B and C
           alternative source of microbial diversity and new antibiotic   present weaker activity than hormoamycin for Gram positive
         molecules produced by marine actinomycetes. In recent years  pathogens (MRSA MIC 7 and 0.4 mg mL 1 respectively) and no
        new taxonomic groups of marine actinomycetes have been   signicant inhibitory activity against Gram negative pathogens.
         described within the order Actinomycetales with diﬀerent     In addition to Streptomyces, newly described marine-derived
          physiology and extraordinary rich metabolic capacities. Marine-   actinomycetes have also shown to produce interesting diﬀerent
          obligate and marine-derived species have been shown to be the   families of new antibiotics as it is the case of the prolic new
         source of structurally diverse secondary metabolites, and since  proposed genus  Marinispora  within  the  Streptomycetaceae.
         the  discovery  of  the  spirotetronate  abyssomycin C from  Marinomycins A–D represent a new class of bioactive polyene-
         a marine Verrucosispora, the rst natural compound reported to   polyols isolated from a strain of Marinispora with unusual
          inhibit biosynthesis  of para-aminobenzoic acid with good   macrodiolides  composed  of  dimeric  2-hydroxy-6-alkenyl-
          inhibitory activity against MRSA and VRSA (MIC 4–13 mg mL  1),   benzoic acid lactones with conjugated tetraene-pentahydroxy
          additional new antibiotics produced by marine strains have   polyketide chains (Fig. 9). Marinomycins A, B and D possess
         continued to be reported (Table 2).106 Cultivation of the obligate   a  symmetrical  macrodiolide  construction,  whereas  mar-
        marine Streptomyces sp. CNQ-418 permitted the isolation of  inomycin C  is  unsymmetrical.  Marinomycins A–D show


             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1217


[PDF physical page 16]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review





AM.
7:49:08
3/5/2025
on
Downloaded
2017.
August
18
on
Published





             Fig. 9  Antibiotics produced by marine-derived actinomycetes (I).



          signicant  antimicrobial  activities  against  drug  resistant   contrast none of them present signicant VRE activity.117 In
          bacterial pathogens but they also present selective cancer cell   addition to marinomycins, additional isolates of Marinispora
           cytotoxicities against melanoma cell lines.117 Marinomycin A is  have been shown to be prolic producers of new scaﬀolds. The
         the most potent antibacterial compound with an in vitro MIC of   Marinispora strain NPS8920, isolated from a sediment collected
          0.13 mM against both methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus   in a lagoon in Guam, produces lipoxazolidinone A, B and C,
        and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium. Marinomycins   a series of novel 2-alkylidene-5-alkyl-4-oxazolidinones (Fig. 9).118
       B to D are also active against MRSA (MIC 0.25 mM) but in  These 4-oxazolidinones have an unprecedented pharmacophore




          1218  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017


[PDF physical page 17]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

         Review                                                                                                    Natural Product Reports


        and broad spectrum antimicrobial activity similar to that of the   against Haemophilus inuenzae, a similar potency to those of
         commercial 2-oxazolidinone antibiotic linezolid, and a unique   linezolid. Another family of chlorinated antibiotics produced by
         scaﬀold for development. Lipoxazolidinone A has a broad   Marinispora are lynamicins A–E, a series of ve chlorinated
          antimicrobial spectrum activity, and the most potent activity   bisindole  pyrroles produced by the  strain  of  Marinispora
         with MIC values ranging from 0.5 to 5 mg mL 1 against Gram  NPS12745 isolated from a marine sediment from the coast of
          positive bacteria, including MRSA and VRE and 12 mg mL 1  San Diego.119 The core bisindole pyrrole skeleton has been





AM.
7:49:08
3/5/2025
on
Downloaded
2017.
August
18
on
Published





             Fig. 10  Antibiotics produced by marine-derived actinomycetes (II).



             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1219


[PDF physical page 18]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review


         proposed to be derived from tryptophan, but the amino acids   potential for developing analogs by combinatorial biosynthetic
          are modied in the nal antibiotics and the indole rings are  methods.
          substituted with chlorine (Fig. 10). These chlorinated natural     Another class rarely observed in actinomycetes despite their
         products are characteristic of marine species and are not   biosynthetic capacity of actinomycetes to produce them are
         produced by terrestrial organisms. Lynamicins present broad-   terpenes. Micromonohalimanes A and B  (Fig. 10) are two
         spectrum  activity  against both Gram  positive and Gram-  examples of halimane-type diterpenoids that were isolated from
          negative organisms, and MIC values were comparable across   a Micromonospora sp. obtained from the marine ascidian Sym-
          drug-sensitive  and  drug-resistant  strains.  This  class  of   plegma  brakenhielmi. Only one  of the compounds, Micro-
        compounds shows good potency against Staphylococci and  monohalimane B has a moderate activity against MRSA with
           Enterococci, including MRSA and VRE with MIC values for   a MIC of 40 mg mL  1.128
         lynamicins A–D in the range 1–3 mg mL 1 and 2–8 mg mL 1     Napyradiomycins  represent  a  structural  class  of  mer-
           respectively, suggesting potential for treatment of nosocomial   oterpenoid antibiotics isolated from terrestrial and marine-
           infections.                                                    derived  actinomycetes  with  signicant  activities  against
          More  recently  another  antibacterial  discovery program   a broad range of Gram positive bacteria including S. aureus, S.
         focused on marine isolates of the family Micrococcaceae isolated   epidermidis, Enterococcus faecalis and E. faecium, Streptococcus
AM.      from marine sponges collected in the Florida Keys (USA)   pyogenes and S. pneumoniae, and Bacillus anthracis that exhibit
7:49:08      producedpermitted theby identicationstrains belongingof a newto thiazolylpeptide,the genera Kocuriakocurin,and   meroterpenoidas well importantclasscytotoxicof napyradiomycinsactivity.129 Twowith membersunusual levelsof theof
           Micrococcus.120,121 The structure of kocurin conrmed the iden-   halogenation, A80915A and A80915B and previously described
             tity of PM181104 and was found to be similar to that of the  from the marine derived Streptomyces sp. CNQ-525, have been3/5/2025          antibiotic peptide GE 37468  A.122–124 The major  structural   revisited with regard to their activity against a panel of clinical
on
         diﬀerences found between kocurin and GE 37468 A were the   relevant panel of community-associated (CA) and hospital-
         replacement of the methylhydroxyproline unit in the cycle of GE   associated (HA) strains (Fig. 11).130 Both compounds showed
         37468 A by proline in kocurin and the presence of additional   potent activities in all the MRSA and VRSA, and glycopeptide-Downloaded      amino acid units in the side chain of the latter compound   intermediate S. aureus (GISA) strains evaluated, with MICs
           (Fig. 10). As other thiazolylpeptides, kocurin strongly inhibited  were in the range of 0.5 to 4 mg mL  1.128 A80915A and A80915B
2017.       the growth of MRSA with a MIC value of 0.25 mg mL  1, as well as  have related structural features and share a methyl group at the
August        clinicaltested instrainsa murineof VRE,septicemiaS. epidermidismodel.120,122and showed eﬃcacy when   C-16methylpositiongroupandin anA80915Aexocyclichasmethylenebeen relatedgrouptoat C1.the ThereducedC-16
18           Interestingly, the rst triazolopyrimidine natural product,   cytotoxicity observed in comparison to napyradiomycin lacking
on
          essramycin, was described as produced by the marine Strepto-   the methyl group, and  it has been suggested that napyr-
         myces Mer8102 isolated from a sediment sample collected in the  adiomycin scaﬀold could be modied to contain structural
          coast of Egypt (Fig.  10).125 Triazolopyrimidines are synthetic   moieties that reduce mammalian cell cytotoxicity yet retain orPublished
          heterocycles well known for their broad range of biological  enhance anti-MRSA activities.130
            activities as fungicides, herbicides, antiparasitic agents, as well as    New antibiotic compounds with activity against Mycobacte-
         drugs  with  application  in  the  treatment  of  cardiovascular   rium tuberculosis have also been reported recently from marine
          diseases, and pain and inammation. Essramycin is a novel tri-   isolates.  Two  new   diaza-anthracene   antibiotics,   dia-
          azolopyrimidine antibiotic with broad range antibacterial activity  zaquinomycins H and  J selectively targeting M. tuberculosis
          against the Gram positive S. aureus and the Gram negative   including several forms of drug-resistant strains have been
          bacteria such as E. coli, and P. aeruginosa with MICs ranging from   identied from a Micromonospora strain isolated from a sedi-
         1 to 8 mg mL 1 without presenting any antifungal activity.125     ment in the course of a M. tuberculosis H37Rv growth inhibition
          The strain Marinactinospora thermotolerans SCSIO 00652,   screening (Fig. 11).131 Diazaquinomycins H and J inhibit repli-
         a strain isolated from a deep-sea marine sediment of the South   cating M. tuberculosis with MICs of 0.04 and 0.07 mg mL 1
        China Sea, was also discovered to produce, in addition to four   respectively. Another two analogs  isolated from a marine
        new b-carbolines and two new indolactam alkaloids possessing   Streptomyces sp. (diazaquinomycins A, E F and G) present
         potent antimalarial activity, the antimicrobial nucleoside anti-   similar MICs although the major compound diazaquinomycin
           biotic A201A, previously described from Streptomyces capreolus  A shows limited activity against non replicating M. tuberculosis
       NRRL 3817 by Kirst in 1985.126,127 Antibiotic A201A structure   with MIC of 72 mg mL  1, is only a weak inhibitor activity of
          consists of a 30-amino-30-deoxyadenosine moiety, a p-hydroxy-a-  Gram positive bacteria and does not exhibit signicant inhibi-
         methylcinnamic acid moiety, an unusual unsaturated hexofur-   tory activity against Gram-negative bacteria. Diazaquinomycin A
         anose, and a 3,4-di-O-methyl-b-D-rhamnose moiety (Fig. 10).  and is only a weak inhibitor activity of Gram positive bacteria.
         This compound presents potent antibacterial activities against  Mechanism of action studies have revealed the target of dia-
       Gram positive and Gram-negative anaerobic bacteria, and its  zaquinomycins  within  the  folate pathway  as  competitive
       mode of action involves inhibition of peptide bond formation   inhibitor of thymidylate synthase, an enzyme involved in de
         during protein synthesis.127 Whole-genome scanning and bio-   novo synthesis of deoxythymidine monophosphate that plays
          informatics analysis, have identied the biosynthetic gene   a key role in DNA replication and repair.131 Streptcytosines A–E
           cluster  responsible  for A201A  biosynthesis,  providing  the   are new nucleoside antibiotics produced by the marine-derived


         1220  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017


[PDF physical page 19]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

         Review                                                                                                    Natural Product Reports





AM.
7:49:08
3/5/2025
on
Downloaded
2017.
August
18
on
Published





             Fig. 11  Antibiotics produced by marine-derived actinomycetes (III).


          Streptomyces  strain TPU1236A  isolated  in Okinawa, Japan   Isoikarugamycin and, 28-N-methylikaguramycin showed strong
        from sea water from which only streptcytosine A was shown  growth inhibition of MRSA with MIC value ranges of 2–4 and 1–
          to  exhibit some  activity  against  Mycobacterium  smegmatis  2 mg mL  1, while 30-oxo-28-N-methylikarugamycin showed
        (MIC ¼ 32 mg mL  1).132                                     weaker activity against MRSA with a MIC in the range of
          Members of other structural classes isolated from marine-  32–64  mg mL  1.  Concerning  antifungal  properties,  iso-
          derived actinomycetes include three new polycyclic tetramic   ikarugamycin inhibited the growth of C. albicans and A. fumigatus
          acid macrolactams structurally related to ikarugamycin and   with MIC value ranges of 2–4 and 4–8 mg mL  1, respectively,
          isolated from a marine-derived strain of Streptomyces zhaoz-   whereas 28-N-methylikaguramycin and ikarugamycin showed
          houensis that were shown to exhibit antibiotic activity against   similar MIC value of 4 mg mL 1 against C. albicans and a MIC
       MRSA  and  A.  fumigatus  and  C.  albicans   (Fig.   11).133   value range of 4–8 mg mL 1 against A. fumigatus.133



             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1221


[PDF physical page 20]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review


           Table 3  Antibiotics discovered using new isolation methods (a) and genome-based approaches (b)


             (a)

            Antibiotic                   Structural class                     Antibiotic spectrum              Producing species                Reference

          Neocitreamicins I, II         Polycyclic xanthone           Gram positive                    Nocardia sp.                    139
         Novo 3                     Glycosylated macrolactone       MRSA/VRE                       Streptosporangium sp.            140
         Novo 4                     Glycosylated macrolactone       MRSA/VRE                        Amycolatopsis sp.                141
          Lassomycin                 Cyclic peptide                 M. tuberculosis                    Lentzea kentukyensis             142
          Ecumicin                  Macrocyclic tridecapeptide       M. tuberculosis                 Nonomuraea sp.

             (b)

            Antibiotic                   Structural class                     Antibiotic spectrum            Genomes                        Reference

          Piperidamycins             Cyclic peptide               Gram positive                     Streptomyces mauvecolor          148
          Phosacetamycin           Phosphonate                Gram positive/negative            Streptomyces aureus              166
AM.       Argolaphos A/B           Phosphonopeptide            Gram positive/negative            Streptomyces monomycini         170
          Valinophos               Phosphonopeptide            Gram positive/negative            Streptomyces durhamensis         170
          Sphaerimicin A             Polyketide nucleoside          Gram positive                    Sphaerisporangium sp.           172
7:49:08       TP-1161                   Thiopeptide                 Gram positive                     Nocardiopsis sp.                 177
          Taromycin A               Lipopetide                  Gram positive                   Saccharomonospora sp.           179
          Thiolactomycin and        Thiotetronic acids            Gram positive                      Salinispora sp./S.                180
          analogs                                                                                             afghaniensis3/5/2025
on
Downloaded                                                 NOVO4 are another two novel glycosylated macrolactam anti-       5.  Improved isolation methods to
2017.    capture bacterial diversity                    chambersbiotics producedand obtainedby newrespectivelystrains isolatedfrom usingthe strainsthe diﬀusionStrepto-
                                                                    sporangium P1532 and Amycolatopsis Z0363  (Fig.  12). Both         Despite the eﬀorts to expand the diversity of microbial sources,August                                                                 molecules show potent  activity against methicillin-resistant
18          it is well known that cultivation-based methods fail to cultivate
                                                                          Staphylococcus  aureus  (MRSA)  and  vancomycin-resistant
on       the most abundant members of microbial communities and we
                                                                              Enterococci (VRE) (MIC range 1 to 4 mg mL  1) with no serum         can expect that most microorganisms in the environment
                                                                      eﬀect and minimal in vitro toxicity to mammalian cells.140,141         cannot be cultivated in laboratory conditions, limiting the
                                                                 Lassomycin is one of the most interesting compounds withPublished       characterization a many potential active compounds.134 Identi-
                                                                                      activity against M. tuberculosis identied from a new strain of          fying new producers of novel antibiotic compounds has been
                                                                          Lentzea  kentuckyensis  isolated  using  the  iChip  technology         a challenge and required to develop new methods to grow
                                                                                      (Fig.  12).142 Lassomycin  is a ribosomal 16-membered cyclic          bacteria that could not be previously cultured, exposing cells to
                                                                       peptide that is post-translationally cyclized as a macrolactam         growth factors and signals from the neighbouring environment
                                                                between the N-terminal Gly and Asp8, and the C-term is capped        and domesticating the isolates to laboratory conditions. New
                                                                        as a methyl ester. Lassomycin not only has a potent activity         diﬀusion chambers such as the iChip have been focused at
                                                                          against M. tuberculosis but shows a selective activity against M.         enriching  in  previously  uncultivated  bacteria  and  have
                                                                                tuberculosis similar to rifampicin (1–4 mg mL  1), including         permitted the discovery of the unprecedent antibiotic  teix-
                                                                               persister cells. Resistant point mutations have been mapped in         obactin from  the new  b-proteobacteria  species  Eleheria
                                                                    ClpC1, the hexameric ATPase capping complex of the ClpC1–             terrae.135–137 This approach has also been used for the isolation
                                                               ClpP1P2 chambered protease in mycobacteria, an essential          of minor genera of actinomycetes from marine sediments or
                                                            enzyme for maintaining protein homeostasis and critical for           soil samples from diﬀerent natural environments and the
                                                                                  survival. Contrarily to the excessive proteolysis produced upon          discovery of new antibiotic scaﬀolds (Table 3).135,136,138 This is
                                                                    binding ClpC1  by  the  cyclic  heptapeptide  cyclomarin A         the case of neocitreamicins I and II, the only new members of
                                                                produced by the marine Streptomyces sp. CNB-982, lassomycin         the citreamicin group of polycyclic xanthone antibiotics that
                                                                    binding to ClpC1 uncouples ATP hydrolysis but inhibits prote-         have been reported aer the discovery of citreamicin in 1989
                                                                                                 olysis.142,143 Lassomycin selectively inhibits ClpC1–ClpP1P2 of           (Fig. 12).139 Both compounds are produced by a novel Nocardia
                                                                     mycobacteria and has no eﬀect on other members of the          strain G0655 isolated from a sandy soil sample using an in situ
                                                             chambered proteases from other bacteria. Ecumicin, a macro-         diﬀusion chamber technology.136 As other citreamicins, they
                                                                                    cyclic tridecapeptide from Nonomuraea sp. MJM5123, shares         have potent antibiotic activity against Gram positive bacteria
                                                                     with lassomycin a common target in the N-terminal domain of         including strains of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
                                                                    ClpC1, but it binds in a diﬀerent position on the N-terminal        (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecalis (VRE)
                                                           domain  of  ClpC1  as  shown  by  reverse  genomics  of         with MICs in the range of 0.06 to 0.5 mg mL  1. NOVO3 and



          1222  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017


[PDF physical page 21]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

         Review                                                                                                    Natural Product Reports





AM.
7:49:08
3/5/2025
on
Downloaded
2017.
August
18
on
Published





             Fig. 12  Antibiotics from actinomycetes isolated from new enrichment methods.

         spontaneous resistant mutants (Fig. 12).144 Both compounds are  6.  Genome targeted antibiotic
          bactericidal against replicating and non-replicating M. tuber-
            culosis, multidrug-resistant M. tuberculosis and a range of other  discovery
         mycobacterial species, but they lack activity against other Gram                                                                  Unlocking the expression from cryptic pathways to identify
          positive and Gram negative pathogens such as S. aureus and P.
                                                                       novel natural products has been for many years a bottle neck in
          aeruginosa. Preclinical studies have shown that cyclomarin A                                                                       the exploitation of the biosynthetic diversity in actinomycetes.
         has hepatic clearance and a short half-life in mice, and ecu-                                                                    Diﬀerent general methods for cryptic cluster activation have
         micin has limited solubility and poor intestinal absorption.                                                               been developed in the last decade to activate silent or poorly



             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1223


[PDF physical page 22]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review


         expressed  secondary  metabolite  pathways  and  increase   the mutants.147 The approach permits to select mutations in the
         production yields. Most of these approaches were combined  endogenous RNA  polymerase and  ribosomal  protein S12
         with a continued research to elucidate the regulatory patterns   leading to altered transcription and translation pathways and as
         determining the control and activation of secondary metabo-   a result strong activation of cryptic clusters and antibiotic
         lism of actinomycetes.145,146 One of the approaches developed by   expression in Streptomyces  spp.147 A novel  antibiotic  class
         Ochi and coworkers that involved the selection of drug-resistant   piperidamycins was  described  in  Streptomyces  mauvecolor
        mutants to antibiotics acting at the ribosome such as rifam-  631689 following this ribosome engineering approach.148 A
          picin were shown to activate antibiotic production in some of  double mutant  of rpbO and rpsL  resistant  to rifampicin





AM.
7:49:08
3/5/2025
on
Downloaded
2017.
August
18
on
Published





             Fig. 13  Antibiotics from genome-based approaches (I).



          1224  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017


[PDF physical page 23]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

         Review                                                                                                    Natural Product Reports


         produced the piperidamycins as a family of structurally related  stambomycins, salinilactam, or streptocollin.151 In the case of
           cyclic peptides from which piperidamycin A, D and F were iso-   Saccharopolyspora  erythraea  a  genomisotopic  approach  of
          lated (Fig. 13). From the diﬀerent analogues identied, piper-   relying on bioinformatic genome analysis and transcriptome
         idamycin D shows the highest antibacterial activity against   data combined with radiolabeled precursor feeding studies for
       Gram positive pathogens with MICs of 1.56 mg mL 1 against   NRPS-derived natural products led to the isolation of eryth-
           S. aureus, S epidermidis, Streptococcus pyogenes, E. faecalis, and   rochelin A, an hydroxamate type siderophore identied from
           E. faecium.148                                               a cryptic tetrapeptide siderophore sequence and produced
            Despite the success of some of the empiric traditional  under  iron-depleted  conditions.164  Despite  the  success  in
         approaches to unlock the production of some compounds,   isolating and characterizing these previously cryptic molecules,
        genome mining and pathway engineering have been the tech-   few have been explored for their biological activities.
          nologies that are determining a radical shiin the way new     Other approaches have been directed  at targeting new
          antibiotic discovery can be envisioned in the future, translating  compounds structurally related known antibiotics on the basis
         secondary metabolites  biosynthetic pathways  into puried   of specic key biosynthetic genes involved in their synthesis
           molecules.149–151 Extensive analysis of actinomycetes genomes  and targeted genome mining for these genes present in cryptic
         has shown the broad chemical potential of this microbial   pathways. Compounds of the families of phosphonates and
AM.       group, fostering the development of new tools and approaches   phosphinates have been the focus of this approach. These
7:49:08        foridenticationthe expressionand theof isolationthese biosyntheticof new compounds.pathways andFurther-the   moleculesof enzymesarethatpotentrecognizecompoundssubstratesextensivelywithusedphosphorylas inhibitorsor
        more transcriptome and proteomic analysis have suggested that   carboxyl substituents. These compounds include both synthetic
         the majority of secondary metabolism gene clusters in strepto-   molecules and natural products, and are frequently produced in3/5/2025         mycetes are not silent, but expressed at a very low level under   very low concentrations, normally requiring specic chro-
on
          laboratory conditions.152 The availability of increasing numbers  matographic enrichments.165 These phosphonate biosynthetic
          of full genome sequence data and the development of new  pathways share a phosphoenoylpyruvate phosphonomutase
          bioinformatic  analysis  tools  has  permitted  to  focus  the  (PepM) allowing a pre-screening of microbial strains for theDownloaded       screening of biosynthetic gene clusters on assembled genomes   presence of the encoding ppm gene. Phosacetamycin is a new
2017.      andfor specicmoleculeclassesprediction.of secondaryApproachesmetabolitehave includedbiosyntheticthe searchpath-  phosphonatefrom the strainantibioticof StreptomycesdiscoveredaureusfollowingNRRL B-2808this(Fig.approach13).166
August       ways,miningmostlyfor genesPKS encodingand/or NRPS,core-biosyntheticRiPPs and terpenoids,enzymes,astailoringwell as  The2-amino-5-phosphono-3-pentenoicstructure of phosacetamycin wasacidfound(APPA),to bea constituentanalogous toof
18      enzymes, resistance genes and global and pathway specic   the rhizocticins and plumbemycins (Fig. 13).167,168 Rhizocticins
on            regulators.151,153 Anti-SMASH and MIBiG are one of the most  and plumbemycins exhibit respectively antifungal and anti-
         comprehensive platforms to identify new secondary metabolite   bacterial selective activity that is dependent on the amino acids
          biosynthetic pathways, but many other tools are being devel-  appended on the APPA moiety possibly due to diﬀerentialPublished
        oped to complement these predictions, enabling the contin-   peptide  transport.169  In  contrast, phosacetamycin  inhibits
        uous  discovery  of  new  natural  products  biosynthetic  growth of both Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria and
           pathways.154–156 In addition natural product peptidomimetics   fungi, and its level of activity on E. coli and S. aureus is similar to
         has permitted to identify new peptides from sequenced based  kanamycin in a disk diﬀusion assay. Furthermore activity on E.
          predictions and peptides structures were conrmed by tandem   coli is not aﬀected by mutations in which phosphonate trans-
        mass spectrometry.157,158 This approach has been extended to   port is limited or induced.166 Further approaches to discover
           identify novel glycosylated natural products by characterization  new phosphonic acid natural products has involved the genome
          of the O- and N-glycosyl groups by mass spectrometry.159 Most of   screening of 10 000 actinomycetes for the presence of the
          these genome mining discovery strategies approaches that have   phosphoenolpyruvate mutase. The PCR screening with degen-
        been  discussed  in  depth  by  diﬀerent  excellent  recent   erate primers amplifying an internal fragment of pepM followed
            reviews.151,160–162                                            by genome sequencing identied a diverse collection of phos-
          The integration of recombinant genome techniques and  phonate biosynthetic gene clusters within 278 strains from
          refactoring the regulation of gene expression have achieved the  which 55 were likely to encode the synthesis of unknown
          activation of silent or low level expressed gene clusters and   compounds.170 The characterization of the strains within these
         unlocked the production of novel natural products. The study of   groups resulted in the discovery of a new archetypical pathway
        an increasing number of actinomycetes genomes and bio-   for  phosphonate  biosynthesis  was  discovered   for  H-
          informatic analyses are favoring the emergence of successful   phosphinates, and another 11 previously undescribed phos-
         examples of new molecules derived from genome sequence  phonic acid natural products. Among these are included the
          information, an area that has beneted from the development   broad-spectrum antibacterial phosphonopeptides argolaphos A
          of new metabolic engineering tools are making possible to  and B, and valinophos (Fig. 13).170 Argolaphos A and B are
          achieve eﬃcient heterologous host expression (Table 3).152,163   structurally related compounds isolated from S. monomycini
       Genome based bioinformatics predictions have permitted to  NRRL  B-24309.  Argolaphos  B   is  composed  of  amino-
           identify and focus on the isolation of diﬀerent molecules from  methylphosphonate with a peptide linkage to the rare amino
         diﬀerent  species  of  actinomycetes  such  as  coelichelin,   acid N5-hydroxyarginine and argolaphos A has an additional


             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1225


[PDF physical page 24]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review


         peptide linkage to valine. The compounds present the highest   sphaerimicin A.171 Uridine-based nucleoside antibiotics such as
        eﬃcacy against Salmonella typhimurium, E. coli, and S. aureus,   caprazamycin,  muraminomicin,  liposidomycin,  and  mur-
        and weak inhibitory activity against M. smegmatis. Valinophos is  aymycin  inhibit  the  bacterial  phospho-N-acetylmuramyl-
        an N-acetyl L-valine ester of 2,3-dihydroxypropylphosphonate   pentapeptide translocase MraY which initiates the lipid cycle
         produced by S. durhamensis NRRL B-3309.170                      of peptidoglycan biosynthesis. A comparative analysis of the
          A PCR-based strategy developed to identify potential novel   diﬀerent nucleoside  biosynthetic  clusters identied a gene
         nucleoside  antibiotics  and  based  on  the  detection  of   sequence encoding a product with closest sequence similarity to
         a conserved open reading frame found in most know uridine-   a  serine  hydroxymethyltransferase  or  transaldolase  that  is
         based  nucleosides   biosynthetic  pathways  enabled  the   essential for the biosynthesis of the nucleosides. A PCR screening
          discovery  of  the  sulfated  hybrid  polyketide–nucleoside   of a collection of 2.500 rare actinomycetes using degenerate




AM.
7:49:08
3/5/2025
on
Downloaded
2017.
August
18
on
Published





             Fig. 14  Antibiotics from genome-based approaches (II).



          1226  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017


[PDF physical page 25]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

         Review                                                                                                    Natural Product Reports


         primers based on this sequence identied the entire locus con-     The identication of a silent cluster in the dragenome of
          taining the transaldolase gene sphJ from the strain Sphaerispor-   Saccharomonospora sp. CNQ490 with high similarity with the
         angium sp. SANK 60911. The sequence presented high amino   lipopeptide daptomycin biosynthetic gene cluster triggered the
          acid sequence homology with LipK, the transaldolase involved in   cloning and expression from a 73 kb genomic region following
          the synthesis of antibiotic A-90289. The nucleoside antibiotics   a  transformation-associated  recombination  in  yeast  (TAR
         sphaerimicin A–D were isolated from extracts of the strain   cloning system), obtaining several related lipopeptides from
            (Fig. 13) and they were shown to inhibit the activity of bacterial  which taromycin A was fully characterised (Fig. 14).179 Tar-
          translocase I in vitro with IC50 values between 12–65 ng mL  1.  omycin A shares with daptomycin the amino acid conguration
        The compounds show good spectrum of activity against Gram   for all common residues, and diﬀers from daptomycin in Trp,
           positive organisms including  S. pneumoniae,  S. pyogenes,  S.   Kyn, and lipid residues, and by the substitution of an Ala for
          aureus, S. epidermidis, E. faecalis, E. faecium and M. catarrhalis   a Ser residue at position 11, as well as for the presence of two
         with MICs ranging from 1 to 16 mg mL  1, but they lack activity   chlorine atoms in the two aromatic amino acid residues as 6-Cl-
          against Gram negative bacteria, possibly as a result of TolC  Trp and 4-Cl-Kyn. Taromycin A was less active than daptomycin
         mediated eﬄux as observed with other nucleoside inhibitors.172  when tested against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
         Genome mining has been applied as well to look for new   (MRSA), and  daptomycin-sensitive  strains  of  Enterococcus
AM.        antibiotics containing an aminocoumarin moiety, only reported   faecalis and Enterococcus faecium with MICs in the range of
7:49:08       in(novobiocin,nature in clorobiocin,ve antibioticscoumermycinproduced byA1,StreptomycessimocyclinonespeciesD8,  6–12calciummg inmLthe1. mediumThe  antibioticand showsis  highlycross aﬀectedresistanceby withthe
        and rubradirin) and more recently by a strain of Actinoallomurus   daptomycin, with a ten fold MIC shiin the case of daptomycin-
         producing coumermycin A2  congeners.173  Recent genome   resistant Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococcus faecium (MIC3/5/2025          analysis of the rare actinomycete Catenulispora acidiphila DSM  50 mg mL  1).
on
         44928 led to the discovery of a novel aminocoumarin gene     Another  interesting  target-directed genome mining was
           cluster encoding cacibiocin A and B (Fig. 14).174 Cacibiocin A   focused on duplicated housekeeping and antibiotic resistance
         contains a 3-amino-4,7-dihydroxycoumarin moiety linked by an   genes. The  approach  applied on  Salinispora  strains  hasDownloaded      amide bond to a pyrrole-2,5-dicarboxylic acid, a structural motif   permitted to identify new thiotetronic acid antibiotics from the
2017.       notgationidentiedof this novelpreviouslypyrrole-2,5-dicarboxylicin any natural product.acid moietyThe investi-might   analysistomyces ofof86angenomes.orphanThepolytekideheterologoussynthase-nonribosomalexpression in Strep-
August       leadcacibiocinsto a newcouldpathwaybe increasedto pyrroles.by heterologousTotal productionexpressionlevelsandof   peptidea putativesynthetasefatty acidhybridsynthasebiosyntheticresistancegenegeneclusterpermittedincludingto
18       screening of diﬀerent culture media from an initial yield of   identify several thiotetronic acids, including the well known
on                   1                               1          4.9 mg L   in C. acidiphila to 60 mg L   in S. coelicolor M1152.174   fatty  acid  synthase  inhibitor  thiolactomycin.180 A  similar
         In contrast to other aminocoumarins, cacibiocin A and B lack  approach followed by cloning and expressing a similar cluster
          antibiotic activity in disk diﬀusion assays against E. coli and  from Streptomyces afghaniensis containing Fab F/B homologuesPublished
        show no DNA gyrase inhibitory activity in DNA supercoiling   in S. coelicolor permitted to identify a new series of thio-
          assays at concentration up to 50 mM.                          lactomycin analogues, including the known compound T¨u3010,
             Similar genome-based approaches focused on the existing  and two new thiotetronamides A–B suggesting a larger distri-
         information on thiopeptide gene clusters has facilitated the   bution of these biosynthetic clusters among diﬀerent taxa of
          discovery of novel thiopeptides by bioinformatic analysis of   actinomycetes (Fig. 14).180
        genome sequences from other bacteria, and several new clus-
           ters potentially encoding for thiopeptides were identied from  7.  Outlook
          strains of Salinospora, Streptomyces, Frankia, Propionibacterium,
        and  Nocardiopsis.175,176 The marine sediment-derived Nocar-   This description of the latest antibiotic discoveries from acti-
           diopsis isolate TFS65-07 was selected aer a PCR screening to  nomycetes reects not only the current state of the art but the
           identify genes involved in polyketide and nonribosomal peptide   rapid evolution in the eld of natural products discovery that
          synthesis and  further  antibiotic  activity  screening.177 The  has taken place in the last decade where merging disciplines in
          Nocardiopsis strain produces the new antibiotic TP-1161, a new   synthetic biology, chemistry and microbiology are naturally
          thiopeptide with a rare aminoacetone moiety (Fig. 14). TP-1161   occurring and will drive this research in the future. The intro-
         belongs to the series of D-thiopeptides that are characterized by   duction of new rational screening criteria in the approaches
         a 2,3,6-trisubstituted pyridine domain located at the center of  used to mine microbial diversity and to exploit the biosynthetic
         a single peptide macrocycle with highly modied amino acids.   potential of actinomycetes combined to the existing high eﬃ-
         TP-1161 is structurally related to antibiotic A10255 described by   cient analytical tools to identify molecules within the network of
           scientists at Eli Lilly in 1992, but presents distinct structural   secondary  metabolites  synthesized by  these  bacteria, has
          diﬀerences.178 TP-1161 has broad spectrum antibacterial activity   resulted in a continued description of new families of bioactive
          against Gram positive strains with MICs ranging from 0.25 to 4  compounds and new analogs of old molecules. The existing
        mg mL 1 comparable to or lower than those of the antibiotic   metabolic richness within the diﬀerent lineages of actinomy-
         vancomycin, and is also active against vancomycin-resistant   cetes from all type of environments is supported by the evidence
          bacterial strains.                                                  of an exponentially growing genome sequence information


             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1227


[PDF physical page 26]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review


          available from public databases and  less expensive to be   12 K. Lewis, S. Epstein, A. D'Onofrio and L. L. Ling, J. Antibiot.,
         generated by individual laboratories. Both the undermined       2010, 63, 468–476.
          existing culture collections as well the novel ways to approach   13 J. Pascual, M. Garc´ıa-L´opez, G. F. Bills and O. Genilloud, Int.
         the exploration of the broad microbial and chemical diversities           J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol., 2016, 66, 1976–1985.
          in the environment will remain starting points for the predic-   14 C. T. Walsh and M. A. Fischbach, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010,
          tion and discovery of novel families of compounds and their       132, 2469–2493.
          potential  expression  in  heterologous  hosts.  Nevertheless,   15 E. Kim, B. S. Moore and Y. J. Yoon, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2015,
          despite the productive integration of the new and comple-       11, 649–659.
         mentary  disciplines  to  identify  molecules  with  biological   16 D. W. Udwary,  L.  Zeigler,  R. N.  Asolkar,  V.  Singan,
            activity, the existing challenges to discover and develop new       A. Lapidus, W. Fenical, P. R. Jensen and B. S. Moore, Proc.
          families of antibiotics to ght antibiotic multidrug resistance       Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 10376–10381.
          are still there and will not be overcome without an integrated   17 T. Weber, P. Charusanti, E. M. Musiol-Kroll, X. Jiang,
         eﬀort to sustain  early  antibiotic drug discovery.  All these       Y. Tong, H. U. Kim and S. Y. Lee, Trends Biotechnol., 2015,
         advances will only be translated into real responses to the       33, 15–26.
         emerging drug resistance needs if in parallel new smart screens   18 A. Milshteyn, J. S. Schneider and S. F. Brady, Chem. Biol.,
AM.       continue to be developed to identify the potential molecules       2014, 21, 1211–1223.
7:49:08       withdevelopment.the required prole to be proposed for future preclinical   19 Z.Microbiol.,Charlop-Powers,2014, 19,A.70–75.Milshteyn and S. F. Brady, Curr. Opin.
                                                                 20 M. A. Fischbach and C. T. Walsh, Science, 2009, 325, 1089–
                                                                           1093.3/5/2025     8.  Conﬂicts of interest                                                                 21 H. Br¨otz-Oesterhelt and P. Sass, Future Microbiol., 2010, 5,
on
                                                                        1553–1579.         There are no conicts to declare.
                                                                 22 M. S. Butler, M. A. T. Blaskovich and M. A. Cooper,  J.
                                                                                           Antibiot., 2017, 70, 3–24.Downloaded     9.  Acknowledgements                        23 R. J. Theriault, J. P. Karwowski, M. Jackson, R. L. Gifolami,
2017.       This work was supported by Fundaci´on MEDINA, a non-prot      G.567–574.Sunga, C. M. Vojko and L. J. Coen, J. Antibiot., 1987, 40,
         partnership between Merck Sharp and Dohme de Espa˜na, the                                                                 24 C. Coronelli, R. J. White, G. C. Lancini and F. Parenti, J.
         Regional Government  of Andalusia and the  University  ofAugust                                                                                        Antibiot., 1975, 28, 253–259.
18      Granada. The author is member of the ENABLE consortium   25 M.  Talpaert,  F. Campagnari and  L.  Clerici,  Biochem.
on      (European Gram Negative Antibacterial Engine; IMI_ND4BB).                                                                                Biophys. Res. Commun., 1975, 63, 328–334.
          Special thanks to Fernando Reyes, MEDINA Natural Products                                                                 26 M. Gerber and G. Ackermann, Expert Opin. Invest. Drugs,
         Chemistry Head, for his help during the preparation of the                                                                           2008, 17, 547–553.Published      manuscript and the revision of the chemical structures.                                                                 27 D. W. Hecht, M. A. Galang, S. P. Sambol, J. R. Osmolski,
                                                                                           S.  Johnson  and  D.  N.  Gerding,  Antimicrob.  Agents
      10.  References                                         Chemother., 2007, 51, 2716–2719.
                                                                 28 A. Srivastava, M. Talaue, S. Liu, D. Degen, R. Y. Ebright,
          1 L. L. Silver, Clin. Microbiol. Rev., 2011, 24, 71–109.                E. Sineva, A. Chakraborty, S. Y. Druzhinin, S. Chatterjee,
          2 H. W. Boucher, G. H. Talbot, J. S. Bradley, J. E. Edwards,          J.  Mukhopadhyay  and  Y.  W.  Ebright,  Curr.  Opin.
             D.  Gilbert,  L.  B.  Rice, M.  Scheld,  B.  Spellberg and        Microbiol., 2011, 14, 532–543.
                    J. Bartlett, Clin. Infect. Dis., 2009, 48, 1–12.                 29 M. R. Leadbetter, S. M. Adams, B. Bazzini, P. R. Fatheree,
          3 D. M. Livermore, J. Antimicrob. Chemother., 2009, 6, i29–i36.      D. E. Karr, K. M. Krause, B. M. Lam, M.  S.  Linsell,
          4 D. J. Payne, M. N. Gwynn, D. J. Holmes and D. L. Pompliano,     M. B. Nodwell, J. L. Pace, K. Quast, J. P. Shaw, E. Soriano,
              Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2007, 6, 29–40.                              S. G. Trapp, J. D. Villena, T. X. Wu, B. G. Christensen and
          5 K. Bush, ACS Infect. Dis., 2015, 1, 509–511.                                  J. K. Judice, J. Antibiot., 2004, 57, 326–336.
          6 K. Outterson, J. H. Rex, T. Jinks, P. Jackson, J. Hallinan,   30 E. Bouza and A. Burillo, Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents, 2010, 36,
                S.  Karp,  D.  T.  Hung,  F.  Franceschi,  T.  Merkeley,      401–407.
             C. Houchens, D. M. Dixon, M. G. Kurilla, R. Aurigemma   31 M. T. Guskey and B. T. Tsuji, Pharmacotherapy, 2010, 30, 80–
           and J. Larsen, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2016, 15, 589–590.        94.
          7 M. G. P. Page and K. Bush, Curr. Opin. Pharmacol., 2014, 18,   32 M. S. Butler, K. A. Hansford, M. A. T. Blaskovich, R. Halai
             91–97.                                               and M. A. Cooper, J. Antibiot., 2014, 67, 631–644.
          8 J. H. Rex, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2014, 12, 231–232.            33 R. D. G. Cooper, N. J. Snyder, M. J. Zweifel, M. A. Staszak,
          9 M. A. Cooper, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2015, 14, 587–588.         S. C. Wilkie, T.  I. Nicas, D.  L. Mullen, T.  F.  Butler,
         10 M. Nett, H. Ikeda and B. S. Moore, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2009, 26,     M.  J. Rodriguez, B.  E. Huﬀand R. C. Thompson,  J.
             1362–1384.                                                              Antibiot., 1996, 49, 575–581.
         11 P. J. Rutledge and G. L. Challis, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2015,   34 W. Rodgers, A. D. Frazier and W. S. Champney, Antimicrob.
               13, 509–523.                                                    Agents Chemother., 2013, 57, 1632–1637.


          1228  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017


[PDF physical page 27]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

         Review                                                                                                    Natural Product Reports


         35 L. Honeyman, M. Ismail, M. Nelson, B. Bhatia, T. E. Bowser,   51 S. B. Singh, J. W. Phillips and J. Wang, Curr. Opin. Drug
                     J.  Chen,  R.  Mechiche,  K.  Ohemeng,  A.  K.  Verma,       Discovery Dev., 2007, 10, 160–166.
               E. P. Cannon, A. Macone,  S. K. Tanaka and  S. Levy,   52 J. Wang, S. M. Soisson, K. Young, W. Shoop, S. Kodali,
              Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., 2015, 59, 7044–7053.               A.  Galgoci,  R.  Painter, G.  Parthasarathy,  Y.  S. Tang,
         36 A. B. Macone, B. K. Caruso, R. G. Leahy, J. Donatelli, S. Weir,       R. Cummings, S. Ha, K. Dorso, M. Motyl, H. Jayasuriya,
           M. P. Draper, S. K. Tanaka and S. B. Levy, Antimicrob. Agents          J. Ondeyka, K. Herath, C. Zhang, L. Hernandez, J. Allocco,
              Chemother., 2014, 58, 1127–1135.                                  A. Basilio, J. R. Tormo, O. Genilloud, F. Vicente, F. Pel´aez,
         37 O.  Kim,  H.  Assefa  and   L.  Honeyman,  Paratek        L. Colwell, S. Ho Lee, B. Michael, T. Felcetto, C.  Gill,
             Pharmaceuticals, US Pat., 8.318.706, 2012.                         L.  L.  Silver,   J.  D.  Hermes,  K.  Bartizal,   J.  Barret,
         38 X. Y. Xiao, D. K. Hunt, J. Zhou, R. B. Clark, N. Dunwoody,      D. Schmatz, J. W. Becker, D. Cully and S. B. Singh, Nature,
              C. Fyfe, T. H. Grossman, W.  J. O'Brien, L. Plamondon,       2006, 441, 358–361.
           M. R¨onn, C. Sun, W.-Y. Zhang and J. A. Sutcliﬀe, J. Med.   53 J. Wang,  S. Kodali,  S. H. Lee, A. Galgoci, R. Painter,
             Chem., 2012, 55, 597–605.                                      K. Dorso, F. Racine, M. Motyl, L. Hernandez, E. Tinney,
         39 V. Knight-Connoni, C. Mascio, L. Chesnel and J. Silverman,        S.  L.  Colletti,  K.  Herath,  R. Cummings,  O.  Salazar,
                     J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2015, 43, 195–204.                           I. Gonz´alez, A. Basilio, F. Vicente, O. Genilloud, F. Pel´aez,
AM.       40 D. R. Snydman, N. V. Jacobus and L. A. McDermott, Activity      H. Jayasuriya, K. Young, D. F. Cully and S. B. Singh, Proc.
7:49:08            ofAntimicrob.a  NovelAgentsCyclicChemother.,Lipopeptide,2012, 56,CB-183,315,3448–3452.against,   54 Natl.O. Genilloud,Acad. Sci.I. U.Gonz´alez,S. A., 2007,O. Salazar,104, 7612–7616.J. Mart´ın, J. R. Tormo
         41 J. B. Aggen, E. S. Armstrong, A. A. Goldblum, P. Dozzo,      and F. Vicente, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2011, 38, 375–
           M. S. Linsell, M. J. Gliedt, D. J. Hildebrandt, L. A. Feeney,       389.3/5/2025               A.  Kubo,   R.  D.  Matias,   S.  Lopez,  M.  Gomez,   55 H. Jayasuriya, K. B. Herath, C. Zhang, D. L. Zink, A. Basilio,
on
              K. B. Wlasichuk, R. Diokno, G. H. Miller and H. E. Moser,      O. Genilloud, M. T. Diez, F. Vicente, I. Gonzalez, O. Salazar,
              Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., 2010, 54, 4636–4642.               F. Pelaez, R. Cummings, S. Ha, J. Wang and S. B. Singh,
         42 S. Boakes, J. Cortes Bargallo and M. J. Dawson, US Pat.,      Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4684–4688.Downloaded            7.989.416, 2011.                                        56 M.  J. Smanski, Z. Yu,  J. Casper, S. Lin, R. M. Peterson,
2017.       43 H.G. Seibert,Hoﬀmann,L. V´ertesy,H.  Guehring,J. Wink, I. L.Winkler,Toti, M.R. Broenstrup,S¨ussmuth,       108,Y. Chen13498–13503.and B. Shen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011,
August           G.20090298904,Sheldrick, 2009.M.  George  and  K.  Meindl,  US  Pat.,   57 M.Antimicrob.J. Smanski,AgentsR. Chemother.,M. Peterson,2009,S. R.53,Rajski1299–1304.and B. Shen,
18       44 K. Meindl, T. Schmiederer, K. Schneider, A. Reicke, D. Butz,   58 M. J. Smanki, J. Casper, R. M. Peterson, Z. Yu, S. R. Rajski
on                S. Keller, H. Guhring, L. Vertesy, J. WinkJ, H. Hoﬀmann,      and B. Shen, J. Nat. Prod., 2012, 75, 2158–2167.
           M. Bronstrup, G. M. Sheldrick and  R. D. Sussmuth,   59 S. B. Singh, D. L. Zink, J. Huber, O. Genilloud, O. Salazar,
             Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1151–1154.                 M. T. Diez, A. Basilio, F. Vicente and K. M. Byrne, Org.Published
         45 S. Donadio,  S. Maﬃoli, P. Monciardini, M. Sosio and         Lett., 2006, 8, 5449–5452.
             D. Jabes, J. Antibiot., 2010, 63, 423–430.                    60 S. B. Singh, D. L. Zink, K. B. Herath, O. Salazar and
         46 O. Genilloud and F. Vicente, in Antimicrobials, new and old      O. Genilloud, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 2616–2619.
              molecules in the ght against multiresistant bacteria, ed. F.   61 S. B. Singh, D. L. Zink, K. Dorso, M. R. Motyl, O. Salazar,
              Marinelli and O. Genilloud, Springer, Germany, 2013, ch.       A. Basilio, M. F. Vicente, K. M. Byrne,  S. N. Ha and
              17, pp. 327–360.                                            O. Genilloud, J. Nat. Prod., 2008, 72, 345–352.
         47 D. Jab´es, C. Brunati, G. Candiani, S. Riva, G. Roman´o and   62 M. Ueno, M. Amemiya, K. Yamazaki, M. Iijima, M. Osono,
                S. Donadio, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., 2011, 55, 1671–       T. Someno, H. Iimuma, M. Hamada, M. Ishizuka and
             1676.                                                              T. Takeuchi, J. Antibiot., 1993, 46, 1156–1162.
         48 L. Silver, in Antibiotic Discovery and Development, ed. T. J.   63 H. Imai, K.-i. Suzuki, M. Morioka, Y. Numasaki, S. Kadota,
            Dougherty and M. J. Pucci, Springer, 2012, pp. 33–75.            K. Nagai, T. Sato, M. Iwanami and T. Saito, J. Antibiot., 1987,
         49 R. A. Forsyth, R. J. Haselbeck, K. L. Ohlsen, R. T. Yamamoto,       40, 1475–1482.
            H. Xu, J. D. Trawick, D. Wall, L. Wang, V. Brown-Driver,   64 C. Zhang, J. G. Ondeyka, D. L. Zink, A. Basilio, F. Vicente,
                     J. M.  Froelich,  G.  C.  Kedar,  P.  King, M. McCarthy,      O. Salazar, O. Genilloud, K. Dorso, M. Motyl, K. Byrne and
              C. Malone, B. Misiner, D. Robbins, Z. Tan,  Z.-y. Zhu,        S. B. Singh, J. Antibiot., 2009, 62, 655–667.
             G. Carr, D. A. Mosca, C. Zamudio,  J. G. Foulkes and   65 R. G. K. Donald, S. Skwish, R. A. Forsyth, J. W. Anderson,
                     J. W. Zyskind, Mol. Microbiol., 2002, 43, 1387–1400.               T. Zhong,  C.  Burns,  S.  Lee,  X. Meng,  L.  LoCastro,
         50 K. Young, H. Jayasuriya, J. G. Ondeyka, K. Herath, C. Zhang,        L. W. Jarantow, J. Martin, S. Ho Lee, I. Taylor, D. Robbins,
                S.  Kodali,  A.  Galgoci,  R.  Painter,  V.  Brown-Driver,       C. Malone, L. Wang, C. S. Zamudio, P. J. Youngman and
              R. Yamamoto,  L.  L.  Silver,  Y. Zheng,  J.  I.  Ventura,          J. W. Phillips, Chem. Biol., 2009, 16, 826–836.
                     J. Sigmund, S. Ha, A. Basilio, F. Vicente,  J. R. Tormo,   66 J. W.  Phillips, M. A. Goetz,  S. K. Smith, D.  L. Zink,
               F.  Pelaez,  P.  Youngman,  D.  Cully,   J.  F.  Barrett,          J. Polishook, R. Onishi, S. Salowe,  J. Wiltsie,  J. Allocco,
             D. Schmatz, S. B. Singh and J. Wang, Antimicrob. Agents          J. Sigmund, K. Dorso, S. Lee, S. Skwish, M. de la Cruz,
              Chemother., 2006, 50, 519–526.                                                   J. Mart´ın, F. Vicente, O. Genilloud,  J. Lu, R. E. Painter,


             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1229


[PDF physical page 28]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review


              K. Young, K. Overbye, R. G. K. Donald and S. B. Singh,   83 W. Li, J. E. Leet, H. A. Ax, D. R. Gustavson, D. M. Brown,
            Chem. Biol., 2011, 18, 955–965.                                     L. Turner, K. Brown, J. Clark, H. Yang and K. S. Lam, J.
         67 S. Tohyama, Y. Takahashi and Y. Akamatsu,  J. Antibiot.,        Antibiot., 2003, 56, 226–231.
             2010, 63, 147–149.                                      84 K. L. Constantine, L. Mueller, S. Huang, S. Abid, K. S. Lam,
         68 S. B. Singh, P. Dayananth, C. J. Balibar, C. G. Garlisi, J. Lu,     W. Li and J. E. Leet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7284–7285.
              R. Kishii, M. Takei, Y. Fukuda,  S. Ha and K. Young,   85 H.  Jayasuriya,  K.  Herath,   J.  G.  Ondeyka,  C.  Zhang,
              Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., 2015, 59, 3474–3481.             D. L. Zink, M. Brower, F. P. Gailliot, J. Greene, G. Birdsall,
         69 S. B. Singh, M. A. Goetz, S. K. Smith, D. L. Zink, J. Polishook,          J.  Venugopal,  M.  Ushio,  B.  Burgess,  G.  Russotti,
              R. Onishi, S. Salowe,  J. Wiltsie,  J. Allocco,  J. Sigmund,       A. Walker, M. Hesse, A. Seeley, B. Junker, N. Connors,
              K.  Dorso,  M.  de  la  Cruz,   J.  Mart´ın,  F.  Vicente,      O.   Salazar,  O.  Genilloud,  K.  Liu,   P.  Masurekar,
             O. Genilloud, R. G. K. Donald and J. W. Phillips, Bioorg.          J. F. Barrett and S. B. Singh, J. Antibiot., 2007, 60, 554–564.
            Med. Chem. Lett., 2012, 22, 7127–7130.                     86 S. B. Singh,  J. Occi, H. Jayasuriya, K. Herath, M. Motyl,
         70 H. Komatsuzawa,  J. Suzuki, M. Sugai, Y. Miyake and       K. Dorso, C. Gill, E. Hickey, K. M. Overbye, J. F. Barrett
            H. Suginaka, J. Antimicrob. Chemother., 1994, 33, 1155–1163.      and P. Masurekar, J. Antibiot., 2007, 60, 565–567.
         71 C. M. Tan, A. G. Therien, J. Lu, S. H. Lee, A. Caron, C. J. Gill,   87 C. Zhang, D. L. Zink, M. Ushio, B. Burgess, R. Onishi,
AM.           C. Lebeau-Jacob,  L. Benton-Perdomo,  J. M. Monteiro,       P. Masurekar, J. F. Barrett and S. B. Singh, Bioorg. Chem.,
7:49:08            P.S. M.Wong,Pereira,E. Daigneault,N. L. Elsen,S.J. Kramer,Wu, K. Deschamps,L. Liang, E. M.Maxwell,Petcu,   88 2008,C.  Zhang,16, 8818–8823.K.  Herath, H.  Jayasuriya,   J.  G.  Ondeyka,
             D. Claveau, J. Vaillancourt, K. Skorey,  J. Tam, H. Wang,      D. L. Zink,  J. Occi, G. Birdsall,  J. Venugopal, M. Ushio,
               T.   C.   Meredith,   S.   Sillaots,   L.   Wang-Jarantow,       B. Burgess, P. Masurekar, J. F. Barrett and S. B. Singh, J.3/5/2025               Y.  Ramtohul,  E.  Langlois,  F.  Landry,   J.  C.  Reid,       Nat. Prod., 2009, 72, 841–847.
on
             G. Parthasarathy, S. Sharma, A. Baryshnikova, K. J. Lumb,   89 S. B. Singh, C. Zhang, D. L. Zink, K. Herath, J. Ondeyka,
           M. G. Pinho, S. M. Soisson and T. Roemer, Sci. Transl.       P. Masurekar, H. Jayasuriya, M. A. Goetz,  J. R. Tormo,
             Med., 2012, 4, 126ra35.                                              F. Vicente,  J. Martin,  I. Gonzalez and O. Genilloud,  J.Downloaded       72 A. G. Therien,  J. L. Huber, K. E. Wilson, P. Beaulieu,        Antibiot., 2013, 66, 599–607.
2017.            A.A. M.Caron,Galgoci,D. M.Claveau,Gallant,K. X.Deschamps,Gu, N. J. Kevin,R. G.J. Donald,Laeur,   90 C.S. Zhang,Smith,  J.R.Occi,Onishi,P. Masurekar,S. Ha, O. J.Salazar,F. Barrett,O. D.Genilloud,L. Zink,
August            P.A. A.S. Michels,Leavitt, C.A. M.Lebeau-Jacob,Ogawa, R. E.S. Painter,S. Lee, C.M.A.M.Parish,Lin,       A.M. Basilio,Motyl andF. S.Vicente,B. Singh,C.  Gill,J. Am.E.Chem.J. Hickey,Soc., 2008,K. Dorso,130,
18            Y. W. Park, L. Benton-Perdomo, M. Petcu, J. W. Phillips,      12102–12110.
on
           M. A. Powles, K. I. Skorey, J. Tam, C. T. Tan, K. Young,   91 M.  N.  Thaker,  W.  Wang,   P.  Spanogiannopoulos,
                S. Wong, S. T. Waddell and L. Miesel, Antimicrob. Agents      N. Waglechner, A. M. King, R. Medina and G. D. Wright,
              Chemother., 2012, 56, 4662–4670.                                Nat. Biotechnol., 2013, 31, 922–929.Published
         73 M. Paetzel, A. Karla, N. C. J. Strynadka and R. E. Dalbey,   92 O. Genilloud, I. Gonz´alez, O. Salazar, J. Mart´ın, J. R. Tormo
            Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 4549–4580.                         and F. Vicente, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2011, 38, 375–
         74 T. C. Roberts, P. A. Smith, R. T. Cirz and F. E. Romesberg, J.       389.
            Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15830–15838.                   93 P.  Monciardini, M.  Iorio,  S. Maﬃoli, M.  Sosio and
         75 A. Fukumoto, Y.  P. Kim, A. Matsumoto, Y. Takahasi,        S. Donadio, Microb. Biotechnol., 2014, 7, 209–220.
              K. Shiomi, H. Tomoda and S. Omura,  J. Antibiot., 2008,   94 J. Piel, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2004, 21, 519–538.
               61, 1–6.                                               95 S. Horinuchi, Biosci., Biotechnol., Biochem., 2007, 71, 283–
         76 A. Liu, L. Tran, E. Becket, K. Lee, L. Chinn, E. Park, K. Tran       299.
           and J. H. Miller, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., 2010, 54,   96 E. A. Shank and R. Kolter, Curr. Opin. Microbiol., 2009, 12,
             1393–1403.                                                  205–214.
         77 L. Kalan and G. D. Wright, Expert Rev. Mol. Med., 2011, 13,   97 D. Castiglione, L. Cavaletti, D. Losi, A. Lazzarini, L. Carrano,
               e5.                                                M. Feroggio, I. Ciciliato, E. Corti, G. Candiani, F. Marinelli
         78 L. Ejim, M.  A. Farha,  S.  B. Falconer,  J. Wildenhain,      and E. Selva, Biochemistry, 2007, 46, 5884–5895.
              B. K. Coombes, M. Tyers, E. D. Brown and G. D. Wright,   98 E. J. Sherwood, A. R. Hesketh and M. J. Bibb, J. Bacteriol.,
              Nat. Chem. Biol., 2011, 7, 348–350.                              2013, 195, 2309–2321.
         79 P. L. Taylor, L. Rossi, G. De Pascale and G. D. Wright, ACS   99 E. J. Sherwood and M. J. Bibb, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.,
            Chem. Biol., 2012, 7, 1547–1555.                                2013, 110, E2500–E2509.
         80 G.  Cox,  K.  Koteva and  G.  D.  Wright,   J.  Antimicrob.  100 M. H. Lacoske and E. A. Theodorakis, J. Nat. Prod., 2015, 78,
              Chemother., 2014, 69, 1844–1855.                              562–575.
         81 R. Nakashima, K. Sakurai, S. Yamasaki, K. Nishino and  101 T. Nakashima, M. Miura and M. Hara, Cancer Res., 2000, 60,
               A. Yamaguchi, Nature, 2011, 480, 565–569.                     1229–1235.
         82 M. C. Bagley, J. W. Dale, E. A. Merritt and X. Xiong, Chem.  102 C. Mazzetti, M. Ornaghi, E. Gaspari, S. Parapini, S. Maﬃoli,
                Rev., 2005, 105, 685–714.                               M. Sosio and S. Donadio, J. Nat. Prod., 2012, 75, 1044–1050.




         1230  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017


[PDF physical page 29]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

         Review                                                                                                    Natural Product Reports


         103 Y. Igarashi, H. Ogura, K. Furihata, N. Oku, C. Indananda  124 S.  Stella,  N.  Montanini,  F.  Le  Monnier,  P.  Ferrari,
           and A. Thamchaipenet, J. Nat. Prod., 2011, 74, 670–674.           L.  Colombo,  F.  Marinelli,  P.  Landini,   I.  Ciciliato,
         104 T. Gverzdys, G. Kramer and  J. R. Nodwell, Bioorg. Med.       B. P. Goldstein and E. Selva, J. Antibiot., 1995, 48, 780–786.
             Chem., 2016, 24, 6269–6275.                            125 M. M. A. El-Gendy, M. Shaaban, K. A. Shaaban, A. M. El-
         105 T. Gverzdys, M. K. Hart, S. Pimentel-Elardo, G. Tranmer      Bondkly and H. Laatsch, J. Antibiot., 2008, 61, 149–157.
           and J. R. Nodwell, J. Antibiot., 2015, 68, 698–702.           126 Q. Zhu, J. Li, J. M. M. Luo, B. Wang, H. Huang, X. Tian,
         106 J. Riedlinger, A. Reicke, H. Z¨ahner, B. Krismer, A. T. Bull,     W. Li, S. Zhang, C. Zhang and  J. Ju, Antimicrob. Agents
               L. A. Maldonado, A. C. Ward, M. Goodfellow, B. Bister,       Chemother., 2012, 56, 110–114.
             D. Bischoﬀ, R. D. S¨ussmuth and H. P. Fiedler, J. Antibiot.,  127 H. A. Kirst, D. E. Dorman, J. L. Occolowitz, N. D. Jones,
              2004, 57, 271–277.                                                                    J. W. Paschal, R.  L. Hamill and  E.  F. Szymanski,  J.
         107 C. C. Hughes, A. Prieto-Davo, P. R. Jensen and W. Fenical,        Antibiot., 1985, 38, 575–586.
              Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 629–631.                            128 Y. Zhang, N. Adnani, D. R. Braun, G. A. Ellis, K. J. Barns,
         108 K. H.  Jang,  S.-J. Nam,  J.  B. Locke, C.  A. Kauﬀman,        S. Parker-Nance, I. A. Guzei and T. S. Bugni, J. Nat. Prod.,
             D. S. Beatty, L. A. Paul and W. Fenical, Angew. Chem., Int.       2016, 79, 2968–2972.
                Ed., 2013, 52, 7822–7824.                               129 D. S. Fukuda,  J. S. Mynderse, P.  J. Baker, D. M. Berry,
AM.      109 M. Hensler,  E. Soubih, K. H.  Jang, W. Thienphrapa,        L. D. Boeck, R. C. Yao, F. P. Mertz, W. M. Nakatsukasa,
7:49:08                 J.C.  Locke,Kauﬀman,M. D.Cunningham,Beatty,  K.   J.B. Shaw,Kwan,V. S.-J.Nizet Nam,and  130 N.J. MabeM. Haste,and J.L.Ott,Farnaes,J. Antibiot.,V. R. 1990,Perera,43,W.623–633.Fenical, V. Nizet
           W. Fenical, Poster presentation, F-1514, in Annual ICAAC      and M. E. Hensler, Mar. Drugs, 2011, 9, 680–689.
             Meeting in San Francisco, September 2012.                 131 M. W. Mullowney, C. H. Hwang, A. G. Newsome, X. Wei,3/5/2025         110 J. A. Trischman, D. M. Tapiolas, P. R. Jensen, R. Dwight,       U.  Tanouye,  B.  Wan,  S.  Carlson,  N.  Joy  Barranis,
on
           W. Fenical, T. C. McKee, C. M. Ireland, T.  J. Stout and       E. Ainmhire, W.-L. Chen, K. Krishnamoorthy,  J. White,
                     J. Clardy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 757–758.                  R. Blair, H. Lee,  J. E. Burdette, P. K. Rathod, T. Parish,
         111 B. S. Moore, J. A. Trischman, D. Seng, D. Kho, P. R. Jensen        S. Cho, S. G. Franzblau and B. T. Murphy, ACS Infect. Dis.,Downloaded         and W. Fenical, J. Org. Chem., 1999, 64, 1145–1150.              2015, 1, 168–174.
2017.      112 S.L. H.Miao,T. HuangM.  R.andAnstee,M. M. Brasseur,K.  LaMarco,J. Nat. J.Prod.,Matthew,1997,  132 Y.-Y.Drugs,Bu,2014,H. 12,Yamazaki,6102–6112.K. Ukai and M. Namikoshi, Mar.
August      113 D.60, Degen,858–861.Y. Feng, Y. Zhang, K. Y. Ebright, Y. W. Ebright,  133 R.Cruz,Lacret,I.  P´erez-Victoria,D. Oves-Costales,F. C.Vicente,G´omez,O.C. GenilloudD´ıaz, M. deandla
18         M. Gigliotti, S. Mandal, M. Talaue, N. Connell, E. Arnold,        F. Reyes, Mar. Drugs, 2015, 13, 128–140.
on           W. Fenical and R. H. Ebright, eLife, 2014, 3, e02450.        134 M. S. Rapp´e and S. J. Giovannoni, Annu. Rev. Microbiol.,
         114 H. M. Hassan, D. Degen, K. H. Jang, R. H. Ebright and       2003, 57, 369–394.
           W. Fenical, J. Antibiot., 2015, 68, 206–209.                 135 T. Kaeberlein, K. Lewis and S. S. Epstein, Science, 2002, 296,Published
         115 D. Roessner, A. Zeeck and W. A. Koenig, Angew. Chem.,       1127–1129.
              1990, 102, 84–85.                                      136 E. Gavrish, A. Bollmann,  S. Epstein and K. Lewis,  J.
         116 M. Bae, B. Chung, K.-B. Oh, J. Shin and D.-C. Oh, Mar.        Microbiol. Methods, 2008, 72, 257–262.
              Drugs, 2015, 13, 5187–5200.                             137 L. L. Ling, T. Schneider, A.  J. Peoples, A. L. Spoering,
         117 H. C. Kwon, C. A. Kauﬀman, P. R. Jensen and W. Fenical, J.           I. Engels,  B.  P. Conlon,  A. Mueller,  T.  F.  Sch¨aberle,
            Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1622–1632.                         D.  E.  Hughes,  S.  Epstein, M.  Jones,  L.  Lazarides,
         118 V. R. Macherla, J. Liu, M. Sunga, D. J. White, J. Grodberg,       V. A. Steadman, D. R. Cohen, C. R. Felix, K. A. Fetterman,
                S. Teisan, K. S. Lam and B. C. M. Potts,  J. Nat. Prod.,     W.  P.  Millett, A. G.  Nitti, A. M.  Zullo, C. Chen and
              2007, 70, 1454–1457.                                           K. Lewis, Nature, 2015, 517, 455–459.
         119 K. A. McArthur, S. S. Mitchell, G. Tsueng, A. Rheingold,  138 D. Nichols, N. Cahoon, E. M. Trakhtenberg, L. Pham,
             D. J. White, J. Grodberg, K. S. Lam and B. C. M. Potts, J.       A.  Mehta,  A.  Belanger,  T.  Kanigan,  K.  Lewis  and
              Nat. Prod., 2008, 71, 1732–1737.                                      S. S. Epstein, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2010, 76, 2445–2450.
         120 J. Mart´ın, T. d. S. Sousa, G. Crespo, S. Palomo, I. Gonz´alez,  139 A.  J. Peoples, Q. Zhang, W. P. Millett, M. T. Rothfeder,
                     J. R. Tormo, M. de la Cruz, M. Anderson, R. T. Hill,       B.  C.  Pescatore,  A.  A.  Madden,  L.  L.  Ling  and
                F. Vicente, O. Genilloud and F. Reyes, Mar. Drugs, 2013,       C. M. Moore, J. Antibiot., 2008, 61, 457–463.
               11, 387–398.                                          140 A. Peoples, Q. Zhang, C. Moore, L. Ling, M. Rothfeder and
         121 S. Palomo, I. Gonz´alez, J. Mart´ın, M. de la Cruz, F. Vicente,       K. Lewis, NovoBiotic Pharmaceuticals, US Pat., 8097709 B2,
                F. Reyes,  J. R. Tormo, M. Anderson, R.  T.  Hill and       2012.
             O. Genilloud, Mar. Drugs, 2013, 11, 1071–1086.            141 A. Peoples, L. L. Ling, K. Lewis and Z. Zhang, Novel
         122 X. Just-Baringo, F. Albericio and M. Alvarez, Mar. Drugs,        Antibiotics,   NovoBiotic   Pharmaceuticals,  US   Pat.,
              2014, 12, 317–351.                                        20110136752 A1, 2011.
         123 P. Ferrari, L. Colombo, S. Stella, E. Selva and L. F. Zerilli, J.  142 E. Gavrish, C. S.  Sit, S. Cao, O. Kandror, A. Spoering,
                 Antibiot., 1995, 48, 1304–1311.                                    A. Peoples, L. Ling, A. Fetterman, D. Hughes, A. Bissell,




             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017                                                             Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232  | 1231


[PDF physical page 30]
                                                                                                                                        View Article Online

          Natural Product Reports                                                                                        Review


            H. Torrey, T. Akopian, A. Mueller, S. Epstein, A. Goldberg,       N. L. Kelleher and W. W. Metcalf, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2014,
                     J. Clardy and K. Lewis, Chem. Biol., 2014, 21, 509–518.            10, 963–968.
         143 E. K. Schmitt, M. Riwanto, V. Sambandamurthy, S. Roggo,  162 J. P. Gomez-Escribano and M.  J. Bibb,  J. Ind. Microbiol.
              C. Miault, C. Zwingelstein, P. Krastel, C. Noble, D. Beer,        Biotechnol., 2014, 41, 425–431.
                S. P. Rao, M. Au, P. Niyomrattanakit, V. Lim,  J. Zheng,  163 T. Weber, P. Charusanti, E. M. Musiol-Kroll, X. Jiang,
             D. Jeﬀery, K. Pethe and L. Camacho, Angew. Chem., Int.       Y. Tong, H. U. Kim and S. Y. Lee, Trends Biotechnol., 2015,
                Ed., 2011, 50, 5889–5891.                                         33, 15–26; U. Kim, P. Charusanti, S. Y. Lee and T. Weber,
         144 W. Gao, J.-Y. Kim, J. R. Anderson, T. Akopian, S. Hong,       Nat. Prod. Rep., 2016, 33, 933–941.
                Y.-Y.  Jin, O. Kandror,  J.-W. Kim,  I.-A. Lee,  S.-Y. Lee,  164 L.  Robbel,  T.  A.  Knappe,  U.  Linne,  X.  Xie  and
                     J.  B. McAlpine,  S. Mulugeta,  S.  Sunoqrot,  Y. Wang,      M. A. Marahiel, FEBS J., 2010, 277, 663–676.
               S.-H. Yang, T.-M. Yoon,  A.  L. Goldberg, G.  F.  Pauli,  165 W. W. Metcalf and W. A. van der Donk, Annu. Rev. Biochem.,
               J.-W. Suh, S. G. Franzblau and S. Cho, Antimicrob. Agents       2009, 78, 65–94.
              Chemother., 2015, 59, 880–889.                          166 B.  S. Evans, C. Zhao,  J. Gao, C. M. Evans,  K.-S.  Ju,
         145 R. H. Baltz, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2011, 38, 657–666.           J. R. Doroghazi, W. A. van der Donk, N. L. Kelleher and
         146 G. P. van Wezel and K. J. McDowall, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2011,     W. W. Metcalf, ACS Chem. Biol., 2013, 8, 908–913.
AM.            28, 1311–1333.                                        167 M. Kugler, W. Loeﬄer, C. Rapp, A. Kern and G. Jung, Arch.
7:49:08      147 K.97,Ochi87–98.and T. Hosaka, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2013,  168 B.Microbiol.,K. Park, 1990,A. Hirota153,and276–281.H. Sakai, Agric. Biol. Chem., 1977,
         148 T.  Hosaka,  M.  Ohnishi-Kameyama,  H.  Muramatsu,       41, 573–579.
              K. Murakami, Y. Tsurumi, S. Kodani, M. Yoshida, A. Fujie  169 S. A. Borisova, B. T. Circello, J. K. Zhang, W. A. van der Donk3/5/2025           and K. Ochi, Nat. Biotechnol., 2009, 27, 462–464.              and W. W. Metcalf, Chem. Biol., 2010, 17, 28–37.
on
         149 B. O. Bachmann, S. G. Van Lanen and R. H. Baltz, J. Ind.  170 K.-S.  Jua,  J. Gao,  J.  R.  Doroghazi,  K.-K.   A. Wang,
               Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2014, 41, 175–184.                        C.  J. Thibodeaux,  S. Lia, E. Metzger,  J. Fudala,  J. Su,
         150 G. L. Challis, J. Med. Chem., 2008, 51, 2618–2628.                        J. K. Zhang,  J. Lee,  J. P. Cioni, B. S. Evans, R. Hirota,Downloaded      151 N. Ziemert, M. Alanjary and T. Weber, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2016,       D. P. Labeda, W. A. van der Donka and W. W. Metcalfa,
2017.      152 Y.33,Rebets,988–1005.E. Br¨otz, B. Tokovenko and A. Luzhetskyy, J. Ind.  171 Proc.M. Funabashi,Natl. Acad.S.Sci.Baba,U. S.T.A.,Takatsu,2015, 112,M. 12175–12180.Kizuka, Y. Ohata,
August      153 J.Microbiol.P. Gomez-Escribano,Biotechnol., 2014,S. Alt41,and387–402.M. J. Bibb, Mar. Drugs,      M.W.-C.Tanaka,L. Chen K.andNonaka,S. G. VanA.Lanen,P.  Spork,Angew. C.Chem.,Ducho,Int.
18           2016, 14, 78, DOI: 10.3390/md14040078.                           Ed., 2013, 52, 11607–11611.
on
         154 M. H. Medema, K. Blin, P. Cimermancic, V. de Jager,  172 M. Winn, R. J. Goss, K. Kimura and T. D. Bugg, Nat. Prod.
               P. Zakrzewski, M. A. Fischbach, T. Weber, E. Takano and        Rep., 2010, 27, 279–304.
              R. Breitling, Nucleic Acids Res., 2011, 39, W339–W346.       173 R.   Pozzi,  M.  Simone,   C.   Mazzetti,   S.  Maﬃoli,Published
         155 T. Weber, K.  Blin,  S. Duddela, D. Krug, H. U. Kim,        P. Monciardini, L. Cavaletti, R. Bamonte, M. Sosio and
              R.  Bruccoleri,  S.  Y.  Lee, M.  Fischbach,  R.  Muller,        S. Donadio, J. Antibiot., 2011, 64, 133–139.
           W.   Wohlleben,   R.    Breitling,   E.   Takano   and  174 D. Zettler, H. Xia, N. Burkard, A. Kulik, S. Grond, L. Heide
           M. H. Medema, Nucleic Acids Res., 2015, 43, W237–W243.       and A. K. Apel, ChemBioChem, 2014, 15, 612–621.
         156 M. H. Medema, R. Kottmann, P. Yilmaz, M. Cummings,  175 R. Liao, L. Duan, C. Lei, P. Pan, Y. Ding, Q. Zhang, D. Chen,
                     J. B. Biggins, K. Blin, I. de Bruijn, Y. H. Chooi, J. Claesen,       B. Shen, Y. Yu and W. Liu, Chem. Biol., 2009, 16, 141–147.
              R. C. Coates, et al., Nat. Chem. Biol., 2015, 11, 625–631.     176 E. Vel´asquez and W. van der Donk, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol.,
         157 J. D. Watrous and P. C. Dorrestein, Nat. Rev. Microbiol.,       2011, 15, 11–21.
              2011, 9, 683–694.                                      177 K. Engelhardt, K. F. Degnes, M. Kemmler, H. Bredholt,
         158 R. D. Kersten, Y.-L. Yang, Y. Xu, P. Cimermancic, S.-J. Nam,       E. Fjaervik, G. Klinkenberg, H. Sletta, T. E. Ellingsen and
           W.  Fenical,  M.  A.  Fischbach,  B.   S.  Moore  and        S. B. Zotchev, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2010, 76, 4969–4976.
               P. C. Dorrestein, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2011, 7, 794–802.        178 M. E. Favret, J. W. Paschal, T. K. Elzey and L. D. Boeck, J.
         159 R. D. Kersten, N. Ziemert, D. J. Gonzalez, B. M. Duggan,        Antibiot., 1992, 45, 1499–1511.
               V. Nizet, P. C. Dorrestein and B. S. Moore, Proc. Natl.  179 K. Yamanaka, K. A. Reynolds, R. D. Kersten, K. S. Ryan,
              Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, E4407–E4416.                    D. J. Gonzalez, V. Nizet, P. C. Dorrestein and B. S. Moore,
         160 M. Zerikly and G. L. Challis, ChemBioChem, 2009, 10, 625–        Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 1957–1962.
              633.                                                 180 X. Tang, J. Li, N. Mill´an-Agui˜naga, J. J. Zhang, E. C. O'Neill,
         161 J. R. Doroghazi,  J. C. Albright, A. W. Goering, K.-S. Ju,          J. A. Ugalde, P. R. Jensen, S. M. Mantovani and B. S. Moore,
              R.  R.  Haines,  K.   A.  Tchalukov,  D.   P.  Labeda,      ACS Chem. Biol., 2015, 10, 2841–2849.





          1232  | Nat. Prod. Rep., 2017, 34, 1203–1232                                                             This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017