
[PDF physical page 1]
       Article                                                                                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z
   Ancient gene clusters govern the initiation of
  monoterpenoid indole alkaloid biosynthesis
  and C3 stereochemistry inversion



        Received: 19 March 2025               Jaewook Hwang1,6, Jonathan Kirshner   2,6, Daniel André Ramey Deschênes1,
                                       Matthew Bailey Richardson1, Steven J. Fleck   2, Scott Galeung Alexander Mann1,
       Accepted: 16 October 2025
                                          Jun Guo    1, Jacob Owen Perley1, Mohammadamin Shahsavarani1,
                                            Jorge Jonathan Oswaldo Garza-Garcia1, Alyssa Dawn Seveck1,
                                        Savannah Sadie Doiron1, Zhan Mai1, Stephen Nelson Silliphant1,
          Check for updates                    Sarah Anne Englehart1, Barry A. Blight1, Larry Calhoun1, Di Gao3,
                                             Jiazhang Lian   3,4,5, Ghislain Deslongchamps   1    , Victor A. Albert  2  &
                                      Yang Qu   11234567890():,;                 1234567890():,;


                                     The inversion of C3 stereochemistry in monoterpenoid indole alkaloids
                                              (MIAs), derived from the central precursor strictosidine (3S), is essential for
                                         producing pharmacologically important 3 R MIAs and spirooxindoles such as
                                               reserpine. While early MIA biosynthesis preserves the 3S conﬁguration, the
                                     mechanism underlying C3 inversion has remained unresolved. Here, we
                                                 identify and biochemically characterize a conserved oxidase-reductase pair in
                                               Gentianales: heteroyohimbine/yohimbine/corynanthe C3-oxidase (HYC3O)
                                      and C3-reductase (HYC3R), which together invert the 3S stereochemistry to 3 R
                                             across diverse substrates. HYC3O and HYC3R are encoded within biosynthetic
                                       gene clusters in Rauvolﬁa tetraphylla and Catharanthus roseus, homologous to
                                         a geissoschizine synthase (GS) cluster also uncovered. Comparative genomics
                                               indicate that the GS cluster originated at the base of Gentianales (~135 Mya),
                                             coinciding with the evolution of the strictosidine synthase cluster, whereas the
                                             reserpine cluster arose later. These ﬁndings uncover the genomic and bio-
                                          chemical basis of key events driving MIA diversiﬁcation beyond canonical
                                                vinblastine and ajmaline pathways.




       The elucidation of the nearly complete, >30-step biosynthetic pathway   periwinkle), MIA biosynthesis begins with enzymes encoded from a
         for the anticancer drug vinblastine marked a milestone in mono-   three-gene biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) known as the strictosidine
        terpenoid  indole  alkaloid  (MIA)  biosynthesis1–5.  This  pathway,   synthase (STR) BGC. This cluster encodes tryptophan decarboxylase
       embedded within a family of over 3000 MIAs, has provided a bio-   (TDC), strictosidine synthase (STR), and Multidrug and Toxic Com-
        chemical framework for studying other medicinally important MIAs in  pound Extrusion (MATE) transporter 1 (MATE1)6,7. Tryptamine, pro-
         nature.  In  the model  plant Catharanthus  roseus  (Madagascar’s  duced by TDC, is condensed with secologanin by STR. This pivotal



         1Department of Chemistry, University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, NB, Canada. 2Department of Biological Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.
        3Key Laboratory of Biomass Chemical Engineering of Ministry of Education, College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
          Zhejiang, China. 4ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientiﬁc and Technological Innovation Center, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. 5Zhejiang Key
         Laboratory of Smart Biomaterials, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. 6These authors contributed equally: Jaewook Hwang, Jonathan Kirshner.
             e-mail: ghislain@unb.ca; vaalbert@buffalo.edu; yang.qu@unb.ca



        Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                                                       1


[PDF physical page 2]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z


reaction merges the secoiridoid and shikimate pathways. MATE1  HYC3R to yield 3R products. Enzyme assays across ﬁve additional
facilitates this reaction by importing secologanin into the vacuole,   Gentianales species reveal that HYC3O/HYC3R represent a conserved
where STR resides8,9. Strictosidine then serves as the universal pre-  mechanism for 3R MIA formation. In R. tetraphylla and C. roseus,
cursor for all downstream MIAs (Fig. 1)10–15.                      HYC3O and HYC3R co-occur within a BGC, which we designate the
    Consistent with its role in facilitating the biosynthesis of this   reserpine BGC. Phylogenomic analysis further uncovers a related
foundational precursor, the STR BGC is broadly conserved among   cluster, which we term the geissoschizine synthase (GS) BGC. Our
MIA-producing species within the Gentianales order, including Gelse-   results indicate that these clusters originate from a large segmental
mium sempervirens (Gelsemiaceae), C. roseus (Apocynaceae), Mitra-   duplication of a CAD-rich ancestral block that predates the Gentianales
gyna  speciosa  (kratom,  Rubiaceae),  and  Ophiorrhiza  pumila  crown group and is syntenic with Vitis. The GS BGC represents the
(Rubiaceae)7,16. Comparative phylogenomics between C. roseus and O.   ancestral function, supporting corynanthe biosynthesis as early as the
pumila suggest this cluster arose early in Gentianales evolution, likely   diversiﬁcation of Rubiaceae (~118 Mya)17, whereas the reserpine BGC
close to the split between Gentianales and other core eudicots, ~135   represents a later innovation in the rauvolﬁoid lineage. Together with a
million years ago (Mya)17.                                        comprehensive synteny analysis of the STR BGC, our work not only
     Strictosidine  is subsequently hydrolyzed by  strictosidine  β-   resolves the long-standing question of the enzymatic origin of 3R MIAs
glucosidase (SGD) to generate the highly labile strictosidine agly-   but also reveals the genomic foundations underlying the initiation and
cone, which naturally exists in equilibrium among multiple reactive   diversiﬁcation of MIA biosynthesis.
forms. This reactive intermediate is stabilized by reduction via multiple
cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD)-like enzymes, such as yohim-  Results
bine  synthase  (YOS),  geissoschizine  synthase  (GS), and  tetra-  A ﬂavoprotein and a CAD-like reductase catalyze C3-
hydroalstonine synthase (THAS), to form stable isomers that serve as   stereochemistry inversion of rauwolscine
scaffolds for further modiﬁcation1–3,12–14,18–20. Despite extensive knowl-  To investigate Rauvolﬁa MIA biosynthesis and its genomic context, we
edge of downstream modiﬁcations into major MIA classes such as   analyzed the published R. tetraphylla genome15 for homologs of known
iboga, aspidosperma, and sarpagan alkaloids, the biosynthesis of a   pathway genes. This search revealed a highly repetitive, ca. 200 kbp
distinct group of MIAs bearing 3R stereochemistry (Fig. 1), exempliﬁed  genomic locus rich in genes encoding CAD-like reductases, including
by the antihypertensive drug reserpine, has remained unresolved.      the ﬁrst committed enzyme for reserpine biosynthesis, yohimbane
    Reserpine is produced by Rauvolﬁa species such as R. tetraphylla   synthase (RtYOS)15 (Supplementary Fig. 1a). Interestingly, just 8.4 kbp
(devil-pepper) and R. serpentina (Indian snakeroot), both members of   upstream of RtYOS, we identiﬁed a gene encoding a ﬂavoprotein,
the Apocynaceae family. Unlike 3S MIAs, 3R MIAs like reserpine exhibit   belonging to the berberine-bridge enzyme (BBE) type (Supplementary
a perpendicular indole orientation that profoundly alters their bioac-   Fig. 1a). This uncharacterized enzyme shared 57% amino acid identity
tivity and reactivity (Fig. 1). The 3S stereochemistry originates from the   to O-acetylstemmadenine oxidase (CrASO), a known BBE-like oxidase
central precursor strictosidine. It has been well established by enzyme   in C. roseus MIA biosynthesis1. The close genomic proximity of the
assays and feeding experiments that STRs from various species (e.g., C.   ﬂavoprotein gene to RtYOS suggested a functional association, moti-
roseus, R. serpentina, M. speciosa, O. pumila, and G. sempervirens across   vating us to investigate its biochemical role.
three plant families) exclusively produce strictosidine (3S) rather than         First, we synthesized the gene encoding the R. tetraphylla ﬂavo-
its 3R epimer, vincoside10,16,21–23. Subsequently, all characterized stric-   protein, expressed it in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and puriﬁed the His-
tosidine aglycone reductases (e.g., GS, THAS, YOS) exclusively yield 3S   tagged  protein  using  afﬁnity  chromatography.  (Supplementary
products12–15 (Fig. 1).                                                          Fig. 1b). Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/
    Beyond reserpine, 3R MIAs are widely distributed and pharma-  MS) analysis showed that the enzyme could oxidize rauwolscine (m/z
cologically relevant. Examples include 3-epi-THA (akuammigine) from   355) to a different MIA (m/z 353) (Fig. 2a). The R. serpentina homolog
C. roseus and Picralima nitida (akuamma; Apocynaceae)24,25, reserpil-  (90% amino acid identify) also oxidized rauwolcine to generate the
line from Ochrosia elliptica (bloodhorn; Apocynaceae) and Rauvolﬁa  same product. The change in the UV absorption maxima of a typical
spp26,27, 3-epi-mitragynine (speciociliatine) from M. speciosa (Rubia-   indole (280 nm) as substrate to that with longer wavelengths (350 nm)
ceae), and the oxindoles mitraphylline, speciophylline, and corynox-   as product indicated a double bond formation between C3-N4, leading
ine, which are biosynthesized from 3R intermediates in M. speciosa,   to extended conjugation (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Fig. 2a). The forma-
Mitragyna parvifolia, Cephalanthus occidentalis (button bush; Rubia-   tion of a 3-dehydro iminium intermediate by hydride abstraction was
ceae), and Hamelia patens (ﬁrebush; Rubiaceae)14,28–31 (Fig. 1). The   also consistent with the ﬂavin chemistry in other BBE-like oxidases,
widespread occurrence of 3R MIAs across diverse plant families sug-   such as CrASO and the California poppy BBE1,33. Reduction of this
gests a signiﬁcant, yet unresolved, biochemical pathway in nature.      intermediate with NaBH₄ regenerated 3S-rauwolscine, since the geo-
    The recent genome assembly of R.tetraphylla15,32 provides an   metry of the tertiary nitrogen strongly favors hydride addition from
opportunity to investigate 3R-MIA biosynthesis at a genomic level.   the re-face (Supplementary Fig. 2b).
Structurally, reserpine contains a 3R yohimbine-type scaffold, sug-       Because reserpine biosynthesis requires a C3 stereochemistry
gesting a potential origin from yohimbine intermediates formed by   inversion, we hypothesized that a reductase could reduce the C3-N4
YOS activity. Intriguingly, YOS is located within a CAD-rich locus that   iminium and generate the 3R-epimer. To test  this, eight highly
contains GS, THAS, homologs of R. serpentina ajmaline pathway   expressed, CAD-like reductases (RsCAD1-8) previously identiﬁed from
enzymes vomilenine 1,2-reductase (VR) and dihydrovomilenine 19,20-   R. serpentina roots19 were expressed and assayed with 3-dehydro-
reductase (DHVR)19, and many uncharacterized genes, suggesting a   rauwolscine. Only RsCAD7 reduced  the  intermediate  to  3-epi-
coordinated genomic architecture for alkaloid diversiﬁcation.          rauwolscine (m/z 355, Fig. 2a), which displayed identical MS/MS frag-
    Here, we take a comparative genomic approach across R. tetra-   mentation and UV spectra to rauwolscine (Fig. 2b, c).
phylla, C. roseus and additional Gentianales species (Asclepias syriaca,       Structure elucidation by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
Gelsemium elegans, M. speciosa, and O. pumila), with Vitis vinifera   experiments conﬁrmed the  identities of rauwolscine, 3-dehydro-
(grapevine) serving as the early-diverging core eudicot outgroup. We   rauwolscine and 3-epi-rauwolscine (Supplementary Figs. 3–20, Sup-
identify an oxidase and reductase pair heteroyohimbine/yohimbine/   plementary Tables 1 and 2)34. In 3-dehydro-rauwolscine, disappearance
corynanthe C3-oxidase (HYC3O) and C3-reductase (HYC3R). Together,   of the H3 resonance and a downﬁeld shift of C3 from 54.1 to 166.1 ppm
these enzymes catalyze stereochemical inversion at C3 by oxidizing 3S   supported the presence of a C3-N4 double bond. For 3-epi-rau-
MIAs to iminium intermediates (HYC3O), which are then reduced by   wolscine, inversion of the C3 stereocenter reoriented the indole ring



Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                           2


[PDF physical page 3]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z





Fig. 1 | HYC3Os and HYC3Rs mediate C3 stereochemistry inversion in the bio-   heteroyohimbine/yohimbine/corynathe C3-oxidases (HYC3Os, green arrow) and
synthesis of reserpine and diverse 3R MIAs and their oxindole derivatives.     C3 reductases (HYC3Rs, blue arrow) across three plant families that collaboratively
Following the biosynthesis of strictosidine by the strictosidine synthase (STR) and    catalyze C3 epimerization in diverse MIAs. This tandem reaction involves H3-
its deglycosylation by the strictosidine β-glucosidase (SGD)10,11, the resulting agly-    hydride abstraction by HYC3Os, followed by si-face C3-reduction by HYC3Rs,
cones are reduced by various strictosidine aglycone reductases to form hetero-      leading to the formation of 3R MIAs. The indole ring of these 3R MIAs adopts a
yohimbine (green shade), yohimbine (blue shade), and corynanthe (orange shade)   unique perpendicular orientation relative to the core scaffold, which is critical for
skeletons, all retaining the inherent 3S stereochemistry derived from                 their bioactivities and required for the biosynthesis of various spirooxindoles (e.g.,
strictosidine12–15. In this study, we identify conserved enzyme pairs: the               mitraphylline) and derivatives (e.g., reserpine and speciociliatine).




Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                       3


[PDF physical page 4]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z





Fig. 2 | Rauvolﬁa HYC3O and HYC3R catalyze C3 stereochemistry inversion      corynantheidine: MRM 369 > 144; mitragynine: MRM 399 > 174;
across structurally diverse heteroyohimbine, yohimbine, and corynanthe       3-dehydroajmalicine and 3-dehydro-THA: MRM 351 > 265; 3-dehydro-yohimbine/
types of MIA substrates. a LC-MS/MS [M + H]+ Multiple Reaction Monitoring        rauwolscine/alloyohimbine: MRM 353 > 335; 3-dehydrogeissoschizine methyl
(MRM) chromatograms show the in vitro reaction products generated by RtHYC3O    ether: MRM 365 > 249; 3-dehydrocorynantheidine: MRM 367 > 251; 3-dehydromi-
alone, and RtHYC3O in combination with either RsHYC3R or M. parvifolia total leaf    tragynine: MRM 399 > 227. b The UV absorption maximum for 3-dehydro-
proteins, using various substrates. Reactions involving heteroyohimbine, yohim-     rauwolscine shifts from 280 nm to 350 nm due to extended conjugation resulting
bine, and corynanthe-type substrates are indicated in green, blue, and orange,      from C3 dehydrogenation. c C3 dehydrogenation in rauwolscine leads to signiﬁcant
respectively. A red dot indicates that the MIA was veriﬁed by NMR or authentic     change in its MS/MS fragmentation pattern, compared to those of 3S/3R-rau-
standards. A red triangle indicates that the MIA was inferred based on its MS and UV   wolscine epimers. Product ion scans used for MRM and additional UV absorption
proﬁles. Ajmalicine and THA: MRM 353 > 144; Yohimbine, rauwolscine, and          proﬁles are provided in Supplementary Fig. 2.
alloyohimbine: MRM 355 > 144; geissoschizine methyl ether: MRM 367 > 144;


perpendicular to the rest of the molecule (Fig. 1). This was evident from  The heteroyohimbine/yohimbine/corynanthe C3-oxidase
the Nuclear Overhauser Effect Spectroscopy (NOESY) correlations  (HYC3O) and C3-reductase (HYC3R) have broad substrate
observed between H3 and H19 (Supplementary Fig. 7), whereas in   spectra
rauwolscine (3S), H3 correlated with H15 instead (Supplementary  To assess substrate speciﬁcity, we tested the oxidase-reductase pair
Fig. 13). These data provide direct evidence of stereochemistry inver-   against MIAs from three major structural classes. R. tetraphylla oxidase
sion at C3, a key step in the biosynthesis of reserpine.                 oxidized rauwolscine, yohimbine, and alloyohimbine (yohimbine



Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                    4


[PDF physical page 5]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z


type), ajmalicine and tetrahydroalstonine (THA) (heteroyohimbine   rauwolscine. HpHYC3O and GsHYC3O2 showed balanced activity
type), and corynantheidine and mitragynine (corynanthe type) to the   across all tested substrates, while GsHYC3O1 favored yohimbine/het-
corresponding 3-dehydro MIAs  (Fig.  2a).  In each case, the C3-   eroyohimbine types but not corynanthe substrates. Strictosidine was
dehydrogenation was evident from the 2 amu m/z loss and product   universally excluded, highlighting a strict requirement for 3S geometry
UV absorption maxima shift from 280 nm to 350 nm (Supplementary  and aglycone-like scaffolds.
Fig. 2a). Alloyohimbine, one of the authentic substrates, was isolated      The partner reductases  also showed functional divergence.
from Corynanthe johimbe (Yohimbe; Rubiaceae) bark for this study  HYC3Rs from C. roseus, O. elliptica, and H. patens efﬁciently reduced
(Supplementary Figs. 21–25, Supplementary Tables 1 and 2).           3-dehydro intermediates of yohimbine and heteroyohimbine types
    The  partner  reductase, RsCAD7,  reduced  3-dehydro  inter-    (Fig. 3d) but were inactive on fully aromatized β-carbolines such as
mediates of the yohimbine and heteroyohimbine classes to their 3R   serpentine and alstonine (See Fig. 1 for their structures). SnvWS,
epimers, but showed no detectable activity toward corynanthe-type   CrTHAS2, and RsVR lacked HYC3R activity, despite their close phylo-
intermediates (Fig. 2a). Based on these results, we named the oxidase   genetic relationship to the HYC3Rs (Fig. 3b). Surprisingly, canonical
and reductase pair the heteroyohimbine/yohimbine/corynanthe C3-  HYC3Rs were absent from M. speciosa, M. parvifolia, and G. sempervi-
oxidase (HYC3O) and C3-reductase (HYC3R), respectively.              rens transcriptomes. Yet, leaf protein extracts from Mitragyna species
    Despite the broad substrate scope, RtHYC3O displayed strict ste-   reduced most 3-dehydro MIAs (Fig. 3d), implying the existence of
reochemical requirements. This enzyme showed negligible activities   alternative  reductases.  Screening  candidate  CAD-like  enzymes
with geissoschizine methyl ether (Fig. 2a), rauwolscine’s 20R-epimer   revealed two atypical HYC3Rs: MpHYC3R, previously annotated as a
corynanthine, corynantheidine’s 20S-epimer dihydrocorynantheine and   THAS39, clustered near CrRedox1 for stemmadenine biosynthesis,
mitragynine’s 20S-epimer speciogynine. It also did not act on 3-epi-   while GsHYC3R grouped with  strictosidine aglycone reductases
ajmalicine, 3-epi-THA, or 3-epi-mitragynine (speciociliatine), indicating    (Fig.  3b). Both could reduce yohimbine/heteroyohimbine  inter-
that 3S-stereochemistry is needed for these substrates.                 mediates but not corynanthe types. The observed reduction of cor-
   We conﬁrmed the structures of 3-dehydro and 3-epi forms of   ynanthe intermediates in Mitragyna leaves suggests additional, non-
yohimbine, ajmalicine and THA by 1D/2D-NMR from compounds   CAD-like reductases are involved for speciociliatine and related 3R-
generated in vitro, isolated from plant extracts, or obtained by che-   corynanthe MIAs.
mical  oxidation  (Supplementary   Figs.  26–67,  Supplementary
Tables 1 and 2)24,34–38. Additionally, 3-epi-mitragynine (speciociliatine)   Active site architectures reveal the substrate spectra of HYC3Os
was identiﬁed with a commercial standard. With these results, 3-epi-  and the dual catalytic activities of HYC3Rs
corynantheidine and 3-epi-alloyohimbine were readily identiﬁed by  Homology modeling (AlphaFold 3) and substrate docking [Molecular
their LC-MS/MS and UV absorption proﬁles, which mirrored their 3S-   Operating Environment (MOE)] revealed how active site architectures
epimers (Supplementary Fig. 2a).                                  shape the substrate preferences of HYC3Os and HYC3Rs (Fig. 4a–e,
     Interestingly, NMR  analysis revealed tautomerization between   Supplementary Figs. 70–92). The high rauwolscine binding afﬁnity for
3-dehydro and 3,14-dehydro forms. In 3-dehydro-ajmalicine, -yohimbine,  RtHYC3O (KM 1.15 µM, Supplementary Fig. 93) was supported by the
and -rauwolscine, the absence of H14 methylene signals indicated   observed hydrogen bonds between Q432/E434 and rauwolscine’s
equilibrium with the 3,14-dehydro isomers (Supplementary Figs. 15–20,   indole/carbomethoxy groups in the model, orienting the H3 position
26–37, Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). For 3-dehydro-THA, the H14   toward FAD’s N5 for hydride abstraction (Fig. 4a, c). Mitragynine
alkene resonances (δ 4.98, δ 96.4, Supplementary Figs. 38–43) con-  docked similarly, its 9-methoxy accommodated in a spacious pocket
ﬁrmed complete rearrangement to 3,14-dehydro-THA. This dynamic    (Fig. 4a), supporting the observed dehydrogenase activity. The dehy-
behavior likely explains the broad LC-MS/MS peak observed for 3-   drogenase activity is consistent with the presence of a conserved
dehydro-THA (Fig. 2a). Notably, heating 3-epi-THA alleviated NMR peak   “gatekeeper” residue V176 (equivalent to V169 in California poppy
broadening, likely by promoting conformational equilibration36.         EcBBE) located within the GLCPTV oxygen-binding pocket (GWCPTV in
                                                                   EcBBE). This domain is positioned at the re-face of the FAD iso-
Diverse HYC3O and HYC3R enzymes are responsible for MIA      alloxazine ring and plays a critical role in enabling FAD re-oxidation by
C3 stereochemistry inversion in three plant families              molecular oxygen, a key step in the dehydrogenation cycle40.
Reserpine and other 3R-MIAs occur broadly across MIA-producing      Most HYC3Os contained the hallmark bicovalent Cys/His-FAD
lineages, suggesting that HYC3O/HYC3R oxidoreductases contribute  bonds of the BBE-like oxidases41. Uniquely, HpHYC3O carried a C173A
to their biosynthesis beyond Rauvolﬁa. Phylogenetic analysis con-   substitution, forming a single His-FAD bond, a feature also observed in
ﬁrmed that HYC3O homologs from Rubiaceae, Gelsemiaceae, and  ASOs from C. roseus, V. minor and T. elegans1. This modiﬁcation lowers
Apocynaceae form a distinct clade of BBE-like oxidases, closely related   the FAD’s redox potential while enlarging the active site, consistent
to but separate from O-acetylstemmadenine oxidases (ASOs) involved   with HpHYC3O’s broader substrate spectra (Fig. 4a). Key hydrogen
in late-stage Apocynaceae MIA metabolism (Fig. 3a, Supplementary  bonds (Q400, R286, N398, substrate N4) and π-stacking of indole with
Fig. 68). Similarly, HYC3Rs formed a CAD-like reductase clade distinct  FAD in the model supported substrate docking orientations, while an
from strictosidine aglycone reductases such as GS or dihydrocor-   E431A substitution likely contributed to accommodating bulky car-
ynantheine synthase (DCS), but grouping with reductases known to  bomethoxy groups  (e.g., geissoschizine methyl  ether). Distances
reduce analogous double bonds (e.g., Strychnos nux-vomica Wieland-   between substrate H3 and FAD N5 (<3 Å) correlated with activity pro-
Gumlich aldehyde synthase: SnvWS, CrTHAS2, R. serpentina vomile-   ﬁles across HYC3Os (Supplementary Figs. 70–85).
nine reductase: RsVR) (Fig. 3b, Supplementary Fig. 69).                  HYC3Rs, belonging to the CAD-like reductase family, displayed an
   To probe their biochemical functions, we expressed homologs   unexpected dual function. When expressed in a strictosidine aglycone-
from C. roseus and O. elliptica (Apocynaceae), H. patens, M. speciosa,   producing yeast strain (AJM-dHYS)19,42,43, all HYC3Rs, as well as SnvWS
and M. parvifolia (Rubiaceae), and G. sempervirens (Gelsemiaceae) in  and CrTHAS2, reduced strictosidine aglycone to THA, with some also
yeast. Despite sequence  diversity (57-76%  identity),  all HYC3Os   yielding ajmalicine, mayumbine, and an m/z 353 isomer (Fig. 4f). By
exhibited dehydrogenase activity, though with distinct substrate pre-   contrast, canonical strictosidine aglycone reductases outside the HYC3R
ferences (Fig. 3c). RtHYC3O, consistent with its native role in reserpine   clade (YOS, GS, and DCS) lacked HYC3R activity. These enzymes pro-
biosynthesis, was most active on rauwolscine but also unexpectedly   duced a much broader mixture of yohimban and heteroyohimban epi-
accepted mitragynine, a unique MIA from M. speciosa. MsHYC3O   mers (Fig. 4f). These activities aligned with the structural diversity of
preferred yohimbine,  ajmalicine, and THA but was  inactive on   strictosidine aglycones12–15, reﬂecting their homologous nature.



Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                         5


[PDF physical page 6]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z





Fig. 3 | Phylogenetic and biochemical analysis of HYC3O and HYC3R enzymes     elliptica, Rs Rauvolﬁa serpentina, Rt Rauvolﬁa tetraphylla, Rst Rhazya stricta, Snv
across Gentianales. a Phylogenetic analysis reveals a monophyletic origin for the   Strychnos nux-vomica, Te Tabernaemontana elegans, Ti Tabernanthe iboga, Ur
MIA-oxidizing enzymes HYC3O (green) and O-acetylstemmadenine oxidase (ASO)   Uncaria rhynchophylla, Vm Vinca minor, At Arabidopsis thaliana, Csi Camellia
within the Gentianales order. These enzymes evolved from broader families of BBE-    sinensis, Ec Eschscholzia californica, Os Oryza sativa, Ps Papaver somniferum, Pt
like ﬂavin-containing oxidases, which include monolignol oxidases (AtMLO) and     Populus tremuloides, Ptr Populus trichocarpa, Vv Vitis vinifera. Phylogenetic ana-
oligosaccharide oxidases (AtOGOX and AtCELLOX) from Arabidopsis thaliana.       lyses were performed using protein sequences with IQ-TREE 1.6.12 and LG sub-
b Phylogenetic analysis demonstrates that MIA-reducing CAD-like reductases share    stitution model. The full phylogenetic trees are found in Supplementary
a common ancestry with bona ﬁde monolignol dehydrogenases (orange) and other    Figs. 68 and 69. c Relative enzyme activities of various HYC3Os with different
CAD-like enzymes across diverse plant species. All characterized HYC3Rs (blue)      substrates. d Relative enzyme activities of various HYC3Rs with different sub-
from Apocynaceae, along with the HYC3R from Hamelia patens (Rubiaceae, an       strates. For (c) and (d), the activity for the substrate with the highest conversion
early diverging family in the Gentianales order) form a monophyletic clade, indi-     rate was set as 1, with other rates normalized to this value. Substrates include
cating a shared evolutionary origin. In contrast, HYC3Rs from Mitragyna speciosa,   heteroyohimbine type (green): ajmalicine, tetrahydroalstonine (THA); yohimbine
M. parvifolia (Rubiaceae), and Gelsemium sempervirens (Gelsemiaceae) fall outside   type (blue): yohimbine, rauwolscine, alloyohimbine; and corynanthe type: geis-
this clade, suggesting they have evolved independently. The strictosidine aglycone   soschizine methyl ether, corynantheidine, mitragynine, and their respective
reductases are labeled in red. Co Cephalanthus occidentalis, Cr Catharanthus       3-dehydro derivatives. Data were generated from three technical replicates, and the
roseus, Csi Camellia sinensis, Gs Gelsemium sempervirens, Hp Hamelia patens, Hlu    bar graphs display mean values, with individual data points shown as circles. Source
Humulus lupulus, Ms Mitragyna speciosa, Mt Mitragyna parvifolia, Oe Ochrosia      data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.



    Docking and modeling revealed why HYC3Rs tolerate multiple   aglycone intermediates, consistent with its high afﬁnity for 3-dehydro-
substrates. Strictosidine aglycone naturally exists as a mixture in   rauwolscine (KM  1.38 µM,  Supplementary  Fig.  93).  In  contrast,
equilibrium, including two primary forms: cathenamine (20,21-dehy-   CrTHAS2’s active site appears sterically restricted, as bulky residues
dro-THA) and 19-epi-cathenamine. Cathenamine can spontaneously  V290 and I313 replace two alanine found in RsHYC3R (Fig. 4b). Addi-
protonate at C20 in solution, forming 4,21-dehydro-THA, which is then   tionally, the inward conformation of W60 in CrTHAS2 further narrows
reduced by NADPH to produce THA13 (Fig. 4e). Reducing 3,4-dehydro-   the active site, preventing the binding of 3-dehydro substrates.
THA or 4,21-dehydro-THA requires slight adjustments in substrates
positioning for double bond reduction.                      HYC3O/HYC3R are encoded in reserpine BGC that likely arose
   Compared to CrTHAS2 that lacks HYC3R activity, RsHYC3R pos-  from an ancient geissoschizine synthase BGC
sesses a more spacious active site, accommodating both substrates via   Investigating in both Rauvolﬁa and Catharanthus revealed that HYC3O
van der Waals forces, including F127’s arene-C20 interaction suggested  and HYC3R are co-localized within a syntenic gene cluster (Fig. 5a). In R.
by the model (Fig. 4b, e, Supplementary Figs. 86–92). This ﬂexibility   tetraphylla, a ~200 kbp locus begins with HYC3O and YOS, followed by
enabled it to accommodate both 3-dehydro MIAs and strictosidine   multiple tandem homologs of R. serpentina reductases, vomilenine 1,2-



Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                     6


[PDF physical page 7]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z





Fig. 4 | Homology modeling and substrate docking experiments reveal the      accounting for its dual catalytic activity. In contrast, the narrower active site of
basis for substrate promiscuity of HYC3Os and dual catalytic activity of       CrTHAS2 selectively facilitates the reduction of 4,21-dehydro-THA but not 3-
HYC3Rs for both 3-dehydro MIA and strictosidine aglycone substrates.         dehydro-THA. NADPH is shown in green, and alkaloid substrates are in magenta.
a Docking studies of rauwolscine, mitragynine, geissoschizine methyl ether, and    The distance between the substrate’s H3 or H21 and the hydride donor of NADPH is
tetrahydroalstonine (THA) at the active sites of RtHYC3O and HpHYC3O homology   indicated by a black line, with corresponding distances in angstroms (Å).
models. See Supplementary Figs. 73, 77, 79, and 83 for larger representations. The   c Illustration of rauwolscine oxidation by FAD at the RtHYC3O active site.
surface surrounding the active sites are shown. Hydrogen bond (white dashed     d Illustration of 3-dehydrorauwolscine reduction by NADPH at the RsHYC3R active
lines) networks and π-stacking interactions orient the substrates (orange) for efﬁ-     site. e Illustration of 3-dehydro-THA binding and reduction by NADPH at the
cient H3 hydride abstraction by FAD (green). The distance between the substrate’s   RsHYC3R active site. f LC-MS/MS MRM [M + H]+ (355 > 144 and 353 > 144) chroma-
H3 and the N5 of FAD is indicated by a black line, with corresponding distances in   tograms show the in vivo reduction of strictosidine aglycone by strictosidine
angstroms (Å). b Docking studies of 3-dehydrorauwolscine, 3-dehydro-THA, and     aglycone reductases and HYC3Rs. These reductases were expressed in yeast Sac-
4,21-dehydro-THA at the active sites of the RsHYC3R homology model and         charomyces cerevisiae strain AJM-dHYS engineered for de novo production of
CrTHAS2 crystal structure demonstrate key differences in substrate accommoda-    strictosidine aglycone. The reductases exhibited diverse product spectra, reﬂecting
tion. See Supplementary Figs. 87, 89, 91, and 92 for larger representations. The      the structural diversity of strictosidine aglycone in equilibrium. An unknown m/z
spacious active site in RsHYC3R supports the binding and reduction of both 3-      353 peak is labeled with a red dot. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
dehydro-THA and 4,21-dehydro-THA (a form of strictosidine aglycone mixture),



reductase (VR) and dihydrovomilenine 19,20-reductase (DHVR), both   an elusive cluster in C. roseus that we designate the geissoschizine
required for ajmaline biosynthesis19. The cluster further contains an E3   synthase (GS) BGC (Fig. 5a). This region encodes ASO and an ASO-like
ubiquitin ligase (E3UL) and tandem HYC3R duplicates. In C. roseus, a   homolog, THAS2, two GS genes, two CAD-like reductases (CrCAD1/2)1,
homologous cluster contains single copies of HYC3O, HYC3R, DCS   8-hydroxygeraniol oxidoreductase (8HGO)47, and additional 8HGO
(THAS1), and E3UL, but lacks additional CAD-like reductases. Given its   homologs. In R. tetraphylla, a syntenic GS BGC was also found but
role, we refer to this region as the reserpine BGC.                     lacked ASO, consistent with the absence of iboga/aspidosperma MIAs
   To clarify its evolutionary origin, we compared BBE-like oxidases   in this lineage.
(HYC3O, ASO) and CAD-like reductases (HYC3R, YOS, GS, HYS, THAS,        Additionally, C. roseus exhibits a speciﬁc genomic organization
Redox1, DPAS) across R. tetraphylla, C. roseus, and related species.   where Redox1 and DPAS (iboga/aspidosperma MIA biosynthesis) are
Using the R. tetraphylla reserpine BGC scaffold as query, syntenic   tightly clustered with CrCAD5 homologs, and HYS and THAS4 are
analyses with SynFind44 application in CoGe45 and MCScan46 uncovered   associated with the reserpine BGC (Fig. 5a). This organization is not



Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                                7


[PDF physical page 8]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z





Fig. 5 | Syntenic reserpine (HYC3O/HYC3R) and geissoschizine synthase (GS)     synthase 4 (THAS4)/heteroyohibine synthase (HYS). While both the reserpine and
clusters in R. tetraphylla and C. roseus encode key MIA biosynthetic enzymes,   GS BGCs are colocalized on a single chromosome in R. tetraphylla, the syntenic
tracing their origin to a genomic block in the common ancestor of Gentianales   blocks in C. roseus are dispersed across three chromosomes. Colorations of arrows
and grapevine (Vitis vinifera). a Synteny analysis on a genomic scale between R.   and syntenic lines correspond with HYC3O (green), HYC3R (blue), and THAS/GS/YOS
tetraphylla and C. roseus reveals a ~200 kpb reserpine biosynthetic gene cluster      (red). Genes from R. tetraphylla identiﬁed in our large-scale phylogenetic trees
(BGC), comprising genes encoding strictosidine aglycone reductases: yohimbine     (primarily encoding CAD-like enzymes; see Supplementary Fig. 69) are linked to
synthase (YOS) and demethyldihydrocorynantheine synthase (DCS or THAS1), the    their corresponding high-scoring pair (HSP) orthologs in other species via dark
redox pair HYC3O/HYC3R, and an uncharacterized E3 ubiquitin ligase (E3UL). R.     yellow lines. The remaining HSPs are connected in gray lines. b Synteny analysis
tetraphylla reserpine BGC additionally encodes CAD-like reducdtases VR and DHVR   shows that the GS BGC is conserved between Rauvolﬁa tetraphylla and other
for ajmaline biosynthesis. C. roseus reserpine BGC additionally encodes a secolo-     Gentianales members, including Mitragyna speciosa, Ophiorrhiza pumila, Gelse-
ganin synthase homolog (SLS3). The GS cluster is conserved between the two     mium elegans, Asclepias syriaca, Catharanthus roseus, tracing its origin to Vitis
species and encodes GS, 8-hydroxygeraniol oxidoreductase (8HGO), and unchar-     vinifera. c Synteny analysis shows that the reserpine BGC is only conserved between
acterized CAD-like reductases and their homologs. In C. roseus, the GS BGC also      R. tetraphylla and C. roseus. The E3UL gene is indicated in black lines. M. speciosa,
incorporates genes encoding O-acetylstemmadenoine oxidase (ASO) and an ASO-   which underwent a lineage-speciﬁc whole-genome duplication, exhibits two sub-
like oxidase. C. roseus additionally contains two CAD-rich gene clusters encoding    genomic regions mapping to these synthetic regions. Larger versions of synteny
Redox1/dihydroprecondylocarpine synthase (DPAS) and tetrahydroalstonine        graphs and source data are provided as in Source Data ﬁle.


conserved in R. tetraphylla, where homologs of these genes are absent   reductases (red, blue, and dark yellow syntenic lines) but also across
from the syntenic loci. Notably, these C. roseus loci, which map to a   other neighboring genomic regions (grey syntenic lines) within these
single R. tetraphylla scaffold, are distributed across three chromo-  compact loci. Owing to a lineage-speciﬁc whole-genome duplication
somes (Fig. 5a) These results suggest a complex history of transloca-   (WGD), M. speciosa possesses two subgenomes, both of which map to
tions, tandem duplications, and gene losses following divergence of C.   the R. tetraphylla GS BGC (Fig. 5b).
roseus and R. tetraphylla.                                                     In contrast, the reserpine BGC is restricted to R. tetraphylla and C.
    Remarkably, the genomic context of the GS BGC is conserved   roseus, as the genomic segments containing this cluster are absent in
across both MIA producing (O. pumila, M. speciosa, G. elegans, C.   the other species examined (Fig. 5c). The proximity and gene content
roseus) and non-producing (A. syriaca) Gentianales species, tracing its   similarity (e.g., BBE-like oxidases and CAD-like reductases) between
origin to the Gentianales common ancestor with V. vinifera (Fig. 5b).   the reserpine and GS BGCs support the hypothesis that the reserpine
Clear syntenic relationships are observed not only among CAD-like  BGC originated from a segmental duplication of the ancient GS BGC in



Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                      8


[PDF physical page 9]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z


                                                                        also identiﬁed a STR BGC in R. tetraphylla (Fig. 6). However, in A.
                                                                        syriaca (also Apocynaceae), the corresponding syntenic block contains
                                                                   only a downstream TDC homolog, while a block in Gardenia jasmi-
                                                                     noides (Rubiaceae) contains homologs for TDC and MATE but lacks STR
                                                                                   (Fig. 6). This pattern suggests progressive diversiﬁcation of gene
                                                                  contents within otherwise syntenic genomic regions, reﬂecting dis-
                                                                               tinct evolutionary trajectories in different Gentianales lineages.
                                                                 With complete STR BGCs present in some Apocynaceae, Gelse-
                                                          mium, M. speciosa and O. pumila —all MIA producing species —it is
                                                         most parsimonious that STR BGC assembled once in the Gentianales
                                                           stem lineage, with subsequent lineage-speciﬁc gene  losses. This
                                                                     inference aligns with previous genome studies of O. pumila and
                                                            Pachypodium lamerei51, which similarly pointed to a single ancestral
                                                               assembly event. Supporting this hypothesis, synthetic analysis with V.
                                                                             vinifera (grapevine), which diverged from other core eudicots ~148
                                                                        Mya17, uncovered a syntenic block containing only TDC and MATE
                                                             homologs, analogous to the Gardenia arrangement (Fig. 6).
                                                               Taken together, these ﬁndings suggest that STR was later recrui-
Fig. 6 | Genomic-scale synteny around the STR BGC for members of the order   ted into a pre-existing TDC-MATE genomic framework during the early
Gentianales, with grapevine (Vitis vinifera) as an outgroup. A syntenic view      evolution of the Gentianales stem lineage (~135 My), prior to the
reveals conservation of the genomic block surrounding the TDC/STR/MATE gene    diversiﬁcation of the Gentianales crown group (~118 My)17. The emer-
cluster responsible for biosynthesis of the MIA precursor strictosidine. TDC stands
                                                             gence of the STR BGC coincides with that of the ancestral GS BGC,
for tryptophan decarboxylase, STR for strictosidine synthase, and MATE for Mul-
                                                                   suggesting a coordinated expansion that drove the origin and initial
tidrug and Toxic Compound Extrusion transporter. All MIA-producing species in
                                                                        diversiﬁcation of MIA biosynthesis during the early to mid-Cretaceous
Rubiaceae (O.pumila and M. speciosa),Gelsemiaceae (G. elegans),and Apocynaceae
(C. roseus and Rauvolﬁa tetraphylla) have complete STR BGCs, suggesting the BGC   period.
assembled in the Gentianales stem lineage. Evolutionary inferences include: (1) a
MATE was already in position in the Gentianales/V. vinifera common ancestor, (2) a  Gene clusters organize the initiation and diversiﬁcation of MIA
TDC also existed downstream of the MATE, (3) this (or another) TDC duplicated in   biosynthesis
the Gentianales stem lineage and translocated proximal to the preexisting MATE,   Our synteny analyses of the conserved STR, GS and reserpine BGCs
(4) a STR translocated to the region containing the MATE and TDC duplicate,       reveal a genomic framework for the initiation and diversiﬁcation of
completing the BGC, the genes of which subsequently (5) underwent alternative   MIA biosynthesis (Fig. 7). Initiation begins with the STR BGC, the gene
tandem duplications, most notably within Rubiaceae species, (6) the STR was      products of which facilitate strictosidine biosynthesis, the universal
deleted in the non-MIA-producing Rubiaceae species and G. jasminoides, (7) the   MIA precursor. Following  strictosidine  deglycosylation, CAD-like
entire STR BGC was deleted in the non-MIA Apocynaceae species A. syriaca, and (8)   reductases, such as HYS, DCS, YOS, and GS encoded by several gene
the downstream TDC was deleted in MIA-producing C. roseus. Syntenic lines are
                                                                              clusters, reduce the reactive aglycone into heteroyohimbine, yohim-
colored green for TDC genes, red for STRs, and blue for MATEs; grey represents
                                                                         bine, and corynanthe scaffolds, all of which retain the initial 3S ste-
other homologous genes. Where colored lines are multiple within the STR BGC,
                                                                    reochemistry.  Geissoschizine  cyclization  via  cytochrome  P450
tandem duplications of TDC/STR/MATE genes can be inferred. Only one of the two
                                                          monooxygenases represents a critical diversiﬁcation point, producingsubgenomes of tetraploid M. speciosa is shown. Numbers below species names
indicate lengths of chromosomal regions in Mb. Source data are provided as a     the sarpagan, akuammiline, and strychnos scaffolds3,52–54.
Source Data ﬁle.                                                                 In parallel, HYC3O and HYC3R catalyze C3 epimerization of het-
                                                                 eroyohimbine, yohimbine, and corynanthe substrates to create a dis-
                                                                               tinct 3R MIA branch. The perpendicular indole orientation of these 3R
a rauvolﬁoid ancestor. Their present forms were likely shaped by   structures serves as the substrate for subsequent spirooxindole bio-
subsequent duplications, gene losses (e.g., ASO loss in Rauvolﬁa), and   synthesis, formed via C7-oxidation and pinacol rearrangement31,55,56.
neofunctionalization (e.g., recruitment of VR and DHVR in Rauvoﬁa).         In Catharanthus, additional enzymes encoded within its GS BGC,
    Functional testing supported this evolutionary trajectory. Two   Redox1/DPAS  cluster, and HYS/THAS4 cluster participate in both
syntenic CAD-like reductases from V. vinifera (VsCAD1 and VsCAD2,   upstream and downstream steps  of  geissoschizine  biosynthesis
Fig. 3b), located in the GS BGC region, were conﬁrmed as canonical    (Fig. 7), leading to diverse aspidosperma and iboga alkaloids like vin-
CADs reducing cinnamyl and coniferyl aldehydes to their corre-   blastine. Our results illustrate a fundamental pattern of gene clustering
sponding alcohols (Supplementary Fig. 94), suggesting the ancestral   that organizes and facilitates MIA structural diversiﬁcation.
lignin-related function of this genomic block. In G. sempervirens, we
located GsHYC3R within its GS BGC, highlighting this cluster as a  Discussion
source of neofunctionalization. The recruitment of VR and DHVR into  Our biochemical characterization of HYC3O and HYC3R enzymes
the R. tetraphylla reserpine BGC further illustrates how this genomic   resolves a long-standing enigma of the biosynthesis of diverse 3R MIAs.
region has served as fertile ground for the emergence of multiple  The stereochemical modiﬁcation profoundly alters the structural and
biosynthetic  pathways  and  products, many  of  which  remain   biological properties of these metabolites While homologs of HYC3O
undiscovered.                                               and HYC3R are broadly distributed across Gentianales, our genomic
                                                                      analyses reveal that their physical clustering is uniquely restricted to
Strictosidine biosynthesis evolved once in the Gentianales stem   the rauvolﬁoid Apocynaceae lineage.
lineage                                                             While HYC3Os form a monophyletic clade closely related with
Strictosidine biosynthesis provides the universal precursor immedi-   ASOs, HYC3R function has a polyphyletic distribution. In G. sempervi-
ately upstream of the CAD-like reductases that act on strictosidne   rens, a CAD-like reductase encoded within the GS cluster indepen-
aglycone. The STR BGC, containing genes encoding STR, TDC, and a   dently evolved HYC3R activity, despite being more closely related to
MATE transporter, have been reported in C. roseus6, Rhazya stricta   strictosidine aglycone reductases like HYS and YOS. Similarly, in M.
(Apocynaceae)48, O. pumila7, M. speciosa49,50, and G. sempervirens16. We   speciosa and M. parvifolia, HYC3Rs are more closely allied with Redox1



Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                     9


[PDF physical page 10]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z





Fig. 7 | MIA structure diversiﬁcation is primarily driven by the activities of      akuammiline, aspidosperma, iboga, spirooxindole, and other scaffolds. SGD stric-
physically clustered CAD-like reductases, BBE-like oxidases, and non-            tosidine β-glucosidase, GS geissoschizine synthase, THAS tetrahydroalstonine
clustered CYPs. The biosynthetic framework of major MIA subclasses is depicted    synthase, HYS heteroyohimbine synthase, YOS yohimban synthase, DCS deme-
with representative intermediate structures. Arrows indicate the biosynthetic       thyldihydrocorynantheine/demethylcorynantheidine synthase, SBE sarpagan
direction, with corresponding enzyme names and illustrations of the gene clusters   bridge enzyme, RHS rhazimal synthase, GO geissoschizine oxidase, SAT stemma-
to which they belong, positioned adjacent to each transformation step. This         dinine O-acetyltransferase, ASO O-acetylstemmadenine oxidase, DPAS dihy-
schematic highlights the central role of gene clusters (STR, GS, reserpine,           droprecondylocarpine synthase, HYC3O heteroyohimbine/yohimbine/corynanthe
Redox1/DPAS, and HYS/THAS4 clusters) in directing the biosynthesis of strictosidine   C3-oxidase, HYC3R heteroyohimbine/yohimbine/corynanthe C3-reductase.
and stepwise conversion of strictosidine aglycone into diverse strychnos,


than with canonical HYC3Rs. A recent study further reported that an   the redox potential of the FAD cofactor41. The functional implications
isoﬂavone reductase homolog, unrelated to CAD-like reductases,   of this reduced redox potential, and the evolutionary pressures that
functions as a HYC3R in M. speciosa for corynanthe type substrates56.   drove loss of the cysteine-FAD linkage in both HpHYC3O and diverse
Conversely H. patens, a member of the Rubiaceae family like M. spe-  ASOs across Apocynaceae, remain open questions for future study.
ciosa, instead encodes a HYC3R that falls within the canonical HYC3R      By combining phylogenomic and synteny analysis, we recon-
clade, suggesting descent from a common ancestral gene. However,   structed the origin of the GS and reserpine BGCs. Vitis vinifera, well
the absence of a genome assembly precluded conﬁrmation of a cor-  known for its structurally conserved genome and genome sequence
responding HYC3O/HYC3R cluster. Collectively, these ﬁndings indicate   variation compared to many other eudicots57–59, served as an infor-
that HYC3R activity has independently re-emerged in multiple Gen-   mative outgroup. Using the Vitis genome, we traced both BGCs to a
tianales lineages, reﬂecting recurrent evolutionary innovation to   single ancestral genomic block present ~148 Mya at the divergence of
enable 3R-MIA biosynthesis.                                         grapevine from other core eudicots. Synteny between C. roseus and R.
    Our biochemical analyses also highlighted broad substrate spec-   tetraphylla suggests that this ancestral block was subsequently frag-
tra for HYC3Os, with notable lineage-speciﬁc adaptations. Notably, H.  mented and distributed across three C. roseus chromosomes via
patens HYC3O naturally carries a C173A substitution, resulting a single   species-speciﬁc translocation events.
FAD-Histidine bond, unlike canonical BBE-like oxidases that bind FAD      Our ﬁndings indicate that the reserpine BGC is a more recent
via both cysteine and histidine residues41. Structural modeling sug-   innovation, detected only in R. tetraphylla and C. roseus. Its genomic
gests this substitution may enlarge the active site and contribute to   context suggests that  it arose as a rauvolﬁoid-speciﬁc segmental
HpHYC3O’s broad substrate range. Interestingly, the homologous   duplication of the GS BGC, followed by functional divergence to spe-
oxidase ASO in C. roseus, V. minor, and T. elegans, central to iboga and   cialize in distinct MIA pathways. In contrast, the GS BGC is more
aspidosperma biosynthesis, also lacks the cysteine residue and retains   ancient and broadly conserved across Gentianales, predating the
only the histidine-FAD linkage1,5. Loss of this bond is expected to lower   divergence of Rubiaceae from other Genianales families. Our synteny



Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                             10


[PDF physical page 11]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z


analysis using Vitis indicated that the emergence of ancestral GS gene   Genay, France), and geissoschizine methyl ether (AvaChem Scientiﬁc,
cluster coincides with that of the STR BGC, collectively establishing the   San Antonio, TX, USA).
genomic and biochemical foundation for MIA diversiﬁcation.
    Consistent with this model, the THAS4/HYS and Redox1/DPAS   Plant alkaloid puriﬁcation
clusters appear to have evolved later within Apocynaceae, since the   For alkaloid puriﬁcation from plants, fresh leaves (100 g) of C. occi-
homologous genes are not clustered outside of C. roseus. Since all   dentalis or Luculia pinceana (Rubiaceae; greenhouse grown) were
genes in these clusters encode CAD-like reductases, they may have   soaked in ethyl acetate for 1 h to dissolve alkaloids. The C. johimbe bark
originated either through local duplication within the CAD-rich syn-  powder (50 g) was soaked in ethanol for 10 min to dissolve alkaloids.
tenic block conserved from Vitis to Gentianales, or from partial  The evaporated extracts were suspended in 1 M HCl and extracted with
duplications of the GS BGC. Distinguishing between these scenarios   ethyl acetate. The aqueous phase was basiﬁed with NaOH to pH 8 and
will require further comparative genomic studies, particularly invol-   extracted with ethyl acetate to afford total alkaloids. After evaporation,
ving strategically positioned Gentianales taxa.                        the crude alkaloids were reconstituted in 0.5 mL methanol and further
    Taken together, our ﬁndings highlight the CAD-rich genomic   puriﬁed with preparative thin layer chromatography (TLC, Silica gel60
block as a dynamic evolutionary hub for MIA biosynthetic innovation.   F254, Millipore Sigma, Rockville, MD, USA). THA (Rf 0.77, 3.7 mg) was
Beginning with canonical CADs in Vitis, this block was progressively   isolated from L. pinceana alkaloids using a mobile phase of acetoni-
reshaped into the GS BGC in Gentianales, facilitating the biosynthesis   trile:toluene 1:1 (v/v). 3-epi-ajmalicine (Rf 0.38, 3.3 mg) was puriﬁed
of corynanthe-type scaffolds such as geissoschizine and dihydrocor-  from C. occidentalis alkaloids using a mobile phase of toluene: ethyl
ynantheine. The reserpine BGC and HYS-THAS4 clusters subsequently   acetate: methanol 15:4:1 (v/v). For alloyohimbine, the C. johimbe alka-
enabled the diversiﬁcation of yohimbine- and heteroyohimbine-type   loids were separated on TLC with three successive mobile phases.First,
MIAs  in  Rauvolﬁoid  Apocynaceae,  while  the  emergence  of   acetonitrile: toluene:methanol 15:4:1 (v/v) gave a band with Rf 0.2,
HYC3Rs facilitated C3 epimerization and further metabolic branching.   which was further separated with acetonitrile:chloroform 1:1 (v/v) to
The parallel recruitment of BBE-like oxidases like ASO and HYC3O   obtain a band with Rf 0.16. Lastly, this was further separated with
into  these  blocks  contributed  to  the  diversiﬁcation  of MIA   hexane:ethyl acetate: methanol 5:4:1 (v/v) to obtain pure alloyo-
biosynthesis.                                                  himbine (Rf 0.37, 3.2 mg). The structures of puriﬁed alkaloids were
    Together, the segmental, tandem duplicative ancestry of the  conﬁrmed with mass spectrometry and 1D/2D NMR analyses.
reserpine and GS BGCs reﬂects a broader paradigm in which the
duplication of homologous gene clusters and small genomic blocks  De novo alkaloid biosynthesis and alkaloid biotransformation
provides opportunities for chemical innovation in Gentianales57,58.   in yeast
Alongside the large BGCs identiﬁed for triterpenoids like QS-21 (9   Single colonies of the yeasts carrying various vectors were inoculated
genes) and benzylisoquinoline alkaloids noscapine and morphine (17   in 1 mL synthetic complete (SC) media with 2% (w/v) glucose, and
genes)60–62, our data support the prevalence of coordinated specialized   incubated at 30 °C, 200 rpm overnight. The yeasts were pelleted by
metabolism through gene clustering in plants. This work not only   centrifugation, washed once with water, resuspended in 1 mL SC media
uncovers the biosynthetic route for 3R MIAs but also expands the   with 2% (w/v) galactose, and incubated at 30 °C, 200 rpm overnight.
understanding of MIA genomic organization beyond the canonical   For yeast producing alkaloids de novo, the media were directly mixed
vinblastine and ajmaline pathways.                                   with equal volumes of methanol for LC-MS/MS analysis. For HYC3O/
                                                   HYC3R yeasts, the cells were pelleted by centrifugation and resus-
Methods                                               pended in 0.1 mL 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 supplemented with 0.5–2 μg
Cloning                                                                 alkaloid  substrates. The biotransformation took place  at 30 °C,
The sequences of HYC3O/HYC3R have been deposited to NCBI Gen-  200 rpm overnight, and was mixed with equal volume of methanol for
Bank (PP911565-911588, and OQ591889 for RsHYC3R). The open  LC-MS/MS analysis.
reading  frames  (ORFs)  of  all HYC3O/HYC3R sequences  except
Rs/CrHYC3R, RtYOS, SnvWS, were synthesized and subcloned within  Large scale 3-dehydro and 3-epi MIA synthesis and puriﬁcation
the BamHI/SalI sites of pESC-Leu vector (for HYC3O genes) or pESC-   For 3,14-dehydro-THA production, yeast cells expressing RtHYC3O
Ura vector (for CAD-like reductase genes) (Twist Bioscience, South San  from a 200 mL culture were resuspended in 50 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl
Francisco, CA, USA). RsHYC3R, RsYOS, CrHYS, CrDCS (THAS1), CrTHAS2,  pH 7.5 and fed with 5 mg THA at 30 °C, 200 rpm overnight. After
and CrHYC3R (THAS3) were ampliﬁed from plant cDNA using primer   incubation, the reaction was extracted with ethyl acetate, and the
sets 1–12 (Supplementary Table 3) and cloned within the BamHI/SalI   crude product was puriﬁed by preparative TLC using pure methanol as
sites of pESC-Ura and pET30b+ vectors. To generate a C-terminally His-   the mobile phase. The procedure yielded 2 mg of 3,14-dehydro-
tagged RtHYC3O for puriﬁcation, the ORF was ampliﬁed using primer  THA (Rf 0.10).
set 13/14 and cloned into the BamHI/SalI restriction sites of the pESC-       For 3-dehydro-rauwolscine production, an identical protocol was
Leu vector. For yeast expression of HYC3Os and HYC3O/HYC3R   followed except that 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) was
combinations, the pESC vectors were mobilized to Saccharomyces   used instead of Tris buffer. This substitution was essential, as vacuum
cerevisiae  strain BY4741 (MATα his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 met15Δ0 ura3Δ0   drying of 3-dehydro-rauwolscine in Tris buffer led to product degra-
YPL154c::kanMX4) using a standard lithium acetate/ polyethylene   dation, likely due to nucleophilic attack on the electrophilic 3,4-double
glycol transformation procedure. For de novo production of various  bond by the amine groups in Tris. No such degradation was observed
reduced strictosidine aglycone products, the vectors containing CAD-   with phosphate buffer. The dried crude extract was reconstituted in
like reductases were mobilized to S. cerevisiae strain AJM-dHYS43. For   methanol and puriﬁed via preparative TLC with pure methanol,
RsHYC3R expression in E. coli, the pET30b+ construct was introduced   yielding 2 mg of 3-dehydro-rauwolscine (Rf 0.13).
into E. coli strain BL21(DE3).                                            For 3-dehydro-yohimbine and 3-dehydro-ajmalicine, a chemical
                                                                     oxidation protocol was followed38. In brief, to a round bottomed ﬂask
Chemical standards                                                  (RBF),  yohimbine  (7.7 mg,  0.0217 mmol)  or  ajmalicine  (2.3 mg,
Authentic chemical standards and substrates were purchased from   0.0065 mmol) was dissolved in ultra-dry DCM (0.5 mL) and dry Et3N
commercial sources. These included ajmalicine (Sigma Aldrich, St.   (5.0 μL, 0.0358 mmol for yohimbine and  1.5 µL, 0.0108 mmol for
Louis, MO, USA), yohimbine and corynantheidine (Cayman Chemical,   ajmalicine) under N2. t-BuOCl was prepared as reported63. In brief, a
Ann Arbor, MI, USA), corynanthine and rauwolscine (Extrasynthese,   commercial household bleach solution (200 mL, 5.803 mol, 2.57%



Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                                                        11


[PDF physical page 12]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z


NaOCl, determined by titration, was added to an RBF. The RBF was   10 desalting column (Cytiva). Puriﬁed proteins were stored at −80 °C
placed in an ice bath and stirred rapidly until the temperature dropped   until further use.
below 10˚C. Tin foil was then wrapped around the apparatus and the
lights in the fume hood were turned off to ensure complete darkness. A   In vitro enzyme assays
solution of t-butyl alcohol (14.9 mL, 0.157 mol) and glacial acetic acid   For HYC3O activity, the in vitro assay (100 µL) included 20 mM Tris HCl
(10.0 mL, 0.174 mol) were added in a single portion to the bleach  pH 7.5, 100 ng alkaloid substrate, and 25–45 µL yeast crude lysate
solution and continued to stir rapidly for 15 min. The oily yellow   containing various HYC3Os (adjusted for the variance of HYC3O
organic layer was washed with 10% sodium carbonate (25 mL) and   activity in each lysate). For each HYC3O, their lysate amounts were
water (25 mL). The product was dried over calcium chloride (0.5 g) and   kept constant. The assays in triplicates took place at 30 °C for four
ﬁltered. The ﬁnal product (t-BuOCl) yielded an oily yellow liquid. 1H   hours, which was terminated by mixing with equal volumes of
NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3, 298 K): δ1.32 (9H, s). The prepared t-BuOCl was   methanol for LC-MS analysis. For substrate preference analysis, the
added to the reactions to oxidize the alkaloids (5.4 μL, 0.0478 mmol for   3-dehydro product MS peak areas were compared.
yohimbine and 1.6 μL, 0.0144 mmol for ajmalicine). The solution was       For HYC3O/HYC3R coupled reactions, the  in  vitro assay
stirred for 1 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched with   (100 µL) included 20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM NADPH, 100 ng
water (5 mL) and extracted with DCM (3 × 3 mL). The organic layer was   alkaloid substrate, 25–45 µL yeast crude lysate containing various
washed with water (5 mL), then dried over MgSO4. The solution was  HYC3Os, 1–10 µL yeast crude lysate containing various HYC3Rs,
ﬁltered, and solvent was removed under reduced pressure to afford the  and adjusted for the variance of HYC3R activity in each lysate. For
chloroindolenine. The crude was treated with 3 M methanolic HCl   reactions with Mitragyna leaf total proteins, 20 µg proteins were
(0.77 mL for yohimbine and 0.23 mL for ajmalicine) and allowed to stir   used instead of yeast HYC3R lysate. The assays took place at 30 °C
for 1 h under N2 at room temperature. The solvent was removed under   for four hours, which was terminated by mixing with equal
reduced pressure to obtain the crude iminium products, which were  volume of methanol for LC-MS analysis.
separated by preparative TLC using a solvent system of H₂O:me-      To study HYC3R substrate preference, the seven 3-dehydro sub-
thanol:acetonitrile  (1:2:18,  v/v/v). This yielded 3–4 mg each of 3-   strates were ﬁrst produced using scaled up (25 mL) reactions with
dehydro-rauwolscine (Rf = 0.05) and 3-dehydro-ajmalicine (Rf = 0.06).  RtHYC3O under otherwise identical HYC3O reaction conditions. The
    For 3-epi-rauwolscine, 3-epi-yohimbine, and 3-epi-THA produc-   reactions were evaporated to ~1 mL under vacuum as substrates. The
tion, in vitro reactions (50 mL) contained 20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM   in vitro assay (100 µL) included 20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM NADPH,
NADPH yeast lysates from 200 mL cultures expressing RtHYC3O and  and 1–5 µL 3-dehydro MIA substrates in excess and adjusted for the
RsHYC3R and 3–5 mg 3S substrates. Reactions were incubated at 30 °C   variance in substrate amounts, and 1–10 µL yeast crude lysate con-
for 1 h and subsequently extracted with ethyl acetate The products   taining various HYC3Rs. For each HYC3R, their lysate amounts were
were puriﬁed by preparative TLC using pure methanol, affording   kept constant, and the substrates should not be completely consumed
1–2 mg 3-epi-rauwolscine, 3-epi-yohimbine, and 3-epi-THA with Rf  by end of the assays. The triplicated assays took place at 30 °C for four
values of 0.43, 0.30, and 0.67, respectively. All the puriﬁed products   hours, which was terminated by mixing with equal volumes of
were subsequently analyzed by NMR.                              methanol for LC-MS analysis. The 3R product MS peak areas were
                                                         compared for HYC3R substrate preference.
Plant and yeast total protein extraction                              For reduction of monolignol aldehydes, the in vitro assay (100 µL)
Greenhouse-grown M. speciosa and M. parvifolia leaf tissues (3 g) and   included 20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM NADPH (for reduction reac-
0.2 g polyvinylpolypyrrolidone were ground to a ﬁne powder in liquid   tions), 2 µg substrates, 2 µg His-tagged and puriﬁed VvCAD1/2. The
nitrogen using a mortar and pestle, which were extracted with ice-   assays took place at 30 °C for 4 h before LC-MS analysis.
cold sample buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v)
glycerol). The extracts were centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 30 min and  Enzyme kinetics
desalted into the same sample buffer using a PD10 desalting column   For HYC3O kinetics, each reaction (100 µL) contained 20 mM Tris-
(Cytiva, Wilmington, DE, USA) according to the manufacturer’s pro-  HCl (pH 7.5), 0.33 µg of semi-puriﬁed RtHYC3O, and rauwolscine
tocol. The total proteins were desalted once more, and the ﬁnal   substrate at concentrations ranging from 0.078 to 20 µM. For
samples were stored at −80 °C. For HYC3O/HYC3R proteins, yeast  HYC3R kinetics, each reaction (100 µL) contained 20 mM Tris-HCl
cultures (50 mL) expressing various enzymes were pelleted, mixed  (pH 7.5), 0.5 µg of puriﬁed RsHYC3R, and 3-dehydro-rauwolscine
with 1 mL ice cold sample buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM   substrate at concentrations ranging from 0.039 to 5 µM.  All
NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol), and mechanically lysed by glass beads (1 mm   reactions were carried out at 30 °C for 10 min and quenched by
diameter) using a Qiagen tissuelyser II (Qiagen, Germantown, MD,   the addition of an equal volume of methanol. Samples were
USA) at 4 °C. The lysate was centrifuged at 20,000 × g at 4 °C for   centrifuged, ﬁltered, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Kinetic para-
10 min. The aqueous phases containing total yeast soluble proteins   meters were determined by ﬁtting the data to a non-linear
were stored at −80 °C.                                             regression model using GraphPad Prism version 10.4.2.

Recombinant protein expression and puriﬁcation             LC-MS/MS and NMR
For RtHYC3O puriﬁcation, a 500 mL yeast culture expressing C-term-  The samples were analyzed using the Ultivo Triple Quadrupole LC-MS/
inal His-tagged RtHYC3O was lysed using glass beads, and the soluble  MS system from Agilent (Santa Clara, CA, USA), equipped with an
protein fraction was collected by centrifugation as described above.   Avantor® ACE® UltraCore C18 2.5 Super C18 column (50 × 3 mm, par-
For RsHYC3R puriﬁcation, E. coli BL21(DE3) cells expressing N-terminal    ticle size 2.5 μm) as well as a photodiode array detector and a mass
His-tagged RsHYC3R were grown to an OD₆₀₀ of 0.7, then induced with   spectrometer. For alkaloid analysis, the following solvent systems were
0.1 mM isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) at 15 °C and   used: Solvent A, methanol:acetonitrile:ammonium acetate (1 M):water
200 rpm overnight. The cells were lysed by sonication in ice-cold   at 29:71:2:398; solvent B, methanol: acetonitrile:ammonium acetate
sample buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) gly-    (1 M):water at 130:320:0.25:49.7. The following linear elution gradient
cerol) and centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C to obtain the  was used: 0–5 min 80% A, 20% B; 5–5.8 min 1% A, 99% B; 5.8–8 min 80%
soluble protein fraction. Both RtHYC3O and RsHYC3R proteins were   A, 20% B; the ﬂow during the analysis was constant and 0.6 mL/min.
puriﬁed using Ni-NTA afﬁnity chromatography (Cytiva, Marlborough,  The photodiode array detector range was 200–500 nm. The mass
MA, USA) and subsequently desalted into the sample buffer using a PD-   spectrometer was operated with the gas temperature at 300 °C and



Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                                      12


[PDF physical page 13]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z


gas ﬂow of 10 L/min. Capillary voltage was 4 kV from m/z 100 to m/z   (vASM2450571v1; gid: 65259). Gene alignments from transcriptomic
1000 with scan time 500 ms, and the fragmentor performed at 135 V   data was performed using CLC Genomic Workbench 20.0.4 software.
with positive polarity. The MS/MS was operated with gas temperature   Protein sequences were aligned using Muscle. The alignments were
at 300 °C, gas ﬂow of 10 L min−1, capillary voltage 4 kV, fragmentor  trimmed to remove poorly aligned regions using GBlocks (all three
135 V, and collision energy 30 V with positive polarity. The data were   sensitivity options boxes checked) in Seaview, a sequence processing
collected with Agilent Acquisition 10.0 software and analyzed with   tool. Phylogenetic trees were constructed using IQ-TREE 1.6.12 with the
Agilent Qualitative Analysis 10.0 software. Compound identiﬁcation  LG substitution model. A total of 1000 bootstrap replicates were
was carried out by comparing the retention time, MS/MS spectra, and   performed to estimate support values for each node in the tree. Phy-
UV absorption proﬁles with authentic standards. All chromatograms   logenetic trees of HYC3O and HYC3R enzyme families (Fig. 3a, b) were
represent a single sample (n = 1). For comparisons of biochemical   constructed in the same manner as the large gene family trees.
activities among different HYC3O and HYC3R enzymes, as well as for
their kinetic analyses, three technical replicates were performed.       Plant genome structural analysis
   NMR spectra were recorded on an Agilent 400 MR and a Bruker  To begin, we reannotated the available genome of R. tetraphylla using
Avance III HD 400 MHz NMR spectrometer in acetone-d6, MeOD, or  GeMoMa as described above. We checked the annotated assembly using
CDCl3. The data were collected with Agilent VNMR OVJ2.1 and Bruker  SynMap in CoGe to evaluate  its whole-genome duplication (WGD;
TopSpin 4.3 software and analyzed with MestReNova v14.2.1 software.   polyploidy) status and any additional WGDs following the gamma hex-
                                                                      aploidy event68 at the base of all core eudicots, as reported in the R.
Homology modeling and substrate docking studies                 tetraphylla genome study15. While the R. tetraphylla genome publication
All computational experiments and visualizations were carried out   reported that haplotypic contigs were purged and that no WGDs were
with Molecular Operating Environment (MOE) version 2022.02 and   observed, our self:self syntenic analysis using SynMap in CoGe69 showed
AlphaFold 364 on local computers. All molecular mechanics calcula-   the presence of internal syntenic blocks that suggest a recent WGD
tions and simulations employed the AMBER14:EHT forceﬁeld with   based on the overall low Ks (synonymous substitution rate) values for
Reaction Field solvation. Sequence homology searches for HYC3Rs   homologous gene pairs. However, for a putative WGD, the numbers of
against the Protein Data Bank identiﬁed CrTHAS2 complexed with   such low-Ks pairs in R. tetraphylla closely matched the number of high-
NADP+ as the template for homology modeling (PDB ID: 5H81, 68%   Ks pairs retained since the ancient gamma hexaploidy event; G. elegans
amino acid identity with RsHYC3R), based on Hidden Markov Model   and V. vinifera self:self SynMaps and a R. tetraphylla:C. roseus plot also
energy scores. Following a QuickPrep of the 5H81 template, homology   revealed old gamma peaks comprising similarly low numbers of gene
models were derived in MOE using default settings and scored using   pairs (Supplementary Figs. 95, 96). Although heavy fractionation (alter-
the GBVI/WSA dG method. NADPH was modeled and docked into each   native homolog deletion on different subgenomes) of gamma over time
homology model based on the NADP+ binding site in the 5H81. Fol-   was anticipated, it was unusual to observe similar fractionation for such a
lowing NADPH docking, 3,4-dehydro ligands were docked to the   recent WGD, as would otherwise be suggested by the small number of
HYC3R-NADPH complexes. Rt/HpHYC3O protein models were pre-   low-Ks syntenic homolog pairs. Further syntenic analyses executed in
dicted in AlphaFold3. The FAD-bound models were transferred to  MCScan in the JCVI application46 supported these observations. A self:-
MOE, and ligands were docked to the HYC3O-FAD complexes as    self syntenic dotplot for R. tetraphylla showed the same internally
described above.                                                     duplicated blocks identiﬁed by SynMap (Supplementary Fig. 97), but
    For each ligand docking experiment, 17,000 docking poses were   syntenic depth histograms did not yield a sufﬁcient number of doubled
initially generated via the Triangle Matcher method and scored by the   blocks to suggest that a WGD accounted for their presence (Supple-
GBVI/WSA dG function. A subset top-docking poses was reﬁned by the   mentary Fig. 98). We further checked these results using the software
induced ﬁt method, where the bound ligands and active site residues   Ksrates70 (version 1.1.359), which corrects for unequal Ks rates in dif-
underwent local geometry optimization and rescoring. The top-   ferent taxa using a phylogenetic tree and provides relative timings via Ks
scoring docking poses  with  plausible  reaction geometry were   values for species splits and any WGD events inferred. Coding sequence
retained  for subsequent  analyses. Cartesian coordinates  for  all   fasta ﬁles were extracted using AGAT version 1.0.065 (See Supplemen-
homology models and their ligand complexes can be found at Dryad   tary Fig. 96). Based on this analysis, and the previous SynMap results, we
(https://datadryad.org/dataset/doi:10.5061/dryad.vdncjsz59).          conclude that the rather recent “syntenic” gene pairs represent alter-
                                                                         native haplotypes that remained unpurged in the assembly assembly,
Bioinformatics and phylogenetic analyses                            resulting in partially diploid regions, despite the reported use of Purge
The published genome of R. tetraphylla (GCA_030512225.1, available at   Haplotigs by the original investigators. The conclusion was supported by
NCBI) was reannotated (with default settings) using Gene Model   our examination of two scaffolds, both containing a reserpine cluster,
Mapper version 1.9 by using available reference assembly annotations   which showed nearly identical sequences in their overlapping regions.
of several related species C. roseus (GCA_024505715.1), A. syriaca   Consequently, we focused all subsequent structural analyses on the
(CoGe  gid61699),  O. pumila (GCA_016586305.1), and  Calotropis   longer of the two R. tetraphylla scaffolds, which contains both the
gigantea (NCBI PRJNA400797). For sequence discovery to synthesize   reserpine and GS BGCs.
enzymes for experimental analyses, the annotated genomes of R.       Color highlighting of genes on the McScan visualization was based
tetraphylla15, C. roseus65, G. sempervirens16, G. elegans66, M. speciosa49,50  on high-scoring pairs (HSPs) identiﬁed through synteny-based com-
were analyzed with CoGeBLAST (https://genomevolution.org/coge/)67.   parisons, focusing on conserved genomic regions between R. tetra-
Gene family representatives from the R. tetraphylla reserpine cluster   phylla and related species. The identity and evolutionary placement of
(our  GeMoMa   gene  model   IDs:   Catharanthus_roseus_rna_   these HSPs were conﬁrmed by assessing their proximity to reference
EVM0023822.1_R0, Catharanthus_roseus_rna_EVM0000382.1_R0, and   genes within large-scale phylogenetic gene trees. Syntenic analyses
Catharanthus_roseus_rna_EVM0027783.1_R2)  were  used  as  query   across Gentianales and V. vinifera provided a comparative framework
sequences to perform CoGeBLAST searches using TBLASTX with   for conserved genomic blocks. In the resulting diagrams, R. tetraphylla
default parameters. The searches were conducted against a selection   genes encoding homologs of YOS and CADs were shaded in dark yel-
of species, including A. scholaris (gid: 67811), E. grandiﬂorum (gid:   low to indicate their HSP relationships, while experimentally sup-
63766), V. vinifera (v12x; gid: 19990, O. pumila (vv1; gid: 63710), G.   ported biosynthetic genes were linked by color-coded connectors.
elegans (v1.0; gid: 64491), A. syriaca (v0.3; gid: 61699), Mitragyna       For the MCScan analyses noted above (syntenic dot plots, synte-
speciosa (vv1; gid 63699), R. tetraphylla (v4; gid: 69143), and C. roseus   nic depth) as well as syntentic karyotype plots between assemblies,



Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                                     13


[PDF physical page 14]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z


input annotation ﬁles were converted to gff3 format using AGAT ver-   15.  Stander, E. A. et al. The Rauvolﬁa tetraphylla genome suggests
sion 1.0.065. AGAT was also used to extract CDS fasta ﬁles using each        multiple distinct biosynthetic routes for yohimbane monoterpene
species’ assembly and reformatted annotation. When detecting syn-        indole alkaloids. Commun. Biol. 6, 1197 (2023).
teny between two species with the same ploidy level, a C-score cutoff   16.  Franke, J. et al. Gene discovery in Gelsemium highlights conserved
of 0.99 (–cscore = 0.99) was used to ﬁlter out high-Ks pairs(i.e., greater      gene clusters in monoterpene indole alkaloid biosynthesis. Chem-
than the gamma hexaploidy’s expected Ks) for clearer connections      BioChem 20, 83–87 (2019).
between syntenic blocks. Otherwise, default options were used to    17.  Zuntini, A. R. et al. Phylogenomics and the rise of the angiosperms.
generate ﬁgures.                                                        Nature 629, 843–850 (2024).
                                                                                 18.  Edge, A. et al. A tabersonine 3-reductase Catharanthus roseus
Reporting summary                                               mutant accumulates vindoline pathway intermediates. Planta 25,
Further information on research design is available in the Nature        1–15 (2017).
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.                        19.  Guo, J., Gao, D., Lian, J. & Qu, Y. De novo biosynthesis of antiar-
                                                                       rhythmic alkaloid ajmaline. Nat. Commun. 15, 457 (2024).
Data availability                                               20. Hong, B. et al. Biosynthesis of strychnine. Nature 607, 617–622 (2022).
RNA-seq data have been deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive    21.  Ma, X., Panjikar, S., Koepke, J., Loris, E. & Stöckigt, J. The structure of
under   accession  numbers   SRR32911581,   SRR32911592,  and       Rauvolﬁa serpentina strictosidine synthase is a novel six-bladed
SRR32911600. HYC3O and HYC3R sequences are available at NCBI        beta-propeller fold in plant proteins. Plant Cell 18, 907–920 (2006).
GenBank  under  accession  numbers  PP911565–PP911588  and   22.  Nagakura, N., Rüffer, M. & Zenk, M. H. The biosynthesis of mono-
OQ591889. Additional datasets related to genome annotation and       terpenoid indole alkaloids from strictosidine. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin
protein homology models have been deposited at Dryad [https://        Trans. 1 0, 2308–2312 (1979).
datadryad.org/dataset/doi:10.5061/dryad.vdncjsz59]. Source data are   23. Yang, M. et al. Divergent camptothecin biosynthetic pathway in
provided with this paper.                                                  Ophiorrhiza pumila. BMC Biol. 19, 122 (2021).
                                                                       24.  Kohl, W., Witte, B. & Höﬂe, G. Alkaloide aus Catharanthus roseus-
References                                                                  Zellkulturen, II [1]/Alkaloids from Catharanthus roseus tissue cul-
1.   Qu, Y., Safonova, O. & De Luca, V. Completion of the canonical            tures, II [1]. Z. F.ür. Naturforsch. B 36, 1153–1162 (1981).
    pathway for assembly of anticancer drugs vincristine/vinblastine in   25.  Duwiejua, M., Woode, E. & Obiri, D. D. Pseudo-akuammigine, an
    Catharanthus roseus. Plant J. 97, 257–266 (2018).                          alkaloid from Picralima nitida seeds, has anti-inﬂammatory and
2.  Qu, Y. et al. Completion of the seven-step pathway from taberso-        analgesic actions in rats. J. Ethnopharmacol. 81, 73–79 (2002).
    nine to the anticancer drug precursor vindoline and its assembly in   26. Bruyn, A. D., Zhang, W. & Buděšinský, M. NMR study of three het-
     yeast. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112, 6224–6229 (2015).                     eroyohimbine derivatives from Rauwolﬁa serpentina: Stereo-
3.  Qu, Y. et al. Solution of the multistep pathway for assembly of          chemical aspects of the two isomers of reserpiline hydrochloride.
    corynanthean, strychnos, iboga, and aspidosperma monoterpenoid      Magn. Reson. Chem. 27, 935–940 (1989).
     indole alkaloids from 19E-geissoschizine. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115,   27. Kouamo, K., Creche, J., Chénieux, J. C., Rideau, M. & Viel, C. Alkaloid
    3180–3185 (2018).                                                   production by Ochrosia elliptica cell suspension cultures. J. Plant
4.    Li, C. et al. Single-cell multi-omics in the medicinal plant Cathar-          Physiol. 118, 277–283 (1984).
    anthus roseus. Nat. Chem. Biol. 19, 1031–1041 (2023).                28. Takayama, H. Chemistry and pharmacology of analgesic indole
5.   Caputi, L. et al. Missing enzymes in the biosynthesis of the antic-          alkaloids from the rubiaceous plant, Mitragyna speciosa. Chem.
    ancer drug vinblastine in Madagascar periwinkle. Science 360,          Pharm. Bull. 52, 916–928 (2004).
    1235–1239 (2018).                                                  29. Pandey, R., Singh, S. C. & Gupta, M. M. Heteroyohimbinoid type
6.   Kellner, F. et al. Genome-guided investigation of plant natural            oxindole alkaloids from Mitragyna parvifolia. Phytochemistry 67,
    product biosynthesis. Plant J. Cell Mol. Biol. 82, 680–692 (2015).        2164–2169 (2006).
7.   Rai, A. et al. Chromosome-level genome assembly of Ophiorrhiza    30. Paniagua-Vega, D., Cerda-García-Rojas, C. M., Ponce-Noyola, T. &
    pumila reveals the evolution of camptothecin biosynthesis. Nat.          Ramos-Valdivia, A. C. A new monoterpenoid oxindole alkaloid from
   Commun. 12, 1–19 (2021).                                            hamelia patens micropropagated plantlets. Nat. Prod. Commun. 7,
8.    Li, F. et al. Characterization of a vacuolar importer of secologanin in      1934578X1200701109 (2012).
    Catharanthus roseus. Commun. Biol. 7, 939 (2024).                    31.  Nguyen, T.-A. M. et al. Discovery of a cytochrome P450 enzyme
9.   Payne, R. M. E. et al. An NPF transporter exports a central mono-          catalyzing the formation of spirooxindole alkaloid scaffold. Front.
    terpene indole alkaloid intermediate from the vacuole. Nat.Plants 3,        Plant Sci. 14, 1125158 (2023).
    1–9 (2017).                                                         32.  Lezin, E. et al. A chromosome-scale genome assembly of Rauvolﬁa
10.  Treimer, J. F. & Zenk, M. H. Puriﬁcation and properties of strictosi-         tetraphylla facilitates identiﬁcation of the complete ajmaline bio-
    dine synthase, the key enzyme in indole alkaloid formation. Eur. J.        synthetic pathway. Plant Commun. 5, 100784 (2024).
    Biochem. FEBS 101, 225–233 (1979).                                33.  Winkler, A. et al. A concerted mechanism for berberine bridge
11.  Geerlings, A. et al. Molecular cloning and analysis of strictosidine       enzyme. Nat. Chem. Biol. 4, 739–741 (2008).
     beta-D-glucosidase, an enzyme in terpenoid indole alkaloid bio-     34. Falkenhagen, H., Stckigt, J., Kuzovkina, I. N., Alterman, I. E. & Kols-
     synthesis in Catharanthus roseus.  J. Biol. Chem. 275, 3051–3056         horn, H. Indole alkaloids from “hairy roots” of Rauwolﬁa serpentina.
    (2000).                                                          Can. J. Chem. 71, 2201–2203 (1993).
12.  Qu, Y. et al. Geissoschizine synthase controls ﬂux in the formation   35.  Stahl, R. & Borschberg, H. A Reinvestigation of the oxidative rear-
     of monoterpenoid indole alkaloids in a Catharanthus roseus mutant.      rangement of yohimbane-type alkaloids. Part A. Formation of
     Planta 247, 625–634 (2017).                                         pseudoindoxyl (= 1,2-dihydro-3H-indol-3-one) derivatives. Helvetica
13.  Stavrinides, A. et al. Structural investigation of heteroyohimbine         Chim. Acta 77, 1331–1345 (1994).
     alkaloid synthesis reveals active site elements that control stereo-   36. Wenkert, E. et al. General methods of synthesis of indole alkaloids.
     selectivity. Nat. Commun. 7, 12116 (2016).                                    14. Short routes of construction of yohimboid and ajmalicinoid
14.  Kim, K. et al. Biosynthesis of kratom opioids. N. Phytol. 240,               alkaloid systems and their carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance
    757–769 (2023).                                                         spectral analysis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 98, 3645–3655 (1976).




Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                                  14


[PDF physical page 15]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z


37.  Carbonezi, C. A. et al. Determinação por RMN das conﬁgurações    59. Chanderbali, A. S. et al. Buxus and Tetracentron genomes help
     relativas e conformações de alcalóides oxindólicos isolados de           resolve eudicot genome history. Nat. Commun. 13, 643 (2022).
    Uncaria guianensis. Quím. Nova 27, 878–881 (2004).               60. Reed, J. et al. Elucidation of the pathway for biosynthesis of
38. Ren, J., Ding, S.-H., Li, X.-N. & Zhao, Q.-S. Uniﬁed strategy enables       saponin adjuvants from the soapbark tree. Science 379,
    the collective syntheses of structurally diverse indole alkaloids. J.        1252–1264 (2023).
    Am. Chem. Soc. 146, 7616–7627 (2024).                                61.   Li, Q. et al. Gene clustering and copy number variation in alkaloid
39. Wu, Y., Liu, C., Koganitsky, A., Gong, F. L. & Li, S. Discovering dynamic       metabolic pathways of opium poppy. Nat. Commun. 11, 1190
     plant enzyme complexes in yeast for kratom alkaloid pathway iden-        (2020).
     tiﬁcation. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 62, e202307995 (2023).             62. Winzer, T. et al. A Papaver somniferum 10-gene cluster for synthesis
40. Zafred, D. et al. Rationally engineered ﬂavin-dependent oxidase          of the anticancer alkaloid noscapine. Science 336, 1704–1708
     reveals steric control of dioxygen reduction. FEBS J. 282,                  (2012).
    3060–3074 (2015).                                               63. Mintz, M. J. & Walling, C. t-butyl hypochlorite. Org. Synth. 49,
41.  Winkler, A., Hartner, F., Kutchan, T. M., Glieder, A. & Macheroux, P.      9 (1969).
    Biochemical evidence that berberine bridge enzyme belongs to a    64. Jumper, J. et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with
    novel family of ﬂavoproteins containing a bi-covalently attached         AlphaFold. Nature 596, 583–589 (2021).
   FAD cofactor. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 21276–21285 (2006).               65. Sun, S. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing provides a high-resolution
42. Gao, D. et al. De novo biosynthesis of vindoline and catharanthine in      roadmap for understanding the multicellular compartmentation of
    Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biodesign. Res. 2022, 0002 (2022).           specialized metabolism. Nat. Plants 9, 179–190 (2023).
43.  Liu, T. et al. Construction of ajmalicine and sanguinarine de novo    66.  Liu, Y. et al. Whole-genome sequencing and analysis of the Chinese
     biosynthetic pathways using stable integration sites in yeast. Bio-         herbal plant Gelsemium elegans. Acta Pharm. Sin. B 10, 374–382
     technol. Bioeng. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.28040 (2022).                 (2019).
44. Tang, H. et al. SynFind: Compiling syntenic regions across any set of   67.  Lyons, E. & Freeling, M. How to usefully compare homologous plant
    genomes on demand. Genome Biol. Evol. 7, 3286–3298 (2015).         genes and chromosomes as DNA sequences. Plant J. 53, 661–673
45.  Albert, V. A. & Krabbenhoft, T. J. Navigating the CoGe online soft-        (2008).
    ware Suite for polyploidy research. Methods Mol. Biol. 2545,        68.  Jiao, Y. et al. A genome triplication associated with early diversiﬁ-
    19–45 (2023).                                                           cation of the core eudicots. Genome Biol. 13, R3 (2012).
46. Tang, H. et al. JCVI: A versatile toolkit for comparative genomics     69. Lyons, E., Pedersen, B., Kane, J. & Freeling, M. The value of non-
     analysis. iMeta 3, e211 (2024).                                   model genomes and an example using SynMap within CoGe to
47.  Krithika, R. et al. Characterization of 10-hydroxygeraniol dehy-            dissect the hexaploidy that predates the rosids. Trop. Plant Biol. 1,
    drogenase from Catharanthus roseus reveals cascaded enzymatic        181–190 (2008).
     activity in iridoid biosynthesis. Sci. Rep. 5, 8258 (2015).              70.  Sensalari, C., Maere, S. & Lohaus, R. ksrates: positioning whole-
48.  Sabir, J. S. M. et al. The nuclear genome of Rhazya stricta and the      genome duplications relative to speciation events in KS distribu-
     evolution of alkaloid diversity in a medically relevant clade of              tions. Bioinformatics 38, 530–532 (2021).
    Apocynaceae. Sci. Rep. 6, 33782 (2016).
49. Pootakham, W. et al. A chromosome-scale genome assembly of   Acknowledgements
    Mitragyna speciosa (Kratom) and the assessment of its genetic       This research was supported by a Natural Sciences and Engineering
     diversity in Thailand. Biology 11, 1492 (2022).                      Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Discovery Grant RGPIN-2020-
50. Brose, J. et al. The Mitragyna speciosa (Kratom) genome: a resource   04133, a New Brunswick Innovation Foundation (NBIF) Research
     for data-mining potent pharmaceuticals that impact human health.   Assistantship Initiative Grant 2023_054, and a NBIF Research Profes-
   G3 GenesGenomesGenet 11, jkab058 (2021).                         sional Initiative grant 2022_002 to Y.Q., and a U.S. National Science
51.  Cuello, C. et al. The Madagascar palm genome provides new       Foundation grant 2030871 to V.A.A. The authors thank the Chemical
     insights on the evolution of Apocynaceae specialized metabolism.  Computing Group ULC (www.chemcomp.com) for MOE licenses. This
    Heliyon 10, e28078 (2024).                                       research was enabled in part by support provided by ACENET (www.
52. Wang, Z. et al. Deciphering and reprogramming the cyclization      ace-net.ca) and the Digital Research Alliance of Canada (alliance.
     regioselectivity in bifurcation of indole alkaloids biosynthesis.        can.ca).
    Chem. Sci. https://doi.org/10.1039/d2sc03612f (2022).
53. Dang, T.-T. T. et al. Sarpagan bridge enzyme has substrate-      Author contributions
     controlled cyclization and aromatization modes. Nat. Chem. Biol.     J.H., J.K., G.D., V.A.A., and Y.Q. conceived the research and oversaw
     14, 760–763 (2018).                                                   overall direction and planning. J.H. performed all in vitro and in vivo
54. Mann, S. G. A. et al. Stereochemical insights into sarpagan and      experiments. J.H. and J.K. annotated the Rauvolﬁa tetraphylla genome.
    akuammiline alkaloid biosynthesis. N. Phytol. 247, 1335–1351           J.K. implemented phylogenetic analyses. J.K. and V.A.A. performed
     (2025).                                             genome structural evolutionary analyses. D.A.R.D. and M.B.R. con-
55. Chu, D. et al. Collective biosynthesis of plant spirooxindole alka-    ducted homology modeling and docking experiments. S.J.F. performed
     loids through enzyme discovery and engineering. J. Am. Chem.     genomic analyses using Ksrates software. J.G., J.O.P., and M.S. per-
    Soc. 147, 21600–21609 (2025).                                formed cloning and yeast strain construction. J.J.O.G.G., D.G., and J.L.
56. McDonald, A. et al. Enzymatic epimerization of monoterpene indole   conducted de novo yeast strain construction and analysis. J.H., A.D.S.,
     alkaloids in kratom. Nat. Chem. Biol. 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1038/    S.S.D., Z.M., S.N.S., S.A.E., B.A.B., and L.C. conducted compound pur-
    s41589-025-01970-9 (2025).                                         iﬁcation and N.M.R. analyses. S.G.A.M. conducted enzyme puriﬁcation
57. Denoeud, F. et al. The coffee genome provides insight into the     and kinetics. J.H., V.A.A., S.J.F. and J.K. performed additional plant
    convergent evolution of caffeine biosynthesis. Science 345,       genome analyses. J.H., J.K., V.A.A. and Y.Q. wrote the paper with the
     1181–1184 (2014).                                                   input from all authors.
58. Xu, Z. et al. Tandem gene duplications drive divergent evolution of
     caffeine and crocin biosynthetic pathways in plants. BMC Biol. 18,  Competing interests
    63 (2020).                                                The authors declare no competing interests.




Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                                      15


[PDF physical page 16]
Article                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z

Additional information                             Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Supplementary information The online version contains                Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
supplementary material available at                                which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65543-z.                           reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
                                                                            credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to     Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed
Ghislain Deslongchamps, Victor A. Albert or Yang Qu.                     material. You do not have permission under this licence toshare adapted
                                                                         material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Peter           party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
Macheroux and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution  Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
to the peer review of this work. A peer review ﬁle is available.             material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
                                                                       licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
Reprints and permissions information is available at                  exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
http://www.nature.com/reprints                                   from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
                                                                     creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.     © The Author(s) 2025





Nature Communications| (2025)16:10495                                                                                   16