
[PDF physical page 1]
                           Research Article

                                               How to cite: Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202506825
 Biosynthesis Hot Paper                                                               doi.org/10.1002/anie.202506825

Sequential Reconstruction of Calicheamicin γ1I Iodo-Thiobenzoate by
Selective Carrier Protein Trapping Reveals a Flavin-Dependent
Iodinase

Fang Pang and Craig A. Townsend*



                                                       These halogenated metabolites have become a vital source
  Abstract: Flavin-dependent halogenases (FDHs) play      of diverse therapeutics, including the antibiotics chloram-
  important roles in natural product biosynthesis, particu-     phenicol 1[3] and vancomycin 2,[4] as well as the anticancer
  larly chlorinases and brominases. Apart from ubiquitous     agent rebeccamycin 3[5] (Figure 1a). The incorporation of
  mammalian iodination in thyroxine biosynthesis, iodi-     halogens into natural products, or the substitution of one
  nated natural products are extremely rare, and enzymes     halogen for another, can have a profound effect on their
  responsible for iodination are even less well described.      bioactivity. For instance, the chlorines in vancomycin are
 A notable exception  is  calicheamicin γ 1I, a potent      crucial for its bioactivity, as they stabilize the molecule and
  antitumor compound containing an aromatic  iodide,     enhance  its binding afﬁnity to the target  site.[6] Similarly,
  for which a halogenase has been proposed to mediate      chlorine in rebeccamycin  is essential for  its activity, with
  iodine incorporation. Despite predictions regarding the        its removal leading to a loss of function.[7] The substitution
  enzymes involved in iodinated aryl ring biosynthesis,      of  chlorine with bromine  in the vancomycin  derivative
  experimental evidence remains limited due to challenges     balhimycin alters its antimicrobial activity.[8] Moreover, while
  in substrate identiﬁcation and reaction monitoring. In     ﬂuorinated natural products are rare in nature, ﬂuorination
  this study, we successfully reconstituted the enzymatic     has become an important strategy in drug development.[9,10]
  activities required for iodination and all embellishments       The importance of halogens  in  bioactive compounds
  of the highly substituted benzene ring in calicheamicin     has not only driven advancements in synthetic chemistry
  γ 1I. Using intact-protein mass spectrometry combined     but also in their biosynthesis through enzymatic processes.
  with  protease  cleavage, we demonstrated formation     Enzymatic halogenation can be classiﬁed into three categories
  of the orsellinate thioester followed by sequential C-     based on the type of halogen species involved: electrophilic,
  2 O-methylation, C-5 iodination, C-3 oxidation, and      nucleophilic, or radical. Among these, haloperoxidases and
  C-3  O-methylation.  This  research  characterizes  the     ﬂavin-dependent halogenases (FDHs), which fall under the
  ﬁrst ﬂavin-dependent iodinase that acts on a carrier      electrophilic halogenase category, are the most extensively
  protein-dependent substrate, identiﬁes the natural sub-       studied.[11] For several decades, haloperoxidases were the
  strates of a cytochrome P450 oxygenase and two O-     only known type of halogenases until the discovery of a FDH
  methyltransferases, and provides valuable insights for      in 1995.[12] Tryptophan chlorinases, a prominent subgroup
  biocatalysis.  Additionally, these ﬁndings could  facili-      of FDHs, have provided much of our current understanding
  tate the engineering of other polyketide biosynthetic      of FDH catalytic mechanisms. Two subtly different mecha-
  pathways and contribute to optimizing fermentation     nisms are proposed, relating to how the FDHs confer such
  conditions to generate new calicheamicin derivatives.          precise stereoselectivity. In the chlorination process, a ﬂavin
                                                             reductase reduces ﬂavin to ﬂavin hydroperoxide [FAD(C4a)-
                                              OOH], which then captures Cl−to form hypochlorous acid
                                                     (HOCl). The HOCl intermediate reacts with a conserved
Introduction
                                                        Lys residue in the active  site, generating a stable chlo-
                                                       ramine intermediate that promotes regiospeciﬁc chlorination
Halogenated  natural  products  are  widely  distributed  in
                                                              (Figure 1b).[13] Alternatively, it has been suggested that the
nature, with their numbers increasing dramatically—from just
                                                        Lys residue may serve to position HOCl via hydrogen bond-
30 in 1968 to over 8000 by 2024.[1] These compounds princi-
                                                                        ing, thus directing it to react directly with the substrate.[14]
pally contain chlorine and bromine, with iodine being present
                                          FDHs are further subdivided into two types based on the
in around 100, and fewer than 15 containing ﬂuorine.[2]
                                                                substrate they use: variant A, which utilize free substrates,
                                                    and variant B, which catalyze halogenation of substrates
                                                               covalently attached to a carrier protein.[15] To date, only two
[*] Dr. F. Pang, Prof. C. A. Townsend
                                                                variant A halogenases have been identiﬁed as capable of   Department of Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University, 3400
   North Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA                     iodination. PltM, a phenolic halogenase from the pyoluteorin
    E-mail: ctownsend@jhu.edu                                     biosynthetic gene cluster, was the ﬁrst FDH discovered with
    Additional supporting information can be found online in the          iodination activity.[16] The marine viral halogenase VirX1 has
   Supporting Information section                             been shown to iodinate a range of substrates.[17] Although


Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202506825 (1 of 9)                                      © 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH


[PDF physical page 2]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        34,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202506825
                                                                                                                                                           by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     University
                                                                                                                                                           Of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                China,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Online
Figure 1. a) Examples of chlorinated bioactive natural products. b) Proposed catalytic mechanism of ﬂavin-dependent tryptophan chlorinase. c)                                                         Library
Proposed enzymes that are involved in the biosynthesis of the iodinated aromatic unit of calicheamicin γ 1I.                                                   on
a subsequent study suggested that iodination by VirX1  is   on structural studies. Previous research on CalO6, CalO1,                                                                     [03/09/2025].
a chemical reaction driven by H2O2, as the addition of   and CalO2 suggests that carrier protein-bound substrates                See
catalase inhibited the process,[18] no product formation was   are  necessary  for  this  process.[28–30] CalO6  is  the  only                the
observed when K79A and K79R mutants of VirX1 were    tailoring enzyme functionally characterized as a C-2 O-                          Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and
tested with appropriately puriﬁed ﬂavin reductase.[17] These   methyltransferase by utilizing a N-acetylcysteaminyl orselli-
observations indicate that the Lys residue in VirX1 is essential   nate substrate mimic.[31] This ﬁnding provided evidence that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Conditionsfor enzymatic catalysis.                                CalO6 is the ﬁrst tailoring enzyme involved in the biosynthesis
   Calicheamicin γ 1I 4, discovered in Micromonospora echi-    of the iodinated benzoic acid (Figure 1c). Despite this ﬁnding,
nospora ssp. calichensis, is the most potent member of the   experimental evidence  is  still lacking regarding the exact
calicheamicin family, with aryl iodine incorporation proposed    biosynthetic steps to the iodinated thiobenzoate and whether
to be catalyzed by a halogenase.[19,20] This compound contains   iodine is incorporated by the proposed halogenase CalO3.[31]
a 10-membered enediyne core structure, four deoxy sugars,      Given the enigmatic role of iodine in enediyne natural
and an iodo-thiobenzoate moiety (Figure 1c). Stereoelec-   product biosynthesis[32,33] and the potential applications for
tronic constraints imposed by the unusual N─O linkage[21]   a selective aryl iodinase, this study aimed to characterize the
and hindered bond rotation about the rare,  if not unique,   complete set of enzymes required to assemble the iodinated
hexasubstituted aryl ring confer both structural rigidity to the   benzoate building block in calicheamicin γ 1I. We conducted                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
oligosaccharide domain and remarkable shape complemen-   a series of in vitro experiments to achieve this goal. The           on
tarity to the minor groove of DNA. These factors account for   development and execution of this study established a prac-                          Wiley
the induced ﬁt of calicheamicin binding to DNA and domi-    tical and efﬁcient method for monitoring reactions catalyzed                                Online
nant cause of sequence-selective double-strand cleavage.[22,23]   by large polyketide synthases and tailoring enzymes—here
Upon  reductive  activation  of  the methyl  trisulﬁde,  the   modiﬁcations to the aromatic motif including O-methylation                                     Library
enediyne moiety undergoes Bergman cyclization[24] to form a   and  aryl oxidation, and  insights into the mechanism of                for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rules
diradical intermediate, which abstracts hydrogen atoms from   halogen atom speciﬁcity catalyzed by halogenases.                       of
the deoxyribose backbone of DNA.[25,26] The resulting DNA                                                                                                                                                                         use;
radicals interact with O2 ultimately leading to strand scission.                                                                                     OA
   Although the enediyne core and the aromatic  side-   Results and Discussion                                                                                                                                                                                                          articles
chain unit of calicheamicin γ 1I are thought to be biosyn-                                                                                                                               are
thesized by two distinct polyketide synthases, CalE8 and   Enzymatic Synthesis of the C-2 O-Methyl Orsellinate Thioester                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           governed
CalO5, respectively,[27] the enzymatic mechanisms underlying    Tethered to CalO5                                                             by
enediyne biosynthesis and the sequence of tailoring enzymes                                                                                                                               the
involved in the formation of the iodinated aromatic unit are    Orsellinic  acid (2,4-dihydroxy-6-methylbenzoic  acid)  is a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     applicablepoorly characterized. Understanding the tailoring enzymes    critical structural motif found in numerous natural products.
responsible for modifying the aromatic ring primarily relies    Its biosynthesis differs between bacteria and fungi. In fungi,                                          Creative

Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202506825 (2 of 9)                                     © 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             License


[PDF physical page 3]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        34,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202506825
                                                                                                                                                           by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      University
                                                                                                                                                           Of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                China,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Library
Figure 2. Enzymatic synthesis of the C-2 O-methyl orsellinate thioester. a) Domain organization of orsellinate acid synthase (OAS) from fungi and              on
bacteria. Domains are abbreviated as follows: SAT, starter unit acyltransferase; KS, ketosynthase; MAT, malonyl acyltransferase; AT, acyltransferase;
PT, product template; ACP, acyl carrier protein; and TE, thioesterase. b) Experimental design of the in vitro orsellinate thioester biosynthesis                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [03/09/2025].
catalyzed by CalO5* and the O-methylation catalyzed by CalO6. Mutated residues are highlighted in red. c) Deconvoluted mass spectra of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        See
TEV-cleaved ACP species from (i) apo-CalO5*, (ii) CalO5* incubated with Sfp, CoASH, and MgCl2, (iii) CalO5* incubated with Sfp, CoASH, MgCl2,                   the
and malonyl-CoA, and (iv) CalO5* incubated with Sfp, CoASH, MgCl2, malonyl-CoA, CalO6, and SAM. d) The expected small molecules after P-Pant                             Termsejection and the observed P-Pant ejection ions from intact-protein analysis of the cleaved ACP from (iii) and (iv).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Conditionsorsellinic acid synthase (OAS) typically contains domains   This strategy would preserve polyketide synthase domain–
of a nonreducing iterative polyketide synthase: a starter   domain interactions throughout iterative catalysis and enable
unit  acyltransferase  (SAT),  ketosynthase  (KS),  malonyl    full detection of the cleaved ACP and any species bound
acyltransferase (MAT), product template (PT), acyl carrier    to it.
protein (ACP), and thioesterase (TE). During orsellinic acid     To achieve this goal, we introduced a tobacco etch virus
biosynthesis, the SAT domain recruits an acetyl starter unit,   (TEV) cleavage site[37] into wild-type CalO5 by substituting
while the MAT domain recruits malonyl extender units. After   ﬁve amino acids in the linker region between the ACP and PT
three rounds of chain elongation catalyzed by the KS domain,   domains (Figure 2b). This modiﬁcation did not alter the over-
the PT domain catalyzes a C2–C7 aldol condensation, and    all protein length, minimizing potential impacts on enzymatic
the TE domain releases the ﬁnal product, which is then used    activity. The engineered N-terminal His6-CalO5 (CalO5*) was                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
for constructing various natural products.[34,35] In contrast,   overproduced in Escherichia coli and puriﬁed through metal-           on
bacterial OAS includes only the KS, acyltransferase (AT),    afﬁnity chromatography. CalO5* was then incubated with                           Wiley
PT, and ACP domains. In this case, the AT domain was  TEV protease and analyzed by UPLC-MS to conﬁrm the                                Online
proposed to manage both the recruitment of the starter    correct mass of the cleaved ACP domain. UPLC-MS analysis
unit and the extender unit. The biosynthesized orsellinate   revealed a peak corresponding to the cleaved apo-form ACP                                     Library
motif typically undergoes further modiﬁcations to form more    (7, Figure 2b,c). CalO5* was successfully converted to its holo                for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rules
complex compounds (Figure 2a).[27,36] The orsellinate motif   form by incubation with phosphopantetheinyl transferase           of
in calicheamicin biosynthesis is believed to be synthesized    Sfp,[38] coenzyme A, and MgCl2 (8, Figure 2c). To use CalO5*                     use;
by CalO5. However, due  to  the  large  size  of CalO5,    to synthesize orsellinate thioester 5, we incubated it with Sfp,           OA
direct analysis via intact-protein mass spectrometry (MS) is   coenzyme A, malonyl-CoA, and MgCl2, followed by TEV                                           articles
challenging. Techniques such as trypsin digestion followed   cleavage for MS analysis. This sequence of steps resulted in                are
by peptide analysis with MS are not always effective, as   the formation of a species with a 150 Da mass shift compared                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           governed
successful detection requires isolation of appropriately sized    to the holo-ACP, which was consistent with the biosynthesis of           by
peptide fragments. Given that the biosynthesized substrates   an orsellinate thioester on the ACP domain (9, Figure 2c). The                the
are tethered to the ACP domain, we decided to introduce a    fact that acetyl-CoA is not required for the reaction suggests                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      applicableprotease cleavage site into CalO5 to monitor mass changes    that the KS domain is capable of decarboxylating a malonyl
of the small ACP domain after each enzymatic reaction.    unit to generate an acetyl starter unit.                                                                                                                                                       Creative

Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202506825 (3 of 9)                                     © 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              License


[PDF physical page 4]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        34,
   To conﬁrm that CalO6 is the ﬁrst O-methyltransferase   concentration increased the activity of CalO3 (Figures S3
using the CalO5*-tethered orsellinate substrate, we expressed   and  3c). As a previous study has shown  that elevated                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded
N-terminal His6-CalO6 in E. coli and puriﬁed the recombi-   iodide concentrations promote peroxidase-mediated protein
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     from
nant protein using metal-afﬁnity chromatography. The protein    iodination,[46] we  initially hypothesized that the observed
identity was conﬁrmed by SDS-PAGE and mass spectrometry    effect is due to the iodinated modiﬁcation of electron-rich
(Figures S1 and S2). The  orsellinate thioester from the    residues, such as Tyr, in CalO3, which in turn inﬂuences
previous reaction with CalO5* was used as the substrate     its catalytic activity. However, we did not observe iodine
for CalO6, with the addition  of S-adenosyl methionine   modiﬁcation of CalO3 at increased NaI concentrations in the
(SAM). (6, Figure 2b) Following TEV cleavage, UPLC-MS   presence of NADH, FAD, and FAD reductase, as monitored
analysis revealed a 14 Da mass increase, corresponding to   by intact-protein MS (Figure S4). In addition, compared to
the addition of a single methyl group (10, Figure 2c). To   the two known iodinases, VirX1 and PltM, CalO3 contains
unequivocally identify the small molecule attached to the    relatively few Tyr residues. Since VirX1 and PltM remain
polyketide protein, we performed phosphopantetheinyl (P-    active at high iodide concentrations, it is unlikely that CalO3
Pant) ejection assays[39] by adjusting the collision energy on    activity is inhibited due to Tyr modiﬁcation. It is possible that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202506825
the LC-MS instrument. The detection of the mass peaks,   CalO3 has evolved to function as a gating enzyme in the           by
corresponding to the expected small molecules 11 and 12,    biosynthesis of calicheamicin γ 1I. Given the high toxicity of                          Ocean
conﬁrmed the formation of the orsellinate thioester and its    this compound, such a regulatory role could help prevent the
subsequent O-methylation (Figure 2d).                       accumulation of excessive concentrations during biosynthesis.                                                     University
                                                           Further studies are needed to elucidate the mechanism by           Of
                                                       which high iodide concentrations inhibit CalO3 activity. The                                China,
Characterization of CalO3 as a Flavin-Dependent Iodinase          activity of CalO3 also depends on pH, showing higher activity                          Wiley
                                                                    at pH 6.5, lower at pH 7, and almost no activity at pH 7.5 and                                Online
As previous ligand-binding assays indicated that CalO2 has a   8 (Figure S5).
high afﬁnity for iodine-containing substrates,[28] we propose     To conﬁrm  that the iodination we observed was an                                     Library
that CalO3 catalyzes iodination prior to CalO2-mediated   enzymatic reaction, we generated a K75A mutation on CalO3           on
oxidation, making  it the next step in the postmodiﬁcation   and overproduced the mutant using the same method as forsequence. However, overexpressing sufﬁcient amounts of   the wild-type protein expression and puriﬁcation. Iodination                                                                    [03/09/2025].
active CalO3 for enzymatic reactions proved challenging in    reactions were repeated with the addition of catalase in                See
BL21 E. coli cells. Since chaperone proteins are known to   the presence of wild-type CalO3, and without catalase in                the
enhance recombinant protein expression and solubility,[40–42]    the presence of CalO3(K75A). UPLC-MS analysis revealed                          Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and
we co-expressed N-terminal His6-CalO3 with three chaper-    that the addition of catalase did not affect the iodination,
ones including DnaK, DnaJ, and GroES in SHufﬂe T7 E.   while the K75A mutation completely abolished the activity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Conditionscoli cells.[43] The protein was then puriﬁed using metal-afﬁnity    of CalO3 (Figure 3c). These experiments strongly support the
chromatography followed by size-exclusion chromatography.   conclusion that CalO3 catalyzes iodination via an enzymatic
The protein  identity was conﬁrmed by SDS-PAGE and   mechanism rather than a chemical reaction.
UPLC-MS (Figures S1 and S2). CalO3 exhibited a distinct     The halogen tolerance of CalO3 was also examined by
yellow color, indicating the binding of a cofactor. UPLC-   comparing the reactions of bromide and chloride. UPLC-
MS analysis comparing the extract from boiled CalO3 with  MS analysis of the bromination reaction showed that a high
an authentic standard conﬁrmed that the cofactor of CalO3   concentration of NaBr (50 mM) led to the formation of a
is ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) (Figure  3a). Since    species corresponding to the addition of two bromines, while
FAD-dependent halogenase-catalyzed halogenation requires   mono-bromination occurred at a lower NaBr concentration
a FAD reductase, we overexpressed a previously reported   (50 µM) (15 and 16, Figure 3c). CalO3 exhibited chlorination                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
FAD reductase, Fre[44] and puriﬁed  it using nickel-afﬁnity    activity only when using a high concentration of NaCl           on
chromatography (Figures S1 and S2).                          (50 mM) (Figure  S3). Halogen competition experiments                          Wiley
   CalO3 was incubated with substrate 6, FAD, NADH, Fre,   were then conducted with 1:1:1 and 1:10:10 ratios of NaI                                Online
and NaI, and then analyzed by UPLC-MS following TEV    to NaBr and NaCl. UPLC-MS analysis revealed that only
cleavage (13 and 14, Figure 3b). However, the preliminary    iodination was observed at a 1:1:1 halide ratio. At the 1:10:10                                     Library
in vitro iodination reaction was unsuccessful when carried    ratio, minimal bromination occurred, and no chlorination                for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rules
out  at pH  7.4  with a NaI  concentration  of 200 mM,   was detected (Figure 3c). These results suggest that CalO3           of
using previously reported conditions for PltM.[16] Since the   has the highest halogen speciﬁcity for iodide, followed by                     use;
chlorinase SgcC3, involved in the biosynthesis of C-1027, has   bromide, with much lower afﬁnity for chloride. To conﬁrm           OA
been shown to exhibit higher activity at pH 6 and 6.5,[45] we    that halogenation occurs on the aryl ring, iodinated and                                          articles
explored different pH values and varied NaI concentrations.   brominated small molecules were analyzed using P-Pant                are
Interestingly, when reduced NaI concentration (50 mM) and    ejection assays. UPLC-MS analysis revealed the expected ions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           governed
pH 6.5 were used, UPLC-MS analysis of the enzymatic    for the iodinated species (compound 17). P-Pant ejection           by
reaction revealed a peak with a 126 Da mass shift, albeit   from the mono-brominated product led to the identiﬁcation                the
in small amounts, in accord with the incorporation of iodine    of two elimination  ions, corresponding to compound 18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     applicable(Figure 3c). Further testing of NaI concentrations ranging   with the incorporation of either a Br79 or Br81  isotope.
from 50 mM to 50 µM revealed that decreasing the NaI    Similarly, P-Pant ejection from the di-brominated product                                          Creative

Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202506825 (4 of 9)                                     © 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             License


[PDF physical page 5]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        34,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202506825
                                                                                                                                                           by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      University
                                                                                                                                                           Of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                China,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Library
                                                                                                                                                           on
Figure 3. In vitro characterization of CalO3 as a FAD-dependent iodinase. a) UPLC-MS analysis of the acetonitrile (ACN) extract of denatured CalO3                                                                                [03/09/2025].
conﬁrming it puriﬁes with FAD. The extracted ion chromatogram corresponds to [M + H]+ for FAD (m/z = 786.15 ± 0.02). b) Design of the                             See
enzymatic reaction to characterize CalO3, including iodination reaction in the presence of the FAD reductase, FAD, NaI, and NADH, followed by TEV                the
cleavage for UPLC-MS analysis. c) Deconvoluted mass spectra of TEV protease-cleaved ACP species after CalO3 enzymatic reactions with diﬀerent                                 Terms
halides. The left ﬁgure shows the iodination reaction at various NaI concentrations: no NaI, 50 mM NaI, 50 µM NaI, 50 µM NaI with catalase, and                    and
50 µM NaI using the CalO3 (K75A) mutant from top to bottom; the middle shows the bromination reaction at various NaBr concentrations: no NaBr,
50 mM NaBr, 50 µM NaBr, 50 µM NaBr with catalase, and 50 µM NaBr using the CalO3 (K75A) mutant from top to bottom; the right ﬁgure shows                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Conditions
the competition assays using no halide (top), 50 µM of NaI, NaBr, and NaCl, respectively (middle), and 50 µM NaI with 500 µM NaBr and 500 µM
NaCl, respectively (bottom). d) The expected small molecules after P-Pant ejection and the observed P-Pant ejection ions from intact-protein analysis
of the cleaved ACP from CalO3 catalyzed iodination reaction with 50 µM NaI (top), bromination reaction with 50 µM NaBr (middle), and 50 mM
NaBr (bottom).


revealed three elimination ions corresponding to compound    substrates and they show 35% and 34% sequence identity to
19, incorporating either two Br79  isotopes, one Br79 and   CalO3, respectively.
one Br81, or two Br81 isotopes (Figure 3d). The successful     Owing to the inability to obtain a crystal structure of
detection of these halogenated small molecules conﬁrmed   CalO3, we generated a structural model of CalO3 bound
that halogenation occurred on the aryl ring.                     to FAD using AlphaFold 3[48] (Figure 4b), which achieved                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                     an ipTM value of 0.98. The alignment of the FAD ligand           on
                                                    and the catalytic residue Lys75 closely matches those found                           Wiley
Phylogenetic and Structural Analysis of CalO3                      in CndH (Figure 4c). To explore the residues potentially                                Online
                                                               responsible for the distinct halogen speciﬁcity of CalO3,
To investigate the evolutionary relationship of CalO3 with   we conducted a sequence alignment (Figure S6). Flavin-                                     Library
other FDHs, we conducted a phylogenetic analysis using pre-   dependent halogenases typically feature two signature motifs:                for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rules
viously characterized enzymes. The majority of known FDHs  GxGxxG (ﬂavin-binding site) and WxWxIP (which prevents           of
clustered into distinct clades based on their substrate types,   monooxygenase  activity).[49,50]  Surprisingly, in CalO3, the                     use;
such as tryptophan halogenases, indole halogenases, and  WxWxIP motif  is modiﬁed, with the Ile replaced by Ala           OA
phenolic or pyrrole halogenases. The newly discovered VirX1,    (Figures 4c and  S6). We hypothesized  that  this change                                           articles
however, formed a separate clade with  its homologs.[17,18]   could provide more space to accommodate iodine instead                are
For our evolutionary analysis, we selected representative    of chlorine. However, a single mutation from Ala to Ile did                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           governed
examples from the major FDHs groups, including CalO3. Our   not signiﬁcantly affect the enzymatic activity of CalO3, as           by
analysis places CalO3 within the phenolic or pyrrolic halo-   evidenced by time-course iodination experiments (Figure S7).                the
genase group, establishing an evolutionary link to SgcC3[45]     It is still possible that this mutation plays a supporting role                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      applicableand CndH[47] (Figure 4a). Notably, both SgcC3 and CndH    in the preference for iodine, but other residues near the
are variant B chlorinases that use carrier protein-tethered    substrate-binding site or halogen-binding channel are likely                                           Creative

Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202506825 (5 of 9)                                     © 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              License


[PDF physical page 6]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        34,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202506825
                                                                                                                                                           by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     University
                                                                                                                                                           Of
Figure 4. Phylogenetic and structural analysis of FAD-dependent halogenases. a) Unrooted neighbor-joining tree of representative FAD-dependent                                         China,
halogenases. Phylogenetic analysis was carried out in Clustal Omega[51] and visualized in iTOL v5.[52] b) A structural model of CalO3 with FAD ligand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wileypredicted by AlphaFold 3. The catalytic Lys was highlighted in a red circle. c) Comparison of the predicted CalO3 structure modeled with FAD and
iodide using Chai-1[53] to the crystal structure of CndH (PDB:3e1t).[47] A224 in CalO3 was aligned with I221 in CndH within the signature residue                                              Online
sequence (WxWxIP).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Library
                                                                                                                                                           on

critical as well. To better understand substrate positioning   the addition of one hydroxyl group. (20 and 21, Figure 5a) P-within the binding pocket of CalO3, a phosphopantetheine   Pant ejection assays conﬁrmed that oxidation occurred on the                                                                    [03/09/2025].
substrate mimic was modeled in complex with CalO3 and   aromatic ring. The ejected ion at m/z = 567.0656 supported                See
FAD. However, in all cases, the free substrate was consistently   the 16 Da mass increase, conﬁrming the addition of a hydroxyl                the
placed far from the catalytic Lys and failed to occupy the   group (22, Figure 5a). To investigate whether CalO2 can                          Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and
proposed substrate pocket (Figure S8). These ﬁndings suggest    oxidize a substrate without iodine, CalO2 was incubated with
that CalO3 adopts a closed conformation in the absence of   the methylated substrate 6 in the presence of ferredoxin,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Conditionsinteraction with CalO5 or the ACP domain. Upon interaction,   ferredoxin reductase, and NADPH. UPLC-MS analysis of the
CalO3 may undergo conformational changes that open the   TEV-cleaved protein showed no formation of new peaks com-
substrate channel, thereby allowing proper substrate entry   pared to the control, indicating that CalO2 did not catalyze
and positioning. To fully understand the halogen speciﬁcity of   oxidation without iodine already present (Figure S9). These
halogenases, a structure of CalO3 in complex with the carrier   data demonstrated that CalO2 has high substrate speciﬁcity
protein-tethered substrate is essential. CalO3 would provide   and that iodination is a necessary step preceding oxidation.
an excellent starting point for investigating the mechanisms    We then investigated the ﬁnal C-3 O-methylation step cat-
that govern halogen speciﬁcity.                                alyzed by CalO1. N-terminal His6-CalO1 was overproduced
                                                                   in E. coli and puriﬁed by nickel-afﬁnity chromatography. The
                                                              protein purity and identity were conﬁrmed by SDS-PAGE and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
Reconstitution of C-3 Oxidation and O-Methylation Catalyzed      intact-protein MS (Figures S1 and S2). The species generated           on
by CalO2 and CalO1                                            previously after the CalO2 reaction was used as the substrate                          Wiley
                                                                  for CalO1, with the addition of SAM. After TEV cleavage                                Online
We next assessed the activity of CalO2 following the suc-   and intact-protein MS, a peak showing a 14 Da mass shift
cessful reconstitution of CalO3. To characterize the function   compared to the control was observed, indicating the ﬁnal                                     Library
of CalO2, N-terminal His6-CalO2 was overproduced  in   O-methylation occurred on the aromatic motif. (23 and 24,                for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rules
E. coli and puriﬁed by metal-afﬁnity chromatography and   Figure 5b) The correct mass of the ﬁnal product was veriﬁed           of
the identity was conﬁrmed by SDS-PAGE and UPLC-MS   by P-Pant ejection, with the peak at m/z = 581.0832 observed                     use;
(Figures S1 and S2). As a cytochrome P450 oxygenase, CalO2   corresponding  to  the  4-hydroxy-5-iodo-2,3-dimethoxy-6-           OA
requires electron-transfer proteins such as ferredoxin and   methylbenzoate species 25 (Figure 5b). The substrate speci-                                          articles
ferredoxin reductase, as well as electron donors NADPH or    ﬁcity of CalO1 was also tested using substrates 5, 6, and 13, but                are
NADH. The iodinated aromatic substrate tethered to CalO5*   no activity was observed (Figure S10). These ﬁndings conﬁrm                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           governed
13 was prepared using the iodination conditions described    that CalO1 catalyzed the ﬁnal C-3 O-methylation and cannot           by
above and then incubated with CalO2 in the presence of    substitute for the function of CalO6. The fact that CalO1                the
ferredoxin, ferredoxin reductase and NADPH. UPLC-MS    functions only after CalO2-mediated oxidation, and CalO2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     applicableanalysis of the TEV-cleavage mixture revealed a peak with a    functions only after CalO3-mediated iodination, is only con-
16 Da mass increase compared to the control group, indicating    sistent with the sequence of reactions—C-2 O-methylation,                                          Creative

Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202506825 (6 of 9)                                     © 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             License


[PDF physical page 7]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        34,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Downloaded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202506825
                                                                                                                                                           by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ocean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      University
                                                                                                                                                           Of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                China,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Online
Figure 5. Enzymatic characterization of C-3 oxidation and O-methylation catalyzed by CalO2 and CalO1. a) Experimental design for characterization of
CalO2-catalyzed oxidation and analysis of the deconvoluted mass spectra of the control (with boiled CalO2) and the reaction (with CalO2 in the                                                        Library
presence of ferredoxin, ferredoxin reductase, and NADPH). Bottom right shows the expected small molecule after P-Pant ejection and the observed            on
P-Pant ejection ions from intact-protein analysis of the cleaved ACP after the CalO2 reaction. b) Experimental design for characterization of
CalO1-catalyzed C-3 O-methylation and analysis of the deconvoluted mass spectra of the control (with boiled CalO1) and the reaction (with CalO1 in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [03/09/2025].the presence of SAM). Bottom right shows the expected small molecule after P-Pant ejection and the observed P-Pant ejection ions from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        See
intact-protein analysis of the cleaved ACP after the CalO1 reaction.                                                                                                                                        the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Conditions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                                                                                                                           on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        for
Figure 6. Proposed biosynthetic pathway of the iodo-thiobenzoate of calicheamicin γ 1I.                                                                                                                                                                                rules
                                                                                                                                                           of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      use;
C-5 iodination, C-3 oxidation, followed by C-3 O-methylation    selective TEV protease cleavage and analysis of the ACP-           OA
(Figure 6).                                          bound intermediate/product. We propose that strategically                                           articles
                                                              introducing protease cleavage sites into large megasynthases                are
                                                                                    is an  effective method for elucidating  their biosynthetic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           governed
Conclusion                                                      functions. This approach also holds promise for studying the           by
                                                                   roles of other tailoring enzymes. Although this strategy is                the
In conclusion, we successfully reconstituted synthesis of the    efﬁcient, careful design of the mutation site is essential to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      applicableiodo-thiobenzonate of calicheamicin γ 1I in vitro. Its stepwise   minimize potential impacts on the protein’s native function.
assembly was detected by intact-protein MS coupled to   The characterized enzymes, including the polyketide synthase                                           Creative

Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202506825 (7 of 9)                                     © 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              License


[PDF physical page 8]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        34,
(CalO5), two O-methyltransferases (CalO6 and CalO1),      [6] C. M. Harris, R. Kannan, H. Kopecka, T. M. Harris, J. Am.
a FAD-dependent iodinase (CalO3), and a P450 oxidase       Chem. Soc. 1985, 107, 6652–6658.                                                                                   [7] E. R. Pereira, L. Belin, M. Sancelme, M. Prudhomme, M. Ollier,                                                     Downloaded(CalO2), will be instructive to future in vivo pathway engi-
                                                         M. Rapp, D. Sevère, J.-F. Riou, D. Fabbro, T. Meyer, J. Med.                     from
neering and aid the creation of novel bioactive calicheamicin
                                                            Chem. 1996, 39, 4471–4477.
γ 1I  derivatives. To the best of our knowledge, CalO3  is                                                                                   [8] B. Bister, D. Bischoff, G. J. Nicholson, S. Stockert, J. Wink, C.
the ﬁrst characterized FAD-dependent iodinase acting on         Brunati, S. Donadio, S. Pelzer, W. Wohlleben, R. D. Süssmuth,
a  carrier protein-tethered  substrate. This advance could       Chembiochem 2003, 4, 658–662.
facilitate the characterization of similar enzymes and serve      [9]  J. Wang, M. Sánchez-Roselló, J. L. Aceña, C. Del Pozo, A. E.
as a model for studying halogen atom speciﬁcity of FAD-         Sorochinsky, S. Fustero, V. A. Soloshonok, H. Liu, Chem. Rev.
dependent halogenases. It is also worth noting that iodination         2014, 114, 2432–2506.
                                                                            [10] V. Agarwal, Z. D. Miles, J. M. Winter, A. S. Eustáquio, A. A. El
plays a crucial role in the biosynthesis of enediyne natural
                                                                Gamal, B. S. Moore, Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 5619–5674.
products, such as tiancimycin A, calicheamicin γ 1I, and    [11] C. Crowe, S. Molyneux, S. V. Sharma, Y. Zhang, D. S. Gkotsi, H.
dynemicin.[32,33] However, the identity of the iodine donor         Connaris, R. J. Goss, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2021, 50, 9443–9481.
and its pivotal role in the biosynthesis of the enediyne core    [12]  T. Dairi, T. Nakano, K. Aisaka, R. Katsumata, M. Hasegawa,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202506825
itself remain undetermined. Successful characterization of a          Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 1995, 59, 1099–1106.                         by
halogen-selective aryl iodinase provides new insights into the    [13] E. Yeh, L. C. Blasiak, A. Koglin, C. L. Drennan, C. T. Walsh,                          Ocean
complex multistep assembly of calicheamicin γ 1I and provides         Biochemistry 2007, 46, 1284–1292.
                                                                            [14]  S. Flecks, E. P. Patallo, X. Zhu, A. J. Ernyei, G. Seifert, C. Dong,
an enzyme with potentially wider biocatalytic applications.                                                                                                                 J. H. Naismith, K.-H. van Pée, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2008, 47,                                                     University
                                                                       9533–9536.                                                                Of
                                                                            [15] H. Ludewig, S. Molyneux, S. Ferrinho, K. Guo, R. Lynch, D. S.                                China,
Supporting Information
                                                                          Gkotsi, R. J. Goss, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2020, 65, 51–60.                                      Wiley
                                                                            [16]  S.                                                                         Mori, A.                                                                          H.                                                                                      Pang, N. Thamban                                                                                                        Chandrika,                                                                                                                                                      S.
                                                                                                              Garneau-                                OnlineThe authors have cited additional references within the                                                                       Tsodikova,                                                                             O.                                                                                          V. Tsodikov,                                                                                                      Nat. Commun.                                                                                                                     2019, 10,                                                                                                                              1255.
Supporting Information.[44,45,51,53–56]                                   [17] D. S. Gkotsi, H. Ludewig, S. V. Sharma,  J. A. Connolly,  J.                                     Library
                                                                         Dhaliwal, Y. Wang, W.  P. Unsworth, R.  J. Taylor, M. M.           on
                                                                  McLachlan, S. Shanahan, Nat. Chem. 2019, 11, 1091–1097.
Acknowledgements                                                  [18] Y. Zhang, L. Chen, H. Chen, T. Huang, Q. Shi, X. Wang, Y.                                                              Wang, M.-C. Tang, N.-Y. Zhou, S. Lin, Sci. China Chem. 2021,                                                                    [03/09/2025].
The authors are pleased to acknowledge Dr. D.R. Cohen for          64, 1730–1735.                                                                                           See
preliminary experiments and Dr. I.P. Mortimer for assistance    [19] M. D. Lee, T. S. Dunne, C. C. Chang, M. M. Siegel, G. O. Morton,                the
with the P-Pant ejection assays. The authors also thank Dr.        G. A. Ellestad, W. J. McGahren, D. B. Borders, J. Am. Chem.                          Terms
R. Li for donation of SHufﬂe T7 E. coli competent cells, Dr.         Soc. 1992, 114, 985–997.                                                                             and
M.J. Wheadon for providing the TEV expression construct,    [20] M. D. Lee, G. A. Ellestad, D. B. Borders, Acc. Chem. Res. 1991,
                                                                                 24, 235–243.and Prof. S.E. Rokita for valuable discussions and suggestions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Conditions
                                                                            [21]  S. Walker, V. Gupta, D. Kahne, D. Gange, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
regarding ﬂavin-dependent halogenases. Financial support of                                                                           1994, 116, 3197–3206.
the National Institutes of Health is gratefully acknowledged    [22]  S. Walker, J. Murnick, D. Kahne, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1993, 115,
(ES001670).                                                           7954–7961.
                                                                            [23] L. G. Paloma, J. A. Smith, W. J. Chazin, K. Nicolaou, J. Am.
                                                            Chem. Soc. 1994, 116, 3697–3708.
Conﬂict of Interests                                                  [24] R. G. Bergman, Acc. Chem. Res. 1973, 6, 25–31.
                                                                            [25] N. Zein, A. M. Sinha, W. J. McGahren, G. A. Ellestad, Science
                                                                           1988, 240, 1198–1201.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.                          [26]  J. J. Hangeland, J. J. De Voss, J. A. Heath, C. A. Townsend, W.
                                                                   D. Ding, J. S. Ashcroft, G. A. Ellestad, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1992,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)                                                                              114, 9200–9202.
                                                                                                                                                           on
                                                                             Ahlert,                                                                              E. Shepard,                                                                                           N.                                                                                    Lomovskaya,                                                                                                        E. Zazopoulos,                                                                                                          A. Staffa,Data Availability Statement                                      [27]  J.
                                                                            B.                                                                      O. Bachmann,                                                                                  K.                                                                                   Huang,                                                                                                        L. Fonstein,                                                                                                   A. Czisny,                                                                                                                   R. E.                          Wiley
                                                             Whitwam, Science 2002, 297, 1173–1176.                                                                                                       Online
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available    [28]  J. G. McCoy, H. D. Johnson, S. Singh, C. A. Bingman, I. K. Lei, J.
in the Supporting Information of this article.                                 S. Thorson, G. N. Phillips Jr., Proteins Struct. Funct. Bioinf. 2009,                                     Library
                                                                                 74, 50–60.                                                                                                  for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rulesKeywords: Calicheamicin • Halogenase • Iodinase •                 [29] A. Chang, S. Singh, C. A. Bingman, J. S. Thorson, G. N. Phillips,                                                                                                                                                           of
O-Methyltransferase • Oxygenase                                    Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 2011, 67, 197–203.                                       use;
                                                                            [30] O. V. Tsodikov, C. Hou, C. T. Walsh, S. Garneau-Tsodikova,           OA
                                           BMC                                                                                             Struct.                                                                                               Biol.                                                                                             2015, 15, 1–7.
                                                                            [31]  S.                                                                              Singh,                                                                                N. S.                                                                                 Nandurkar,                                                                                                                                                        J. S. Thorson, ChemBioChem 2014,                                          articles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        are
                                                                                 15, 1418–1421.
 [1] G. W. Gribble, J. Nat. Prod. 2024, 87, 1285–1305.                    [32] C. Gui, E. Kalkreuter, L. Lauterbach, D. Yang, B. Shen, Nat.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           governed
 [2] G. W. Gribble, Environ. Chem. 2015, 12, 396.                      Chem. Biol. 2024, 20, 1210–1219.                                          by
 [3] H. M. J. Feder, C. Osier, E. G. Maderazo, Rev. Infect. Dis. 1981,    [33] D. R. Cohen, C. A. Townsend, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2018, 57,                the
      3, 479–491.                                                         5650–5654.
 [4] D. P. Levine, Clin. Infect. Dis. 2006, 42, S5–S12.                      [34] V. Schroeckh, K. Scherlach, H.-W. Nützmann, E. Shelest, W.                                                     applicable
 [5] M. Prudhomme, Eur. J. Med. Chem. 2003, 38, 123–140.                Schmidt-Heck,  J. Schuemann, K. Martin, C. Hertweck, A.                                          Creative

Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202506825 (8 of 9)                                     © 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             License


[PDF physical page 9]
                           Research Article                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15213773,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2025,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        34,
    A. Brakhage, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2009, 106, 14558–    [47]  S. Buedenbender, S. Rachid, R. Müller, G. E. Schulz, J. Mol.
     14563.                                                                     Biol. 2009, 385, 520–530.[35] Y. Araki, T. Awakawa, M. Matsuzaki, R. Cho, Y. Matsuda, S.    [48]  J. Abramson, J. Adler, J. Dunger, R. Evans, T. Green, A. Pritzel,                                                     Downloaded
     Hoshino, Y. Shinohara, M. Yamamoto, Y. Kido, D. K. Inaoka,        O. Ronneberger, L. Willmore, A. J. Ballard, J. Bambrick, Nature                     from
     Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2019, 116, 8269–8274.                        2024, 630, 493–500.
[36]  S. Gaisser, A. Trefzer, S. Stockert, A. Kirschning, A. Bechthold,    [49]  S. A. Shepherd, B. R. Menon, H. Fisk, A. W. Struck, C. Levy, D.
       J. Bacteriol. 1997, 179, 6271–6278.                                     Leys, J. Mickleﬁeld, ChemBioChem 2016, 17, 821–824.
[37]  A. Witkowski, A. Ghosal, A. K. Joshi, H. Ewa Witkowska, F. J.    [50] B. R. Menon,  J. Latham, M. S. Dunstan, E. Brandenburger,
     Asturias, S. Smith, Chem Biol 2004, 11, 1667–1676.                    U. Klemstein, D. Leys, C. Karthikeyan, M.  F. Greaney,  S.
[38] L. E. Quadri, P. H. Weinreb, M. Lei, M. M. Nakano, P. Zuber, C.       A. Shepherd,  J. Mickleﬁeld, Org. Biomol. Chem. 2016, 14,
      T. Walsh, Biochemistry 1998, 37, 1585–1595.                           9354–9361.
[39]  P. C. Dorrestein, S. B. Bumpus, C. T. Calderone, S. Garneau-    [51]  F.  Madeira,  N.  Madhusoodanan,   J.  Lee, A.  Eusebi, A.
     Tsodikova, Z. D. Aron, P. D. Straight, R. Kolter, C. T. Walsh, N.         Niewielska, A. R. Tivey, R. Lopez, S. Butcher, Nucleic Acids
     L. Kelleher, Biochemistry 2006, 45, 12756–12766.                        Res. 2024, 52, W521–W525.
[40]  J. G. Thomas, A. Ayling, F. Baneyx, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol.    [52]  I. Letunic, P. Bork, Nucleic Acids Res. 2021, 49, W293–W296.
     1997, 66, 197–238.                                                    [53] Chai Discovery team, J. Boitreaud, J. Dent, M. McPartlon, J.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.202506825
[41] K. Nishihara, M. Kanemori, M. Kitagawa, H. Yanagi, T. Yura,         Meier, V. Reis, A. Rogozhonikov, K. Wu, BioRxiv 2024, https://           by
     Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1998, 64, 1694–1699.                          doi.org/10.1101/2024.10.10.615955.                                                                                                     Ocean
[42] K. Nishihara, M. Kanemori, H. Yanagi, T. Yura, Appl. Environ.    [54]  J. E. Tropea, S. Cherry, D. S. Waugh, Methods Mol. Biol. 2009,
     Microbiol. 2000, 66, 884–889.                                            498, 297–307.[43]  J. Lobstein, C. A. Emrich, C. Jeans, M. Faulkner, P. Riggs, M.    [55] K. D. Tartof, C. A. Hobbs, Bethesda Res. Lab. Focus 1987, 9, 12.                                                      University
    Berkmen, Microb. Cell Factories 2012, 11, 1–16.                     [56] X. Robert, P. Gouet, Nucleic Acids Res. 2014, 42, W320–W324.            Of
[44] G. Spyrou, E. Haggård-Ljungquist, M. Krook, H. Jörnvall, E.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              China,
     Nilsson, P. Reichard, J. Bacteriol. 1991, 173, 3673–3679.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Wiley
[45]  S.        Lin, S. G. Van Lanen, B. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2007, 129,    Manuscript                                                                                         received:                                                                            March 25,                                                                                               2025
     12432–12438.                                                                   Revised manuscript                                                                                                  received:                                                                        May                                                                                                                     14, 2025                                                                                                                       Online
[46] K. V. Jokumsen, V. H. Huhle, P. M. Hägglund, M. J. Davies, L. F.    Accepted manuscript online: June 19, 2025                                                                                                                                            Library
    Gamon, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2024, 220, 207–221.                 Version of record online: June 29, 2025                                            on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [03/09/2025].
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        See
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Conditions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)
                                                                                                                                                           on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Wiley
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Online
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Library
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rules
                                                                                                                                                           of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      use;
                                                                                                                                                           OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           articles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           governed
                                                                                                                                                           by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      applicable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Creative

Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202506825 (9 of 9)                                     © 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Commons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              License