
[PDF physical page 1]
                                                       Engineering Microbiology 6 (2026) 100302



                                                   Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

                            Engineering Microbiology


                         journal homepage: https://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/engineering-microbiology/


Original Research Article

An eﬃcient endogenous type I-E CRISPR-Cas genome-editing platform for
producing transglutaminase in Streptomyces mobaraensis

Dan Wang, Mengjun Sun, Qingxu Meng, Qianjin Kang, Linquan Bai ∗

State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China



a r t i c l e    i n f o            a b s t r a c t


Keywords:                                          Streptomyces mobaraensis  is an industrially important actinomycete capable of producing transglutaminase
Streptomyces mobaraensis                            (TGase), a valuable crosslinking enzyme that is widely used in the food, pharmaceutical, and textile industries.
Endogenous CRISPR-Cas system                   However, its genetic manipulation remains challenging owing to the lack of eﬃcient genome-editing tools. Here,
Genome editing
                                    we characterized an endogenous type I-E CRISPR-Cas system in S. mobaraensis IPIO2 through bioinformatics
Transglutaminase
                                                    analysis and plasmid interference assays, identifying the protospacer adjacent motif as 5 ′ -AAC-3 ′ . We engineered
Comparative proteomics
                                           an artiﬁcial editing plasmid, pCRISPR, by inserting a mini-CRISPR array (repeat-spacer-repeat) and homologous
                                              recombination repair templates into the replicative plasmid pJTU1278. This system exhibited high editing eﬃ-
                                                       ciencies, achieving 70% for single-gene deletions and 75–80% for large DNA fragment deletions ranging from
                                         10 to 40 kb. Based on this system, deletion of four genes consistently downregulated during TGase production,
                                                 identiﬁed through comparative proteomics, enhanced TGase production by 8.5–18.5%. Furthermore, deleting
                                                 the pseudouridimycin and piericidin A1 biosynthetic gene clusters using this system signiﬁcantly improved the
                                                     safety proﬁle of TGase production, resulting in a 17% increase in TGase yield. This study established a robust and
                                            eﬃcient endogenous CRISPR-Cas-based genome-editing platform in S. mobaraensis , providing a powerful tool for
                                                       strain engineering and industrial optimization of TGase production.



1. Introduction                                                emerged as a powerful strategy for identifying enzymes and regula-
                                                                           tory proteins associated with the production of metabolites in bacte-
   Transglutaminase (TGase), an industrially important crosslinking en-      ria [ 12 , 24–27 ]. However, the successful implementation of such ap-
zyme, was ﬁrst discovered in Streptomyces mobaraensis (formerly clas-     proaches critically depends on the availability of eﬃcient genome-
siﬁed as Streptoverticillium mobaraense ) by Ando et al. [ 1 , 2 ] Since then,     editing tools.
TGase has been produced on a large scale in S. mobaraensis and approved        Currently available genome-editing tools in S. mobaraensis , such as
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration [ 3 ]. TGase catalyzes three key     the 𝜑 C31-derived integration plasmid pSET152 for gene overexpres-
reactions: (1) acyl transfer, (2) deamidation, and (3) protein crosslinking     sion and the CRISPRi-dCas9 system for gene repression, enable moder-
between glutamine residues (acyl donor) and lysine residues (acyl ac-     ate modulation of gene expression [ 20 , 28 , 29 ]. However, only a limited
ceptor) [ 3–5 ]. These versatile catalytic activities make TGase an invalu-    number of gene deletion methods have been reported for S. mobaraen-
able biocatalyst in food, pharmaceutical, textile, and other industries       sis to date [ 21 , 23 , 30 ]. Wang et al. employed the replicative plasmid,
[ 6–10 ]. Notably, TGase has been widely used to improve the texture,    pKC1132, to delete the lexA gene, thereby elucidating its role in the
binding properties, and overall quality of protein-based foods, such as     regulatory network governing TGase production [ 21 ]. This conventional
meat, bakery, and soy products [ 11 ].                                  approach relies on the homologous arms ﬂanking the target gene to me-
   Numerous strategies have been developed to enhance TGase produc-     diate single- and double-crossover events [ 31 ], which substantially re-
tion, including mutagenesis breeding [ 12 , 13 ], optimization of medium      stricts the eﬃciency and precision of gene deletion. Therefore, further
composition [ 2 , 14 , 15 ] and fermentation conditions [ 16–19 ], as well as     studies on more eﬃcient and precise genome-editing tools are required.
genetic engineering strategies, such as promoter engineering, gene copy       Although emerging CRISPR-Cas systems (e.g., Cas9 and Cas12) have
number ampliﬁcation, signal peptide optimization, and regulatory gene     revolutionized genome editing in model organisms [ 32 , 33 ], they are of-
manipulation [ 20–23 ]. Despite these eﬀorts, the industrial-scale pro-     ten ineﬃcient in industrial strains owing to the cytotoxicity of Cas pro-
duction of TGases remains challenging. Omics-driven metabolic engi-     teins and their low transformation eﬃciency [ 34 , 35 ]. Type I CRISPR-Cas
neering, particularly comparative transcriptomics and proteomics, has     systems are extensively distributed in sequenced prokaryotic genomes,



  ∗ Corresponding author.
    E-mail address: bailq@sjtu.edu.cn (L. Bai) .

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engmic.2026.100302
Received 19 May 2026; Received in revised form 30 July 2026; Accepted 2 August 2026
Available online 22 August 2026
2667-3703/Copyright © 2026 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the
CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)


[PDF physical page 2]
D. Wang, M. Sun, Q. Meng et al.                                                                                                                 Engineering Microbiology 6 (2026) 100302


accounting for 36.3% of bacteria and 52.8% of archaea [ 36 ], and have    a 5 ′ -trinucleotide (NNN) extension. Complementary oligos with Xba I
been investigated and developed into genome-editing tools for various    and Eco RI-compatible overhangs were designed and annealed by heat-
bacteria and archaea over the past decade [ 37–48 ]. The endogenous     ing at 95 °C for 10 min, followed by slow cooling to 16 °C. The re-
type I-B system has been developed as a highly eﬃcient genome-editing     sulting double-stranded DNA fragments were ligated into Xba I/ Eco RI
tool for Saccharopolyspora spinosa [ 37 ]. Similarly, the engineered type I-     (Cat. No F5581S and F5536S; LABLEAD Inc.) -linearized pSET152
E system from Streptomyces avermitilis achieved 100% editing eﬃciency     to generate a  set of pSET152-NNN-S15/S10 interference plasmids
for fragments ranging from 8 bp to 50 kb and even maintained an eﬃ-     (Table S2). Each plasmid was introduced into S. mobaraensis IPIO2
ciency of 91.7 ± 7.2% for large 100-kb deletions, signiﬁcantly outper-     via intergeneric conjugation [ 52 ] using 108 spores per experiment,
forming CRISPR-Cas9 systems [ 39 ]. Therefore, harnessing endogenous    and conjugation eﬃciency was assessed by counting the number of
type I CRISPR-Cas systems oﬀers a promising solution for the challeng-     exconjugants.
ing genetic manipulation of the TGase-producing strain S. mobaraensis .
   Bioinformatic analysis revealed that a complete type I-E CRISPR-Cas
system naturally occurs in S. mobaraensis IPIO2. In the present study,     2.4. Construction of CRISPR-Cas-based editing plasmids and mutants
we systematically characterized the DNA interference capability of this
endogenous system and repurposed it for genome editing. The system         All plasmids and primers used in this study are summarized in Ta-
enabled the eﬃcient deletion of single genes and gene clusters, with     bles S2 and S3. The shuttle vector pJTU1278 was used as the back-
eﬃciencies exceeding 70%. Using this system, we demonstrated that    bone for the CRISPR-Cas-based editing plasmids. A mini-CRISPR array
the targeted deletion of genes downregulated during TGase production     (leader-repeat-spacer-repeat-terminator) was ampliﬁed via PCR using
resulted in enhanced TGase yields. Furthermore, the deletion of the     the primer pairs sgRNA-F1/R1, sgRNA-F2/R2, and sgRNA-F3/R3 and
biosynthetic gene clusters for pseudouridimycin and piericidin A1 im-     subsequently assembled via overlap PCR. The resulting fragments were
proved the safety proﬁle of TGase preparations. This study establishes a     cloned into the pBluescript II SK( + ) vector, which served as a template
robust and eﬃcient genome-editing platform for S. mobaraensis , paving     for generating a mini-CRISPR array containing the targeting spacer se-
the way for the enhanced and safer production of TGase.                  quences.
                                                                The construction of the pCRISPR-tg-1 plasmid is described below.
2. Materials and methods                                       The mini-CRISPR array containing a 32-bp spacer sequence target-
                                                                         ing the tg gene was ampliﬁed by PCR using crRNA-F1/tg1-crRNA-R1
2.1. Strains and culture conditions                                   and tg1-crRNA-F2/crRNA-R2 and assembled via overlap PCR using the
                                                                      primers crRNA-F1/R2. Two homologous arms ﬂanking the tg gene,
   The bacterial strains used in this study are listed in Table S1. The   UHA and DHA, were ampliﬁed via PCR using the primers tg-UHA-F/R
wild-type strain S. mobaraensis IPIO2 and its genetically derived strains    and tg-DHA-F/R, respectively. The mini-CRISPR array, UHA, and DHA
were cultured on Gauze’s Medium NO.1 agar (20 g/L soluble starch,    were then cloned into the pJTU1278 vector at the Bam HI/ Kpn I sites
0.5 g/L MgSO4 ·7H2 O, 0.5 g/L K2 HPO4 ·3H2 O, 0.5 g/L NaCl, 1 g/L     using a NovoRec® plus One step PCR Cloning Kit (Cat. No NR005,
KNO3 ·3H2 O, 0.01 g/L FeSO4 ·7H2 O, 20 g/L agar) to allow sporulation    Novoprotein Scientiﬁc  Inc., China), generating the editing plasmid
at 30 °C. For conjugation and electroporation, ISP4 agar [10 g/L solu-     pCRISPR-tg-1.
ble starch, 2 g/L (NH4 )2 SO4 , 1 g/L K2 HPO4 ·3H2 O, 2 g/L CaCO3 , 1 g/L       The editing plasmid was introduced into S. mobaraensis using elec-
NaCl, 1 g/L MgSO4 ·7H2 O, 100 𝜇L/L inorganic salt solution (10 g/L     troporation [ 52 ]. After cultivation at 30 °C for 5–7 d, the transformants
ZnSO4 ·7H2 O, 10 g/L MnCl2 ·4H2 O, 10 g/L FeSO4 ·7H2 O), 20 g/L agar]    were inoculated onto Gauze’s Medium NO.1 agar supplemented with
supplemented with 5% 2 × YT broth (16 g/L tryptone, 10 g/L yeast ex-    10 𝜇g/mL thiostrepton and 50 𝜇g/mL trimethoprim. To conﬁrm the
tract, 5 g/L NaCl) and 20 mM MgCl2 was used for transformant growth    complete deletion of the target gene and isolate pure mutants, transfor-
at 30 °C. For plasmid construction and conjugation, Escherichia coli DH5 𝛼    mants were screened via colony PCR using two primer pairs: one pair
and ET12567/pUZ8002 were cultured in LB medium or on LB agar at    ﬂanking the upstream and downstream homology arms (outside PCR)
37 °C with the appropriate antibiotics.                               and the other targeting the internal regions of the target gene or gene
                                                                                cluster (inside PCR). The PCR products were analyzed using agarose gel
2.2. Bioinformatics analysis of the endogenous CRISPR-Cas system             electrophoresis. A pure genotype deletion was deﬁned as the presence
                                                                              of only outside PCR products and the absence of inside PCR products.
   To investigate the endogenous CRISPR-Cas system in S. mobaraen-    The simultaneous detection of both products indicates mixed-genotype
sis IPIO2, its genome sequence was analyzed using CRISPRCasFinder     transformants, whereas the presence of only the inside PCR products
( https://crisprcas.i2bc.paris-saclay.fr/CrisprCasFinder/Index ) with the     suggests deletion failure owing to unsuccessful recombination or plas-
default parameters [ 49 ]. One CRISPR-Cas locus of type I-E was identi-    mid instability. Editing eﬃciency was calculated as the percentage of
ﬁed in the analysis.                                                          correctly edited transformants among all the PCR-identiﬁed transfor-
   To determine the protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) sequences,     mants.
the  identiﬁed CRISPR  spacers were  submitted  to  CRISPRTarget        For plasmid curing, transformants with the correct gene or gene clus-
( http://bioanalysis.otago.ac.nz/CRISPRTarget/crispr_analysis.html)  to      ter deletions were transferred onto Gauze’s Medium NO.1 agar without
search for matched protospacers [ 50 ]. Frequently recurring ﬂanking     thiostrepton. After one passage, single colonies were streaked onto agar
sequences of these protospacers were regarded as potential PAMs. All     plates with or without thiostrepton. Colonies that grew on plates with-
ﬂanking sequences (–8 to –1 nt) were aligned and visualized using     out thiostrepton but failed to grow on plates with thiostrepton were
WebLogo ( https://weblogo.berkeley.edu/logo.cgi ) [ 51 ] to illustrate se-     considered to have lost the editing plasmids.
quence conservation and motif distribution.


2.3. Plasmid interference assays                                                2.5. RNA sequencing


   Plasmid interference assays were performed to validate targeted        For RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), mycelia were harvested after 4, 12,
cleavage activity of the endogenous CRISPR-Cas system (Fig. S1). The     16, 24, 28, and 42 h of IPIO2 fermentation. Total RNA extraction and
interference plasmids were constructed by inserting spacer 15 (S15)    RNA-seq were conducted by Shanghai Personal Biotechnology Co., Ltd.,
or spacer 10 (S10) into the integrative vector pSET152. Oligonu-    and the transcription level of each gene was quantiﬁed as normalized
cleotides containing the S15 or S10 sequences were synthesized with     fragments per kilobase million (FPKM).


                                                                        2


[PDF physical page 3]
D. Wang, M. Sun, Q. Meng et al.                                                                                                                 Engineering Microbiology 6 (2026) 100302


2.6. Proteome determination                                            high performance liquid chromatography time-of-ﬂight mass spectrom-
                                                                             etry (Agilent 6546 LC/Q-TOF) using an Agilent Eclipse Plus-C18 col-
   For proteomic analysis, mycelia were collected after 16, 24, and 42 h   umn (5 μm, 4.6 × 150 mm). The column temperature was maintained
of IPIO2 fermentation. Intracellular proteins were extracted and ana-     at 30 °C, and the ﬂow rate was set at 0.4 mL/min. A sample volume of
lyzed at the Analysis and Testing Center of Shanghai Jiao Tong Univer-    10 μL was injected for analysis. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid
sity. Proteomic identiﬁcation was achieved through peptide database     in deionized water, and mobile phase B was acetonitrile.
searching using BLAST. The expression of each protein was quantiﬁed       Pseudouridimycin analysis: Pseudouridimycin was detected in pos-
based on the peak intensities of the corresponding peptides, reﬂecting      itive ion mode ( m/z 487.1896 [M + H]+ ), and chromatographic separa-
the normalized abundance of each protein.                                  tion was performed using the following gradient elution program: 0–
                                                            20 min, 5–95% B; 20–23 min, isocratic at 95% B; 23–25 min, isocratic
2.7. Fermentation and enzyme activity analysis of TGase                       at 5% B.
                                                                                   Piericidin A1 analysis: Piericidin A1 was detected in the positive ion
   IPIO2 and its derivative strains were incubated on Gauze’s Medium    mode ( m/z 416.2795 [M + H]+ ), and chromatographic separation was
NO.1 agar at 30 °C for 7 d to induce sporulation. Approximately 109     achieved using the following gradient elution program: 0–5 min, iso-
colony-forming units of spores from one agar plate were inoculated into     cratic at 20% B; 5–35 min, 20–80% B; 35–45 min, 80–100% B; 45–
30 mL of seed medium (20 g/L glycerol, 6 g/L yeast, 25 g/L ﬁsh peptone,    55 min, isocratic at 100% B; 55–60 min, isocratic at 20% B.
2 g/L MgSO4 ·7H2 O, 2 g/L K2 HPO4 ·3H2 O, pH 7.4) and cultured in a
rotary shaker at 30 °C and 220 rpm for 24 h. Subsequently, 3 mL of     3. Results
the resulting seed culture was transferred to 30 mL of the fermentation
medium (same as the seed medium) in triplicate and incubated under     3.1. Functional characterization of the endogenous type I-E CRISPR-Cas
the same conditions for 36–42 h until TGase activity began to decline.      system in S. mobaraensis IPIO2
   TGase activity was measured using a colorimetric method, as previ-
ously described [ 53 ]. The fermentation cultures were ﬁrst centrifuged,       Endogenous CRISPR-Cas systems are promising candidates for the
and the supernatants were collected and diluted appropriately. Then,    development of a simpliﬁed and eﬀective genome-editing platform
200 𝜇L of the diluted sample was mixed with 2 mL of preheated solution     [ 40 , 54 , 55 ]. Given that the heterologous CRISPR-Cas9 system does not
A (0.2 M Tris–HCl, 0.1 M hydroxylamine hydrochloride, 0.01 M reduced    work well in S. mobaraensis , we sought to characterize and harness its na-
glutathione, 0.03 M N - 𝛼-CBZ-Gln-Gly, pH 6.0) and incubated in a water     tive CRISPR-Cas system as a potential genome-editing tool. Bioinformat-
bath at 37 °C for 10 min. The reaction was terminated by adding 2 mL of      ics analysis of the S. mobaraensis IPIO2 genome revealed a complete type
solution B, a mixture of 3 M HCl, 12% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA),     I-E CRISPR-Cas locus, comprising a CRISPR array and an associated cas
and 5% (w/v) FeCl3 in 0.1 M HCl (all components were mixed at equal    gene cluster ( Fig. 1 a). The cas genes, including cas3, cas8, cas11, cas7,
volumes). The OD525 value of the reaction products was measured using     cas5, cas6, cas1 , and cas2 , are involved in the interference and adap-
a spectrophotometer (TECAN, Spark®). Enzyme activity was quantiﬁed     tation phases of the CRISPR-Cas system. Consistent with the canonical
using a hydroxamate standard curve.                                       architecture of type I-E CRISPR-Cas systems [ 56 , 57 ], the cascade com-
   SDS-PAGE was performed using 12% resolving gels with 5% stacking     plex is composed of Cas5, Cas6, Cas7, Cas8, and Cas11, which form a
gels in a Tris-glycine-SDS buﬀer. Samples were mixed with 5 × SDS    Cascade–crRNA complex. Subsequently, the Cas8 subunit recognizes the
sample loading buﬀer containing 5% 𝛽-mercaptoethanol and boiled for   PAM sequence and binds to the target DNA, and the helicase-nuclease
5 min, and 5 𝜇L of each sample was loaded per well. Electrophoresis    Cas3 is recruited to the Cascade–DNA complex and progressively de-
was conducted at 80 V for stacking and at 120 V for separation until     grades the target DNA [ 56 , 58 ] (Fig. S2). Additionally, RNA-seq proﬁling
the dye front reached the bottom of the gel. Gels were stained with 1%    conﬁrmed that all eight cas genes were transcriptionally active during
Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 for 10 min and destained overnight with     fermentation (Fig. S3), supporting the functional potential of this en-
10% acetic acid. Protein bands were visualized using an Illumination    dogenous system.
panel, and TGase was identiﬁed based on its known molecular weight       The CRISPR array consists of 19 conserved 29-bp repeats, which are
of 37.4 kDa.                                                             predicted to form stable stem-loop secondary structures ( Fig. 1 b) and
                                                                         are interspersed with 18 unique spacers (designated as spacer 1 through
2.8. Biomass measurement                                                18, average length of 32 bp) ( Fig. 1 a, Fig. S4). To assess the targeting
                                                                             potential of these spacers, all 18 spacers were analyzed via BLAST us-
   Biomass was measured by collecting 1 mL of the culture from each     ing CRISPRTarget. Seven spacers (spacers 1, 3, 8, 10, 13, 14, and 15)
replicate at 42 h of fermentation. Following centrifugation, the super-    showed high homology with sequences from exogenous plasmids, sug-
natant was discarded, and the resulting cell pellet was dried to a constant     gesting their possible original targets for CRISPR interference (Fig. S5).
weight.                                                                    In addition to spacer–protospacer complementarity, DNA cleavage in
                                                                      type I systems requires the presence of a PAM adjacent to the 5 ′ -end of
2.9. Determination of the intracellular amino acid pool                       the protospacer, which can discriminate between self and non-self DNA
                                                              and initiate the process of identifying and cleaving target DNA [ 59 , 60 ].
   The culture broth (1 mL) was collected after 28 h and centrifuged at    To determine the speciﬁc PAM sequence recognized by this system, we
13,800 × g for 5 min. The harvested mycelia were washed twice with     ﬁrst analyzed the 5 ′ -ﬂanking sequences of all matched protospacers us-
distilled water and resuspended in 1 mL of HCl/TCA solution (0.1 M     ing WebLogo, which revealed the nucleotide frequencies of the putative
HCl/10% TCA; 1:2, v/v). The cell suspensions were disrupted by soni-   PAM sequences ( Fig. 1 c). To unambiguously determine the functional
cation on ice for 10 min and centrifuged at 13,800 × g for 20 min. The   PAM sequence and validate interference activity, we conducted plas-
supernatants were subjected to quantitative amino acid analysis using    mid interference assays (Fig. S1). Nine candidate PAM sequences (5 ′ -
an automatic amino acid analyzer (Hitachi l -8900–1, Japan).           GAT-3 ′ , 5 ′ -GAC-3 ′ , 5 ′ -GGT-3 ′ , 5 ′ -GGC-3 ′ , 5 ′ -AAT-3 ′ , 5 ′ -AAC-3 ′ , 5 ′ -AGT-
                                                            3 ′ , 5 ′ -AGC-3 ′ , and 5 ′ -AAG-3 ′ ), derived from the WebLogo analysis re-
2.10. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of                       sults, were separately cloned into pSET152 immediately upstream of
pseudouridimycin and piericidin A1 production                              the protospacer (spacer 15). The native repeat-derived sequence 5 ′ -CCC-
                                                            3 ′ located immediately upstream of the native spacers was used as the
   The fermentation cultures were harvested after 42 h, and extraction     negative control. Spacer 15 was selected as the test object because it
was performed using methanol. The extracts were then analyzed via    matched most protospacers (Fig. S5a). Ten interference plasmids and


                                                                        3


[PDF physical page 4]
D. Wang, M. Sun, Q. Meng et al.                                                                                                                 Engineering Microbiology 6 (2026) 100302





Fig. 1. Characterization of the type I-E CRISPR-Cas system in Streptomyces mobaraensis IPIO2. a. Genomic organization of type I-E CRISPR-Cas locus, including
the cas gene cluster ( cas3-cas8-cas11-cas7-cas5-cas6-cas1-cas2 ) and the CRISPR array consisting of 19 repeats (black diamonds) and 18 spacers (rectangular colored
squares). b. Predicted stem-loop structure of the crRNA in the endogenous type I-E CRISPR-Cas system. c. The putative protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) derived
from bioinformatics analysis of protospacer 5 ′ -ﬂanking sequences using WebLogo. d, e. Plasmid interference assays validating the functional PAM. The number of
exconjugants per 108 spores for each interference plasmid were averaged from two biological replicates. Gray represents the negative control; red indicates the
functional PAM (5 ′ -AAC-3 ′ ) recognized by this the type I-E CRISPR-Cas system.



the vector plasmid pSET152 were then individually transformed into S.    a mini-CRISPR array and two donor fragments (UHA and DHA) ﬂank-
mobaraensis IPIO2. The plasmid harboring the PAM 5 ′ -AAC-3 ′ and spacer     ing the tg gene into the replicative plasmid pJTU1278 [ 31 ] ( Fig. 2 a).
15 showed signiﬁcantly lower transformation eﬃciency than that of the    The mini-CRISPR array contains a repeat-spacer-repeat sequence, with
negative control ( Fig. 1 d, Fig. S6). A similar reduction was observed for     expression driven by the native promoter of the CRISPR array. Two 32-
the plasmid harboring the PAM 5 ′ -AAC-3 ′ and spacer 10, further sug-    bp spacers immediately downstream of the 5 ′ -AAC-3 ′ site were selected
gesting 5 ′ -AAC-3 ′ as the PAM sequence for this system ( Fig. 1 e, Fig. S6).     within the tg coding region. The control plasmid 1278-tg, containing
   These ﬁndings indicate that the endogenous type I-E CRISPR-Cas     only two donor fragments, was then constructed ( Fig. 2 b).
system possesses target-cleavage activity and recognizes 5 ′ -AAC-3 ′ as        After introduction into S. mobaraensis IPIO2 via electroporation,
its functional PAM. Furthermore, the S. mobaraensis IPIO2 genome was    pCRISPR-tg yielded fewer transformants than the control plasmid 1278-
found to contain 104,062 5 ′ -AAC-3 ′ sites, with an average of 15.8 sites      tg, suggesting that CRISPR-mediated targeting resulted in cell death.
per gene, highlighting the potential utility of this native CRISPR-Cas     Next, 10 transformants for each pCRISPR-tg plasmid were selected from
system for targeted genome editing in S. mobaraensis .                      the thiostrepton-containing media and veriﬁed via PCR ampliﬁcation
                                                                       using two sets of primers: one set ﬂanking the tg gene (TG-out-F/R) and
3.2. Highly eﬃcient gene deletion based on the endogenous type I-E           another set targeting internal regions of the gene (TG-in-F/R). For both
CRISPR-Cas system                                                   pCRISPR-tg-1 and pCRISPR-tg-2, seven out of 10 transformants (70%)
                                                                 produced a short DNA band of the expected size ( ∼460 bp) with the
   The tg gene, encoding TGase, was selected as the initial target in S.    ﬂanking primers and showed no bands with the internal primers, indi-
mobaraensis IPIO2 for developing a CRISPR-based genome-editing tool,     cating successful deletion of the tg gene. For pCRISPR-tg-1–9 transfor-
as TGase activity can be readily quantiﬁed using a colorimetric method     mants, both wild-type and tg -deleted bands were observed, identifying
[ 53 ]. First, we constructed the CRISPR plasmid pCRISPR-tg by inserting       it as a mixed-genotype strain ( Fig. 2 c). By contrast, no deletions were


                                                                        4


[PDF physical page 5]
D. Wang, M. Sun, Q. Meng et al.                                                                                                                 Engineering Microbiology 6 (2026) 100302





Fig. 2. Repurposing the native type I-E CRISPR-Cas system for gene deletion in Streptomyces mobaraensis IPIO2. a. Schematic diagram of the editing plasmid pCRISPR-
tg for tg gene deletion. b. Schematic diagram of the homologous recombination plasmid 1278-tg for tg gene deletion. c. (i) Two spacers within the tg gene were
selected for CRISPR plasmid construction, along with two pairs of primers used to verify the tg deletion mutants. (ii, iii) PCR veriﬁcation of tg deletion eﬃciency in
transformants obtained from thiostrepton selection (Round 1) using the primers TG-out-F/R (ii) and TG-in-F/R (iii). Two transformants carrying the control plasmid
1278-tg served as negative controls. M: 1 kb plus DNA marker; P: pCRISPR-tg-1/2 plasmid as template; G: IPIO2 genome as template. Lanes 1-–10: individual
transformants. d. Transglutaminase (TGase) activity assay of the fermentation cultures of all transformants. Transformants with successful tg deletion lost the ability
to produce TGase, while the mixed-genotype transformants exhibited a marked decrease in TGase activity. e. PCR analysis of single colonies derived from pCRISPR-
tg-1–1 transformants after plasmid curing (Round 2) using primers TG-out-F/R. M: 1 kb plus DNA marker; P: pCRISPR-tg-1 plasmid as template; G: IPIO2 genome (as
template). Lanes 1–−19: individual colonies. f. PCR analysis of single colonies derived from 1278-tg-1 transformants after plasmid curing (Round 2) using primers
TG-out-F/R. M: 1 kb plus DNA marker; P: 1278-tg plasmid as template; G: IPIO2 genome (as template). Lanes 1–−19: individual colonies.




observed for the control plasmid 1278-tg ( Fig. 2 c). Additionally, the        Next, we evaluated the eﬃciency of marker-less mutant isolation
TGase activity of the transformants was measured. Consistent with the     following plasmid curing. pCRISPR-tg-1–1 (conﬁrmed tg deletion) and
PCR ampliﬁcation results, the tg -deleted transformants exhibited no de-     1278-tg-1 (single-crossover) transformants were subjected to nonselec-
tectable TGase activity, conﬁrming successful gene deletion, whereas     tive sporulation to allow plasmid curing. Nineteen single colonies of
the mixed-genotype pCRISPR-tg-1–9 transformant showed markedly re-    each strain were randomly selected and analyzed via PCR using the
duced activity ( Fig. 2 d).                                             ﬂanking primer pair TG-out-F/R. All 19 colonies (100%) derived from



                                                                        5


[PDF physical page 6]
D. Wang, M. Sun, Q. Meng et al.                                                                                                                 Engineering Microbiology 6 (2026) 100302


pCRISPR-tg-1–1 transformants retained the tg -deleted genotype, indi-     food-grade TGase applications. To eliminate this hazard and demon-
cating stable and complete gene deletion ( Fig. 2 e). In contrast, approx-     strate the capacity of this system for large-fragment deletion, an 11.8-
imately half (10/19, 52.6%) of the colonies derived from control 1278-    kb fragment within the pum BGC was chosen as the target. The CRISPR
tg-1 transformants exhibited the desired tg deletion, whereas the remain-    plasmid pCRISPR-pum was constructed by cloning a spacer targeting the
ing colonies reverted to the wild-type genotype ( Fig. 2 f).                    central region of this 11.8-kb target fragment, together with ﬂanking
   Taken together, these results demonstrate that the endogenous type    homologous recombination arms, into the pJTU1278 backbone, which
I-E CRISPR-Cas system enables eﬃcient and precise genome editing in    was then introduced into S. mobaraensis IPIO2 ( Fig. 4 a). Compared with
S. mobaraensis , substantially outperforming traditional homologous re-     that for single-gene deletion, transformation with pCRISPR-pum yielded
combination methods in both editing eﬃciency and mutant screening.     fewer transformants (only four; data not shown). All four genes were
                                                                      veriﬁed via colony PCR and DNA sequencing. Notably, 75% of the trans-
                                                                     formants (3/4) showed successful deletion of the pum BGC ( Fig. 4 b, Fig.
3.3. Harnessing comparative proteomics and the native CRISPR-Cas system
                                                                         S10), and the absence of pseudouridimycin in their fermentation prod-
to enhance TGase production
                                                                            ucts was conﬁrmed via LC-MS analysis ( Fig. 4 c).
                                                                               In addition, the production of another secondary metabolite, pieri-
   Comparative proteomic analyses of S. mobaraensis IPIO2 were per-
                                                                             cidin A1, was conﬁrmed in IPIO2 using antiSMASH and LC-MS analysis
formed at 16, 24, and 42 h of fermentation, corresponding to the early,
                                                                        (Table S5). Piericidin A1 is a potent inhibitor of the mitochondrial and
logarithmic, and late stationary phases of TGase production, respec-
                                                                               bacterial respiratory chain complex I and acts as a ubiquinone analog
tively (Fig. S7). Time-series analysis was then performed to identify
                                                                             that disrupts electron transport and oxidative phosphorylation [ 63 ]. Its
diﬀerentially expressed proteins potentially involved in TGase biosyn-
                                                     BGC ( pie BGC, cluster 29) is relatively large, spanning approximately
thesis. Among the proteins exhibiting consistently reduced abundance
                                                            50 kb (Table S5). To evaluate the feasibility of deleting larger fragments
( ≥ 2-fold decrease in both the 24 h/16 h and 42 h/24 h comparisons,
                                                                     while eliminating piericidin A1 production, we constructed pCRISPR-
p < 0.05), ﬁve with known functions were selected for further inves-
                                                                                   pie, designed to delete a 40-kb fragment within the pie BGC, with a
tigation ( Fig. 3 a). These candidates included an amino acid adeny-
                                                                        spacer targeting the central region of the target fragment ( Fig. 4 d). This
lation domain-containing protein (SMDS_42), a ketosynthase chain-
                                                                    plasmid was then introduced into the IPIO2 Δpum strain, and ﬁve result-
length factor (SMDS_1045) and  its co-transcribed acyl carrier pro-
                                                                         ing transformants were subjected to PCR veriﬁcation and DNA sequenc-
tein (SMDS_1044), a hemin transporter (SMDS_1204), and an RNA
                                                                                 ing. Here, 80% of the transformants (4/5) showed successful deletion
polymerase-binding protein (SMDS_957) (Fig. S8, Table S4). Consider-
                                                                              of the 40-kb fragment of the pie BGC ( Fig. 4 e, Fig. S10), which was
ing their reduced abundance during TGase production, we hypothesized
                                                                             further corroborated by LC-MS analysis ( Fig. 4 f). The pum and pie BGC-
that these proteins function as negative regulators or metabolic competi-
                                                                         deleted mutant, IPIO2 Δpum Δpie, exhibited a 17% increase in TGase
tors, thereby limiting TGase production.
                                                                             yield compared with that of the parental IPIO2 strain ( Fig. 4 g), with no
   To test this hypothesis, ﬁve genes were individually disrupted us-
                                                                     apparent diﬀerence in cell growth ( Fig. 4 h). Analysis of the intracellu-
ing the endogenous CRISPR-Cas system. Four pCRISPR-based knockout
                                                                                     lar amino acid pools revealed that the deletion of these two BGCs led
plasmids were constructed, one of which was designed to simultane-
                                                                            to a signiﬁcantly higher accumulation of most amino acids, resulting
ously delete the co-transcribed genes SMDS_1044 and SMDS_1045 , and
                                                                              in their increased availability for TGase synthesis (Fig. S11) and likely
then introduced into the parental IPIO2 strain (Fig. S9). Subsequent de-
                                                                          contributing to its enhanced yield. Therefore, removing these clusters
tection of TGase activity in the four resulting mutants revealed notable
                                                                        generates a safer TGase-producing strain and confers a promotive eﬀect
increases in TGase production compared with that in the control. Specif-
                                                             on TGase production.
ically, the inactivation of SMDS_42 led to an 18.5% increase in TGase
                                                                                   Collectively, these results demonstrated the high eﬃciency of the
yield, and the simultaneous deletion of SMDS_1044 and SMDS_1045 and
                                                                endogenous CRISPR-Cas system in mediating large-fragment deletions
individual deletions of SMDS_1204 and SMDS_957 resulted in an approx-
                                                                      ranging from 10 to 40 kb in S. mobaraensis .
imately 8.5% increase in yield ( Fig. 3 b). SDS-PAGE analysis of the fer-
mentation cultures of these four mutants revealed more intense TGase
                                                                           4. Discussion
bands than those of the control ( Fig. 3 c), conﬁrming the enhanced pro-
duction levels. Additionally, all mutants exhibited a modest but consis-
                                                                  Advancements in metabolic engineering depend heavily on the ac-
tent increase in biomass ( Fig. 3 d). These ﬁndings demonstrate a com-
                                                                                     cessibility of eﬃcient and reliable genetic manipulation tools. Here, we
parative proteomics-informed approach for increasing TGase yield in S.
                                                                          characterized and repurposed the native type I-E CRISPR-Cas system of
mobaraensis IPIO2.
                                                                                    S. mobaraensis as an eﬃcient genome-editing tool, which achieved over
                                                   75% editing eﬃciency for gene deletions. CRISPR-Cas systems such as
3.4. The endogenous type I-E CRISPR-Cas system eﬃciently deletes large       type II Cas9 and type V Cas12 are commonly used for genome edit-
DNA fragments                                                           ing in Streptomyces [ 32 , 33 , 64–66 ]. However, their application is of-
                                                                        ten constrained by the severe toxicity resulting from oﬀ-target eﬀects
   Genomic analysis of IPIO2 using antiSMASH version 7.1.0 revealed    and the low transformation eﬃciency of large editing plasmids, partic-
the presence of multiple secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters     ularly in industrial strains [ 34 , 35 , 54 , 67 ]. In contrast, type I systems,
(BCGs). Given the diverse biological activities of secondary metabolites     highly prevalent in actinomycetes, account for approximately 98% of
[ 61 ], these gene clusters pose potential safety concerns for food-grade      all the CRISPR-Cas systems identiﬁed in Streptomyces [ 54 ], suggesting
TGase production. To address this issue, the eﬃcient deletion of BCGs     their superior compatibility and reduced cytotoxicity. Furthermore, the
responsible for these potentially toxic secondary metabolites is neces-     genome-integrated cascade complex facilitates streamlined genetic ma-
sary.                                                                      nipulations using a compact plasmid carrying only a synthetic guide
   The BCG of pseudouridimycin ( pum BGC, cluster 1) was identiﬁed   RNA (sgRNA) cassette, thereby improving both transformation eﬃ-
in IPIO2 using antiSMASH, and its production during fermentation was     ciency and editing feasibility.
conﬁrmed via liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) (Ta-        Conventional homologous recombination requires sequential screen-
ble S5). Pseudouridimycin is a nucleoside analog antibiotic that ex-     ing for single-crossover integrants, followed by counterselection for
hibits selective physiological toxicity by potently inhibiting bacterial     double-crossover mutants after plasmid curing ( Fig. 2 b). The theoret-
RNA polymerase through competition with UTP for the nucleotide ad-      ical probability of obtaining a mutant versus a wild-type revertant after
dition site, thereby blocking transcription and bacterial growth [ 62 ].    a double crossover is up to 50%. However, this method is inherently
Thus, its production during fermentation presents safety concerns for    time-consuming and ineﬃcient owing to its reliance on low-frequency


                                                                        6


[PDF physical page 7]
D. Wang, M. Sun, Q. Meng et al.                                                                                                                 Engineering Microbiology 6 (2026) 100302





Fig. 3. Deletion of the downregulated genes identiﬁed through comparative proteomics. a. Volcano plot of the comparative proteomics data. Each dot represents a
quantiﬁed protein. Blue dots indicate the expression ratio of at 24 h versus that at 16 h, and red dots indicate the expression ratio of at 42 h versus that at 24 h. The
horizontal dashed line represents the signiﬁcance threshold (p ≤ 0.05; —log10 p-value ≥ 1.3), and the vertical dashed lines denote the 2-fold increase (right, log2
fold change ≥ 1) or decrease (left, log2 fold change ≤ –−1) thresholds. Six proteins ( ≥ 2-fold decrease in both 24 h/16 h and 42 h/24 comparisons, p ≤ 0.05) are
labeled with their protein IDs. b. Transglutaminase (TGase) activity of four mutants (IPIO2 Δ42, IPIO2 Δ1044/1045, IPIO2 Δ1204, and IPIO2 Δ957) and the wild-type
IPIO2. Error bars represent the mean ± SD standard deviation (n = 3 biological replicates). ∗ p < 0.05; ∗ ∗ p < 0.01; ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001; ns, not signiﬁcant (two-tailed paired
t -tests). c. SDS-PAGE analysis of the fermentation cultures of four mutants and the wild-type IPIO2. Denser TGase bands in the mutant strains indicate enhanced
TGase production. d. Biomass of four mutants and the wild-type IPIO2. n = 3 biological replicates.


homologous recombination events. In contrast, the replicative plasmid      tal validation. After prediction via CRISPRTarget, we conﬁrmed that this
pJTU1278, mediating homologous recombination-based deletion in S.    system recognizes 5 ′ -AAC-3 ′ as its preferred PAM through plasmid inter-
mobaraensis , achieved a maximum deletion eﬃciency of 52.6% ( Fig. 2 f),     ference assays, which aligns with the canonical PAM observed in other
which is consistent with this theoretical limit. Moreover, the segrega-     well-characterized type I-E systems [ 39 , 68 ]. To utilize this endogenous
tion of wild-type and mutant colonies necessitates extensive screen-    system for genome editing, we constructed a replicative editing plas-
ing, which further prolongs the process. In contrast, the endogenous    mid, pCRISPR, using the pJTU1278 backbone. This plasmid includes an
type I-E CRISPR-Cas system developed in the present study signiﬁcantly    sgRNA cassette consisting of a promoter, repeat-spacer-repeat, and a ter-
enhanced both the eﬃciency and simplicity of genome editing (Ta-     minator. The promoter originates from the endogenous CRISPR array to
ble S6). In the ﬁrst round, CRISPR-mediated one-step editing directly     ensure normal transcription in S. mobaraensis . The spacer length was set
enriched the successful editing events, bypassing the need for time-     to 32 bp, matching the average size of natural spacers. This design was
consuming counterselection. More importantly, after plasmid elimina-    conﬁrmed to support high editing eﬃciency. Shorter spacers may im-
tion, all CRISPR-edited colonies stably maintained the intended dele-    prove transformation eﬃciency but often reduce editing eﬃciency [ 39 ].
tion, thereby avoiding the extensive secondary screening required in     Therefore, further optimization of the spacer length may help strike a
conventional approaches. Thus, the endogenous CRISPR-Cas system im-     balance between transformation and editing eﬃciency.
proves editing eﬃciency and streamlines the overall workﬂow, provid-     We also observed fewer transformants with the editing plasmid
ing a robust and time-eﬃcient platform for genetic manipulation in S.    pCRISPR-tg than with the control plasmid 1278-tg, suggesting that
mobaraensis .                                                       CRISPR-mediated targeting resulted in cell death, which is likely ow-
   While the consensus PAM for type I-E systems is generally reported     ing to the nonspeciﬁc endonuclease activity of Cas3 [ 57 ]. Therefore,
as 5 ′ -AAN-3 ′ [ 39 , 68 ], the speciﬁc PAM preference requires experimen-     the expression and activity of Cas3 must be tightly controlled to ensure



                                                                        7


[PDF physical page 8]
D. Wang, M. Sun, Q. Meng et al.                                                                                                                 Engineering Microbiology 6 (2026) 100302





Fig. 4. The endogenous CRISPR-Cas- system mediated mediates genome editing for large DNA deletions. a. Schematic illustration of the pum biosynthesis gene
cluster (BGC) (11.8 kb) deletion in IPIO2. b. PCR screening of four pum BGC-deleted transformants obtained through thiostrepton selection using two pairs of primers
indicated in Fig. Fig. 4 a. The predicted size of the PCR products was 828 bp (yellow squarerectangle) using for pum-out-F/R, while no band was observed for using
pum-in-F/R, in the deletion strains. M: 1 kb plus DNA marker; P: pCRISPR-pum (as a control); G: Genomic DNA of IPIO2 (as a control). Lanes 1–−4: diﬀerent
numbers of the transformants. c. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis of pseudouridimycin ( m/z 487.1896 [M + H] + ) from the fermentation
extracts of the IPIO2 Δpum transformants. d. Schematic illustration of the pie BGC (40.1 kb) deletion in IPIO2 Δpum. e. PCR veriﬁcation of ﬁve pie BGC-deleted
transformants obtained through thiostrepton selection using two pairs of primers indicated in Fig. Fig. 4 d The predicted size of PCR products was 696 bp (yellow
square rectangle) using for pie-out-F/R, while no band was observed using for pie-in-F/R, in the deletion strains. M: 1 kb plus DNA marker; P: pCRISPR-pie (as
a control); G: Genomic DNA of IPIO2 Δpum (as a control). Lanes 1–−5: diﬀerent numbers of the transformants. f. LC-MS analysis of piericidin A1 ( m/z 416.2795
[M + H] + ) from the fermentation extracts of the IPIO2 Δpum Δpie transformants. g. TGase activity of the edited strain IPIO2 Δpum Δpie. h. Biomass of IPIO2 Δpum Δpie.
Error bars represent the mean ± SD standard deviation (n = 3 biological replicates). ∗ p < 0.05; ∗ ∗ p < 0.01; ∗ ∗ ∗ p < 0.001; ns, not signiﬁcant (two-tailed paired
t -tests).



                                                                        8


[PDF physical page 9]
D. Wang, M. Sun, Q. Meng et al.                                                                                                                 Engineering Microbiology 6 (2026) 100302


speciﬁc targeting and avoid imposing a growth burden on the host. This    Declaration of competing interest
can be achieved using inducible promoters to regulate Cas3 expression
or sgRNA transcription. Furthermore, the nonspeciﬁc endonuclease ac-       The author Linquan Bai is an Editorial Board Member for Engineer-
tivity of Cas3 raises the possibility of oﬀ-target cleavage at unintended     ing Microbiology and was not involved in the editorial review or the
genomic sites. An accurate assessment of oﬀ-target events is required,     decision to publish this article.
involving experimental validation including the whole-genome sequenc-
ing of multiple-edited strains [ 32 ].                                CRediT authorship contribution statement
   The primary goal of developing this type I-E CRISPR-Cas system
is to optimize TGase production in S. mobaraensis . Advances in multi-      Dan Wang: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Methodology, In-
omics technologies have enabled the genome-wide identiﬁcation of can-     vestigation, Data curation. Mengjun Sun: Validation, Methodology, In-
didates for rational metabolic engineering [ 24 , 69 , 70 ]. In this study,     vestigation. Qingxu Meng: Methodology, Investigation. Qianjin Kang:
we analyzed the dynamic changes in intracellular protein abundance     Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Methodology. Linquan Bai:
by comparing proteomic proﬁles at three key time points (16, 24,     Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Fund-
and 42 h) during fermentation. Five proteins showing consistently re-     ing acquisition, Data curation, Conceptualization.
duced abundance concurrent with TGase production were selected as
candidate deletion targets for enhanced TGase production. The dele-    Acknowledgments
tion of these targets led to an increase in TGase yield, demonstrat-
ing that comparative proteomics provides a reliable strategy for strain        This work was ﬁnancially supported by the Shanghai Municipal Sci-
improvement. Notably, the deletion of SMDS_42 resulted in a greater    ence and Technology Major Project, Shanghai Municipal Commission
increase in TGase production (18.5%) than that after the deletion of     of Science and Technology ( 24HC2810200), and Dongsheng Biotech
other genes (8.5%), which may be attributed to the higher abundance     (Taixing) Co., Ltd. to L.B. We thank the Core Facility and Technical Ser-
of SMDS_42 identiﬁed using the proteomics data (Fig. S8). Conse-     vice Center for SLSB and the Instrumental Analysis Center in SJTU for
quently, eliminating this highly expressed protein may lead to the mit-     data collection.
igation of its strong inhibitory eﬀect on TGase production. These ﬁnd-
ings are consistent with those of previous studies. For example, com-
                                                             Supplementary materials
parative proteomic analysis across four fermentation time points in
S. pogona identiﬁed a novel transcriptional regulator, Sp13016, which
                                                                The Supporting Material to this article is available free of charge
was subsequently conﬁrmed to regulate butenyl-spinosyn biosynthe-
                                                                             online. Table  S1-S6;  Fig. S1-S11. Supplementary  material  associ-
sis [ 71 , 72 ]. Collectively, these results indicate that proteomics-guided
                                                                       ated  with  this  article can be  found,  in  the  online  version,  at
metabolic optimization coupled with eﬃcient genome-editing tools rep-
                                                                    doi:10.1016/j.engmic.2026.100302 .
resent an eﬀective strategy for enhancing metabolite production in
bacteria.                                                          References
    S. mobaraensis IPIO2 contains 33 putative secondary metabolite
BGCs (Table S5). As some of these metabolites are cytotoxic, such as       [1] H. Ando, M. Adachi, K. Umeda, A. Matsuura, M. Nonaka, R. Uchio, et al., Puriﬁcation
ketomemicin and avilamycin, their presence poses considerable safety          and characteristics of a novel transglutaminase derived from microorganisms, Agri
                                                                                                      Biol Chem. 53 (10) (1989) 2613–2617 .
risks for food-grade TGase production. To improve the safety proﬁle                                                                                           [2] V. Kolotylo, K. Piwowarek, M. Kieliszek, Production of microbial transglutaminase
of TGase-producing strains, we assessed the capability of this system          by Streptoverticillium cinnamoneum KKP 1658, EXCLI. J. 23 (2024) 655–671 .
for large-fragment deletion and achieved eﬃciencies exceeding 75%       [3] L. Duarte, C.R Matte, C.V Bizarro, M.AZ. Ayub, Transglutaminases: part I-origins,
for large fragments ranging from 10 to 40 kb. The helicase-nuclease            sources, and biotechnological characteristics, World J. Microb. Biot. 36 (1) (2020)
                                                                               15 .
activity of Cas3 enables processive DNA degradation, which likely ac-       [4] S.W Fatima, S.K Khare, Current insight and futuristic vistas of microbial transglu-
counts for the higher eﬃciency observed in this study than with single-           taminase in nutraceutical industry, Microbiol. Res. 215 (2018) 7–14 .
gene deletions [ 73 , 74 ]. Multi-omics analyses revealed that nearly half       [5] K. Yokoyama, N. Nio, Y. Kikuchi, Properties and applications of microbial transglu-
                                                                                               taminase, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 64 (4) (2004) 447–454 .
of these clusters were transcriptionally active during fermentation (data       [6] M.P Savoca, E. Tonoli, A.G Atobatele, E.AM. Verderio, Biocatalysis by transglutami-
not shown). We propose that the iterative deletion of these actively ex-            nases: a review of biotechnological applications, Micromachines-Basel. 9 (2018) 11 .
pressed clusters represents a promising strategy for improving the safety       [7] S.K Chan, T.S Lim, Bioengineering of microbial transglutaminase for biomedical ap-
                                                                                                            plications, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 103 (7) (2019) 2973–2984 .
of TGase-derived products and boosting TGase yield, as supported by our       [8] G. Du, L. Cui, Y. Zhu, J. Chen, Improvement of shrink-resistance and tensile strength
ﬁnding that eliminating pseudouridimycin and piericidin A1 biosynthe-            of wool fabric treated with a novel microbial transglutaminase from Streptomyces
sis increased the amino acid pool for TGase production. The current edit-            hygroscopicus , Enzyme Microb. Technol. 40 (7) (2007) 1753–1757 .
                                                                                           [9] V. Kolotylo, K. Piwowarek, M. Kieliszek, Microbiological transglutaminase: biotech-
ing plasmid, based on the pIJ101 replicon, requires serial passaging for            nological application in the food industry, Open. Life Sci. 18 (1) (2023) 20220737 .
approximately 2 weeks for plasmid curing [ 31 ], limiting the speed of it-      [10] L. Duarte, C.R Matte, C.V Bizarro, M.AZ. Ayub, Review transglutaminases: part II-in-
erative deletions. Therefore, further optimization of the plasmid system,             dustrial applications in food, biotechnology, textiles and leather products, World J.
                                                                                            Microb. Biot. 36 (1) (2020) 11 .
through the use of counterselection elements or temperature-sensitive                                                                                      [11] M. Kieliszek, Microbial transglutaminase in food biotechnology: from biochemical
replicons, may be essential to enable rapid and scalable genetic modiﬁ-          mechanisms to industrial applications, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 110 (1) (2026)
cations in S. mobaraensis .                                                       38 .
   The endogenous type I-E CRISPR-Cas system of S. mobaraensis serves      [12] H. Chang, Z. Zheng, H. Li, Y. Xu, G. Zhen, Y. Zhang, et al., Multi-omics investigation
                                                                                                       of high-transglutaminase production mechanisms in Streptomyces mobaraensis and
as a highly eﬃcient and versatile genome-editing platform within its           co-culture-enhanced fermentation strategies, Front. Microbiol. 16 (2025) 1525673.
native host. This study provides a powerful genetic manipulation plat-      [13] Y. Jiang, Y.-P. Shang, H. Li, C. Zhang, J. Pan, Y.-P. Bai, et al., Enhancing transglu-
form for the rational engineering of high-yield and safe TGase-producing           taminase production of Streptomyces mobaraensis by iterative mutagenesis breeding
                                                                                         with atmospheric and room-temperature plasma (ARTP), Bioresour. Bioprocess. 4
strains.                                                                                             (1) (2017) 37 .
                                                                                      [14] J.R Xavier, K.V Ramana, R.K Sharma, Screening and statistical optimization of me-
                                                                                                 dia ingredients for production of microbial transglutaminase, Life Sci. J. 2 (2017)
                                                                                 216–225 .
Data availability statement                                                     [15] L. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Han, M. Du, Y. Zhang, Z. Feng, et al., Enhancement of trans-
                                                                                            glutaminase production in Streptomyces mobaraensis as achieved by treatment with
   Any data generated or analyzed in this study are either presented in            excessive MgCl2 , Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 93 (6) (2012) 2335–2343 .
                                                                                      [16] M.P Bagagli, H.H Sato, Two-staged temperature and agitation strategy for the pro-
this article and its Supporting Material or are available from the corre-           duction of transglutaminase from a Streptomyces sp. isolated from Brazilian soils,
sponding author upon request.                                                           Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 170 (5) (2013) 1057–1065 .


                                                                        9


[PDF physical page 10]
D. Wang, M. Sun, Q. Meng et al.                                                                                                                 Engineering Microbiology 6 (2026) 100302


[17] M. Z, G. D, J. C, pH control strategy of batch microbial transglutaminase produc-      [46] W. Cheng, J. Li, L. Lei, Y. Zhu, S. Luo, X. Wang, et al., Unlocking genome engineering
      tion with Streptoverticillium mobaraense , Enzyme Microb. Technol. 31 (4) (2002)            in Alcaligenes faecalis by exploiting its native type I-F CRISPR-Cas, Microbiol. Spectr.
     477–481 .                                                                    14 (2026) 5 .
[18] L. Zhang, L. Zhang, H. Yi, M. Du, Y. Zhang, X. Han, et al., Enhancement of transg-      [47] Q. Zhou, Y. Zhao, C. Ke, H. Wang, S. Gao, H. Li, et al., Repurposing endogenous type
     lutaminase production in Streptomyces mobaraensis DSM 40587 by non-nutritional             I-E CRISPR-Cas systems for natural product discovery in Streptomyces , Nat. Commun.
      stress conditions: eﬀects of heat shock, alcohols, and salt treatments, Korean J.         15 (1) (2024) 9833 .
    Chem. Eng. 29 (7) (2012) 913–917 .                                                [48] Z. Liu, J. Liu, Z. Yang, L. Zhu, Z. Zhu, H. Huang, et al., Endogenous CRISPR-Cas
[19] M. Zheng, G. Du, J. Chen, S. Lun, Modelling of temperature eﬀects on batch microbial          mediated in situ genome editing: state-of-the-art and the road ahead for engineering
     transglutaminase fermentation with Streptoverticillium mobaraense , World J. Microb.            prokaryotes, Biotechnol. Adv. 68 (2023) 108241 .
      Biot. 18 (8) (2002) 767–771 .                                                      [49] D. Couvin, A. Bernheim, C. Toﬀano-Nioche, M. Touchon, J. Michalik, B. Neron, et al.,
[20] X. Liu, D. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Zhuang, L. Bai, Identiﬁcation of multiple regulatory           CRISPRCasFinder, an update of CRISRFinder, includes a portable version, enhanced
     genes involved in TGase production in Streptomyces mobaraensis DSM 40587, Eng.          performance and integrates search for Cas proteins, Nucleic. Acids. Res. 46 (W1)
      Microbiol. 3 (4) (2023) 100098 .                                                        (2018) W246–W251 .
[21] X. Shi, H. Yan, F. Yuan, G. Li, J. Liu, C. Li, et al., LexA, an SOS response repressor,      [50] A. Biswas, J.N Gagnon, S.J Brouns, P.C Fineran, C.M Brown, CRISPRTarget: bioin-
      activates TGase synthesis in Streptomyces mobaraensis , Front. Microbiol. 15 (2024)           formatic prediction and analysis of crRNA targets, RNa Biol. 10 (5) (2013) 817–827 .
    1397314 .                                                                        [51] G.E Crooks, G. Hon, J.M Chandonia, S.E Brenner, WebLogo: a sequence logo gener-
[22] T. Xue, M. Sun, D. Chen, X. Yuan, K. Liu, J. Chen, et al., Molecular cloning and             ator, Genome Res. 14 (6) (2004) 1188–1190 .
     overexpression of the transglutaminase gene from Streptomyces mobaraensis , Food      [52] T. Kieser, M.J Bibb, M.J Buttner, K.F Chater, D.A Hopwood, K. Charter, et al., Prac-
      Sci Technol Res. 25 (5) (2019) 687–694 .                                                               tical Streptomyces genetics, John Innes Foundation, 2000 .
[23] F. Yuan, G. Li, Z. Li, M. Li, X. Liu, H. Yang, et al., Eﬃcient biosynthesis of transg-      [53] C. Bourneow, S. Benjakul, H.K A, Hydroxamate-based colorimetric method for di-
     lutaminase in Streptomyces mobaraensis via systematic engineering strategies, Curr.             rect screening of transglutaminase-producing bacteria, World J. Microb. Biot. 28 (5)
      Res. Food Sci. 8 (2024) 100756 .                                                        (2012) 2273–2277 .
[24] X. Liu, Y. Wu, X. Zhang, Q. Kang, Y. Yan, L. Bai, Comparative transcriptome-based      [54] S. Wang, X. Zeng, Y. Jiang, W. Wang, L. Bai, Y. Lu, et al., Unleashing the potential:
     mining of genes involved in the export of polyether antibiotics for titer improvement,           type I CRISPR-Cas systems in actinomycetes for genome editing, Nat. Prod. Rep. 41
      Antibiotics. 11 (2022) 600 .                                                                     (9) (2024) 1441–1455 .
[25] S. Shi, T. Chen, X. Zhao, Comparative transcriptome analysis for metabolic engineer-      [55] J. Zhang, W. Zong, W. Hong, Z.T Zhang, Y. Wang, Exploiting endogenous CRISPR–
      ing, Methods Mol. Biol. 985 (2013) 447–458 .                                           Cas system for multiplex genome editing in Clostridium tyrobutyricum and engineer
[26] L. Wang, H. Yang, M. Wu, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Chen, Enhanced 𝜀 -poly- l -lysine           the strain for high-level butanol production, Metab. Eng. 47 (2018) 49–59 .
     production in Streptomyces albulus through multi-omics-guided metabolic engineer-      [56] H. Morisaka, K. Yoshimi, Y. Okuzaki, P. Gee, Y. Kunihiro, E. Sonpho, et al., CRISPR–
      ing, Biomolecules. 14 (2024) 7 .                                                      Cas3 induces broad and unidirectional genome editing in human cells, Nat. Com-
[27] J. Zhang, N. Wang, W. Chen, W. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Yu, et  al., Integrated         mun. 10 (1) (2019) 5302 .
     metabolomics and transcriptomics reveal metabolites diﬀerence between wild and      [57] C. Xue, D.G Sashital, Mechanisms of type I-E and I-F CRISPR-Cas systems in Enter-
      cultivated Ophiocordyceps sinensis , Food Res. Int. 163 (2023) 112275 .                          obacteriaceae , EcoSal. Plus. 8 (2019) 2 .
[28] H.S Ha, Y.I Hwang, S.U Choi, Application of conjugation using phiC31 att/int system      [58] E. Charpentier, H. Richter, J. van der Oost, M.F White, Biogenesis pathways of RNA
      for Actinoplanes teichomyceticus , a producer of teicoplanin, Biotechnol. Lett. 30 (7)           guides in archaeal and bacterial CRISPR-Cas adaptive immunity, FEMS Microbiol.
     (2008) 1233–1238 .                                                                     Rev. 39 (3) (2015) 428–441 .
[29] Y. Zhao, L. Li, G. Zheng, W. Jiang, Z. Deng, Z. Wang, et al., CRISPR/dCas9-mediated      [59] R. Heler, P. Samai, J.W Modell, C. Weiner, G.W Goldberg, D. Bikard, et al., Cas9
     multiplex gene repression in Streptomyces , Biotechnol. J. 13 (9) (2018) e1800121 .             speciﬁes functional viral targets during CRISPR-Cas adaptation, Nature 519 (7542)
[30] Hindra, D. Yang, Q. Teng, L.B Dong, I. Crnovcic, T. Huang, et al., Genome mining of           (2015) 199–202 .
      Streptomyces mobaraensis DSM 40847 as a bleomycin producer providing a biotech-      [60] Z. Zhang, X. Wu, J. Yang, X. Liu, R. Liu, Y. Song, Highly eﬃcient base editing in
     nology platform to engineer designer bleomycin analogues, Org. Lett. 19 (6) (2017)            rabbit by using near-PAMless engineered CRISPR/Cas9 variants, Sci. China Life Sci.
     1386–1389 .                                                                  66 (3) (2023) 635–638 .
[31] Y. He, Z. Wang, L. Bai, J. Liang, X. Zhou, Z. Deng, Two pHZ1358-derivative vectors      [61] J. Berdy, Bioactive microbial metabolites, J. Antibiot. (Tokyo) 58 (1) (2005) 1–26 .
      for eﬃcient gene knockout in Streptomyces , J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 20 (4) (2010)      [62] S.I Maﬃoli, Y. Zhang, D. Degen, T. Carzaniga, G. Del Gatto, S. Serina, et al., Antibac-
     678–682 .                                                                                                  terial nucleoside-analog inhibitor of bacterial RNA polymerase, Cell 169 (7) (2017)
[32] Y. Tong, P. Charusanti, L. Zhang, T. Weber, S.Y Lee, CRISPR-Cas9 based engineering          1240–1248.e23 e1223 .
      of actinomycetal genomes, ACS. Synth. Biol. 4 (9) (2015) 1020–1029 .                  [63] H.R Bridges, J.G Fedor, J.N Blaza, A. Di Luca, A. Jussupow, O.D Jarman, et al.,
[33] L. Li, K. Wei, G. Zheng, X. Liu, S. Chen, W. Jiang, et al., CRISPR-Cpf1-assisted mul-            Structure of inhibitor-bound mammalian complex I, Nat. Commun. 11 (1) (2020)
      tiplex genome editing and transcriptional repression in Streptomyces , Appl. Env. Mi-         5261 .
      crobiol. 84 (18) (2018) e00827-18 .                                                 [64] Y. Liu, W. Tao, S. Wen, Z. Li, A. Yang, Z. Deng, et al., In vitro CRISPR/Cas9 system for
[34] E.M Musiol-Kroll, A. Tocchetti, M. Sosio, E. Stegmann, Challenges and advances          eﬃcient targeted DNA editing, mBio 6 (2015) 6, doi: 10.1128/mbio.01714-01715 .
      in genetic manipulation of ﬁlamentous actinomycetes–the remarkable producers of      [65] W.L Yeo, E. Heng, L.L Tan, Y.W Lim, Y.H Lim, S. Hoon, et al., Characterization of
      specialized metabolites, Nat. Prod. Rep. 36 (9) (2019) 1351–1369 .                         Cas proteins for CRISPR-Cas editing in streptomycetes, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 116 (9)
[35] Y. Zhao, G. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Lu, Challenges and advances in genome editing technolo-           (2019) 2330–2338 .
      gies in Streptomyces , Biomolecules. 10 (5) (2020) 734 .                                [66] M.M Zhang, F.T Wong, Y. Wang, S. Luo, Y.H Lim, E. Heng, et al., CRISPR-Cas9
[36] K.S Makarova, S.A Shmakov, Y.I Wolf, P. Mutz, H. Altae-Tran, C.L Beisel, et al., An            strategy for activation of silent Streptomyces biosynthetic gene clusters, Nat. Chem.
     updated evolutionary classiﬁcation of CRISPR-Cas systems including rare variants,             Biol. (2017) .
     Nat. Microbiol. 10 (12) (2025) 3346–3361 .                                          [67] S. Ye, B. Enghiad, H. Zhao, E. Takano, Fine-tuning the regulation of Cas9 expression
[37] W. Wang, H. He, H. Liu, Y. Gao, F. Dang, X. Zhao, et al., Developing a robust             levels for eﬃcient CRISPR-Cas9 mediated recombination in Streptomyces , J. Ind. Mi-
    genome editing tool based on an endogenous type I-B CRISPR-Cas system in Sac-            crobiol. Biotechnol. 47 (4–5) (2020) 413–423 .
      charopolyspora spinosa , Sci. China Life Sci. 68 (5) (2025) 1324–1336 .                   [68] C. Hidalgo-Cantabrana, A.B Crawley, B. Sanchez, R. Barrangou, Characterization
[38] C. Hidalgo-Cantabrana, Y.J Goh, M. Pan, R. Sanozky-Dawes, R. Barrangou, Genome          and exploitation of CRISPR loci in Biﬁdobacterium longum , Front. Microbiol. 8 (2017)
      editing using the endogenous type I CRISPR-Cas system in Lactobacillus crispatus ,         1851 .
      Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S. A 116 (32) (2019) 15774–15783 .                          [69] J.Y Liu, M.C Chang, J.L Meng, C.P Feng, Y. Wang, A comparative proteome approach
[39] Y. Xie, X. Liu, T. Wu, Y. Luo, Harnessing the Streptomyces -originating type I-E            reveals metabolic changes associated with Flammulina velutipes mycelia in response
     CRISPR/Cas system for eﬃcient genome editing in Streptomyces , Sci. China Life Sci.            to cold and light stress, J. Agric. Food Chem. 66 (2018) 3716–3725 .
    68 (4) (2025) 1174–1182 .                                                         [70] J. Rang, H. He, S. Yuan, J. Tang, Z. Liu, Z. Xia, et al., Deciphering the metabolic
[40] Y. Li, S. Pan, Y. Zhang, M. Ren, M. Feng, N. Peng, et al., Harnessing type I and type          pathway diﬀerence between Saccharopolyspora pogona and Saccharopolyspora spinosa
        III CRISPR-Cas systems for genome editing, Nucleic. Acids. Res. 44 (4) (2016) e34 .          by comparative proteomics and metabonomics, Front. Microbiol. 11 (2020) 396.
[41] C.M Whitford, P. Gockel, D. Faurdal, T. Gren, R. Sigrist, T. Weber, Cascade-Cas3      [71] J. Tang, H. He, Y. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Xia, L. Cao, et al., Comparative proteomics reveals
     enables highly eﬃcient genome engineering in Streptomyces species, Nucleic. Acids.           the eﬀect of the transcriptional regulator Sp13016 on butenyl-spinosyn biosynthesis
      Res. 53 (6) (2025) gkaf214 .                                                                     in Saccharopolyspora pogona , J. Agric. Food Chem. 69 (2021) 12554–12565 .
[42] Y. Li, N. Peng, Endogenous CRISPR-Cas system-based genome editing and antimi-      [72] Q. Yang, X. Ding, X. Liu, S. Liu, Y. Sun, Z. Yu, et al., Diﬀerential proteomic pro-
      crobials: review and prospects, Front. Microbiol. 10 (2019) 2471 .                            ﬁling reveals regulatory proteins and novel links between primary metabolism and
[43] X. Han, L. Chang, H. Chen, J. Zhao, F. Tian, R.P Ross, et al., Harnessing the endoge-           spinosad production in Saccharopolyspora spinosa , Microb. Cell Fact. 13 (2014) 27 .
     nous type I-C CRISPR-Cas system for genome editing in Biﬁdobacterium breve , Appl      [73] T. Sinkunas, G. Gasiunas, C. Fremaux, R. Barrangou, P. Horvath, V. Siksnys, Cas3
     Env. Microbiol. 90 (3) (2024) e0207423 .                                                                     is a single-stranded DNA nuclease and ATP-dependent helicase in the CRISPR/Cas
[44] F. Cheng, L. Gong, D. Zhao, H. Yang, J. Zhou, M. Li, et al., Harnessing the native         immune system, EMBO J. 30 (7) (2011) 1335–1342 .
     type I-B CRISPR-Cas for genome editing in a polyploid archaeon, J Genet Genom.      [74] Z.X Yang, Y.W Fu, J.J Zhao, F. Zhang, S.A Li, M. Zhao, et al., Superior ﬁdelity and dis-
    44 (11) (2017) 541–548 .                                                                             tinct editing outcomes of SaCas9 compared with SpCas9 in genome editing, Genom
[45] Z. Xu, Y. Li, M. Li, H. Xiang, A. Yan, Harnessing the type I CRISPR-Cas systems for          Proteom Bioinf. 21 (6) (2023) 1206–1220 .
    genome editing in prokaryotes, Env. Microbiol. 23 (2) (2021) 542–558 .





                                                                       10