
[PDF physical page 1]
INSIGHT REVIEW                                                      NATURE|Vol 437|15 September 2005|doi:10.1038/nature04157



Genomic perspectives in
microbial oceanography
Edward F. DeLong1 and David M. Karl2

The global ocean is an integrated living system where energy and matter transformations are governed by
interdependent physical, chemical and biotic processes. Although the fundamentals of ocean physics and
chemistry are well established, comprehensive approaches to describing and interpreting oceanic microbial
diversity and processes are only now emerging. In particular, the application of genomics to problems in
microbial oceanography is significantly expanding our understanding of marine microbial evolution,
metabolism and ecology. Integration of these new genome-enabled insights into the broader framework of
ocean science represents one of the great contemporary challenges for microbial oceanographers.



Marine ecosystems are complex and dynamic. A mechanistic under-    greatly aid in these efforts. The correlation between organism- and habi-
standing of the susceptibility of marine ecosystems to global environ-    tat-specific genomic features and other physical, chemical and biotic
mental variability and climate change driven by greenhouse gases will    variables has the potential to refine our understanding of microbial and
require a comprehensive description of several factors. These include   biogeochemical process in ocean systems.
marine physical, chemical and biological interactions including       All these advances — improved cultivation, environmental genomic
thresholds, negative and positive feedback mechanisms and other   approaches and in situ microbial observatories — promise to enhance
nonlinear interactions. The fluxes of matter and energy, and the   our understanding of the living ocean system. Below, we provide a brief
microbes that mediate them, are of central importance in the ocean,    recent history of marine microbiology and outline some of the recent
yet remain poorly understood. Detailed field studies over the past    results from genomic technology and the challenges to be faced for inte-
three decades have established the current ‘microbial loop’ hypothesis    grating these new data into the larger fabric of ocean science.
wherein microbes have a central position in the conversion of dis-
solved organic matter into higher trophic levels (Fig. 1). An explicit  A brief historical perspective
and comprehensive test of the microbial loop hypothesis, however, has   In the past 30 years, there has been a remarkable growth in under-
not yet been achieved. In addition, the central role of microbial activ-   standing  of marine microbiota  (Fig.  2). During  this  time,
ities in maintaining the oxidative state of our planet, and biogeochem-    researchers have recognized the crucial role that microbes play in
ical cycles other than the carbon cycle, are not well captured in the   ocean ecosystems. This stems in part from technical advances, such
current microbial loop hypothesis. Significant obstacles remain to be    as improved epifluorescence microscope techniques and ATP-based
overcome in the measurement and modelling of ocean microbial   biomass metrics7, that have revealed bacterioplankton standing
processes.                                                         stocks that are several orders of magnitude greater than had been
   For microbial oceanographers, a major challenge is to more accu-   estimated by viable counting techniques8. The use of radiotracers1,9
rately incorporate the details of diversity, physiology and ecology into    to estimate planktonic bacterial growth rates and turnover has also
oceanographic and biogeochemical models. For example, bacterio-    led to revised qualitative and quantitative models of microbial con-
plankton community processes have often been modelled as being solely    tributions to marine food webs10,11. Research using quantitative aut-
heterotrophic1, understating the diverse physiologies and metabolic    ofluorescent cell counts and flow cytometry eventually led to the
processes that operate in situ. Indeed, the importance of oxygenic pho-   discovery of abundant photoautotrophic picoplankton, including
toautotrophic picoplankton, currently acknowledged to be dominant    Synechococcus12,13 and Prochlorococcus14 species, that dominate pho-
components of planktonic communities, was overlooked in early    tosynthetic activities in open ocean gyres. Around the same time,
oceanographic models. In addition, planktonic microbial metabolism   hydrothermal vents and their rich macrofauna and microflora were
has sometimes been presumed to resemble that found in common lab-    discovered15, as well as the first bacterial isolates with an obligate
oratory strains, some of which have questionable ecological relevance.   growth requirement for elevated hydrostatic pressure16. The devel-
Recent advances, such as new cultivation approaches2, cultivation-inde-   opment of cultivation-independent phylogenetic surveys using
pendent identification and enumeration strategies3,4, and environmen-   ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequencing3,17 and fluorescence in situ
tal genomics5,6, are improving this situation. For example, we can now    hybridization4 set the stage for contemporary environmental
identify the genes and biochemical pathways that differentiate microbial   genomic studies. Soon after their development, rRNA-based phylo-
species living in different habitats. It will soon be possible to map the    genetic survey techniques using the then-novel technique poly-
metabolic and functional gene distributions of indigenous microbial   merase chain reaction (PCR) revealed the widespread distribution
species in space and time and within different oceanic provinces. The   and abundance of several previously unrecognized marine micro-
recent establishment of microbial observatories at selected sites will also    bial groups, including Pelagibacter (also known as SAR11)18, abun-


1Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering & Division of Biological Engineering, 48-427 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA; 2School of
Ocean and Earth Science and Technology, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822, USA.

336
                                         ©2005 Nature Publishing Group


[PDF physical page 2]
NATURE|Vol 437|15 September 2005                                                 INSIGHT REVIEW




              Classic food chain                                       Microbial food web                  Figure 1 | Marine microbial interactions in the
                                                                                      upper ocean. Schematic representation of the
                                            Sunlight                                               ocean food web showing on the left the classic
                                                                                     pathway of carbon and energy flow through
                                                                                              photosynthetic Eukarya, to herbivores and on to
                                                                                                     Air         higher trophic levels. Depicted on the right is the
                                                                                              microbial food web, which uses energy stored in
                                                                                               the non-living, detrital carbon pool to produce                                                                                   Seawater
     CO2                                                 CO2                           microbial biomass that can re-enter the classic
                                                                                     pathway of carbon and energy flow. Cell-
                                                                                                   associated ectoenzymes (Ecto) enable bacteria to
                             Viruses                            Viruses             Archaea             use high-molecular-weight (HMW) DOC in
           Algae
                                                                                               addition to the more traditional low-molecular-
                                                                                           weight (LMW) and gaseous carbon substances.
                               Gases    LMW                                            Also shown in the microbial food web are viral
                                                                                           (?)                  particles and Archaea. At the present time, there is
                                                                                            only rudimentary knowledge of the role of
         Herbivores               DOC                    Auto-                           Archaea in the oceanic food web. Shown at the                                                                     hetero
                                                                                  bottom of this diagram is the downward flux of                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ecto   bacteria             Mucus
                                                                                                       particulate carbon (and energy), which is now
                                     Colloids   HMW                                        net
                                                                                               feeders        thought to fuel most subeuphotic zone processes.
                                                                             The classic algae-herbivore grazer pathway (left
                                                                  Protozoans
           Higher                                                                                        side) is most important in this regard. Adapted
            trophic                                                                    from ref. 51.
             levels                                                                                 (?)



                                  Particulate carbon flux to mesopelagic zone



dant new groups of planktonic marine Archaea19–21 and novel   Genomics of cultivated marine microbial species
eukaryotic picoplankton22, to list a few examples.                    Adaptation to the unique characteristics of their environment defines
  More recently, the prevalence of bacteriochlorophyll-containing23    the essence of marine microbial species. High salinity, low and variable
and rhodopsin-containing24 bacterioplankton was recognized, pro-    nutrient concentrations and steep gradients of temperature, light, pres-
viding new perspectives on the nature of light-use strategies in ocean    sure and nutrients with increasing depth are some of the environmen-
surface waters. Surprisingly, it has only very recently been realized that    tal variables that influence the evolution of form and function in
viral particles can exceed total microbial cell numbers by an order of    microbial plankton. The adaptive instructions for coping with the
magnitude in marine plankton25 and that they represent potentially   marine environment are encoded in the genomic blueprints of ocean
important vectors of bacterioplankton mortality and lateral gene    microbiota. Genome sequences are therefore useful tools for explor-
transfer26.                                                           ing the relationship between genotype, phenotype and environment in
  Many new marine microbial species continue to be described, and    native marine microbial species (Table 1). A few examples provided
unexpected physiological and biochemical properties await further   below illustrate how recent sequence information has contributed to
discovery and description. There remains much to learn about the   our understanding of the adaptations, physiology and ecology of
distributions, variability and biogeochemical influence of naturally   marine microbes.
occurring microbes in the sea. To this end, new technologies are now
providing life science and ocean science with remarkable new   Genomic perspective on the forests of the sea
research opportunities. In particular, advances in genome science and   Diatoms, a type of algae, are one of the most conspicuous plant forms
technology are revealing the interdependences that link evolutionary,    in the ocean. As a group they account for a large proportion of contem-
ecological and biogeochemical processes in natural marine microbial   porary marine primary productivity, particularly in coastal regions.
communities. For example, the co-evolution and genetic exchange   What can be learned about the remarkable evolutionary success of
between nuclear and chloroplast genomes record events that have    these protists by studying the structure of their chloroplast and nuclear
profoundly altered the predominant modes and mechanisms of oxy-   chromosomes? How do genomic features of diatoms correlate with
genic photosynthesis on Earth27.                                          their phenotypic and ecological properties? Can genomic analyses pro-
  Our understanding of the frequency and mechanisms by which    vide new information about the metabolic and physiological properties
genes and functional traits are acquired is being radically altered by    of these important phytoplankters? Information gained from the recent
genomic studies suggesting the pervasiveness of lateral gene transfer28.   sequencing of the 34-mega-base-pair (Mbp) nuclear genome of Tha-
Similarly, the recent recognition of the tremendous sympatric species    lassiosira pseudonana has answered some of these questions31.
diversity in microbial plankton is adjusting current views of form,     The 24 diploid chromosomes of T. pseudonana encode genes for
function and speciation in the sea29,30. As more samples of naturally    proteins associated with the construction of the siliceous cell wall,
occurring microbial genomic diversity become available, they will    including genes for silicic-acid uptake, polyamine synthesis and sil-
reveal more of the specific details of microbial evolutionary process    lafin production. These newly identified genes can now be used in
and ecological dynamics, and how these relate to environmental   experiments to understand and model diatom cell-wall synthesis, and
processes. With the above observations and goals in mind, consider-    to model regulatory response mechanisms involved in growth limita-
able effort is now being focused on sequencing whole marine micro-    tion caused by silica starvation. T. pseudonana and other diatom
bial genomes as well as surveying entire marine microbial assemblages    species extrude chitin fibres from cell-wall pores, presumably to
at the genomic level. The results of these efforts have the potential to    increase drag and thereby slow down their sinking rate. The genome
improve descriptions of the structure and function of the living ocean    of T. pseudonana encodes many genes for chitin synthesis and degra-
system.                                                               dation, including 22 putative chitinases, which indicates a dynamic

                                                                                                                           337
                                       ©2005 Nature Publishing Group


[PDF physical page 3]
INSIGHT REVIEW                                                                        NATURE|Vol 437|15 September 2005



and perhaps highly regulated chitin synthesis/degradation cycle to   Variety is the spice of ocean life
control buoyancy and nutrient cycling31. Diatoms are typically growth-    Microbiologists find it convenient to organize microbial groups into
limited by the lack of inorganic nutrients (nitrogen, phosphorus and    functional guilds involved in specific processes, for instance sulphate-
silica) and need to respond to the variable nutrient flux in their sur-    reducers, methanogens and oxygenic photoautotrophs. It is now well
rounding environment. Features of the T. pseudonana genome that   recognized that within any such group, or indeed even within a
reflect its photosynthetic, but auxotrophic, lifestyle include a wide vari-    species, tremendous biological diversity exists. Closely related physi-
ety of nutrient transporters, nitrogen-acquisition genes that allow con-    ological and genetic variants that seem to be ‘tuned’ to specific ecolog-
versions from several different organic and inorganic nitrogen sources    ical conditions have been referred to as ‘ecotypes’33. What might
and multiple pathways for energy storage using both carbohydrate and   genomic blueprints tell us about the ecophysiological differences
lipid synthesis degradation pathways31.                        among ecotypes? Could gene-linkage analyses of such ecotypes pro-
                                                                    vide information about metabolic pathway interdependence? And at
A genomic glimpse into coastal bacterial lifestyles                      the genomic fine scale, how many differences must accumulate before
The physical, chemical and biological changes that occur along a tran-   one ecotype is ecologically distinguishable from another?
sect from the coast to the open sea are profound. Do specific biologi-     One of the best-documented examples of environmentally tuned
cal properties of coastal bacterioplankton differentiate them from their   ecotypes are photoautotrophic Prochlorococcus strains isolated from
open-ocean relatives? Can the genomic and physiological properties    different depths. The genome sequences of these ecotypes reveal some
of bacterioplankton explain in part their observed distribution? Can    of the unique adaptive strategies employed in different parts of the
these different biological features tell us about potential regional dif-   depth continuum. Several high- and low-light adapted Prochlorococ-
ferences in the microbial cycling of matter and energy? Although it is    cus strains were recently sequenced33,34. The low-light-adapted strain
too early to generalize extensively, recent studies are starting to answer   MIT9313 isolated from the bottom of the euphotic zone has signifi-
these questions. For example, some bacterial groups such as  -Pro-    cantly more genes on its 2.4 Mbp genome than its high-light-adapted
teobacteria in the Roseobacter clade seem more abundant in nearshore    relative MED4, with a genome size of 1.66 Mbp. Genome size, how-
waters than the open ocean. The genome of Silicibacter pomeroyi, a    ever, is not a strict indicator of light adaptation, because the genome of
member of the Roseobacter clade, has some adaptations that may    another low-light-adapted strain, ProchlorococusSS120, is 1.75 Mbp33,34.
attune this bacterium to life in coastal environments32. On the basis of   Genes found in the low-light strain but not in the high-light-adapted
its genome content, S. pomeroyi seems to consume not only dissolved    relative included those for nitrite transport and assimilation. This is
organic carbon but also reduced inorganic compounds such as carbon    consistent with the types of nutrient available at the base of the
monoxide and sulphur; it harbours the genes required to generate    euphotic zone. Strain MED4 encoded many more genes for high-light-
energy from these compounds. Preliminary experiments confirmed    inducible proteins than its low-light-adapted cousin. By contrast, the
that carbon monoxide and reduced sulphur compounds are important    low-light-adapted strain MIT9313 contained more genes associated
substrates for S. pomeroyi metabolism32. In common with T. pseudo-   with photosynthesis.
nana, this coastal bacterium is equipped with a wide variety of nutri-     The genome sequence of Synechococcus WH8102 revealed differ-
ent transporters for uptake of different nitrogenous compounds such    ent characteristics from those found in its Prochlorococus cousins. The
as amino acids, ammonium and urea.                                Synechococcus genome suggests that it is more versatile generalist than
  The S. pomeroyi genome also encodes several transporters for    Prochlorococcus, with a broad range of nutrient acquisition and cata-
uptake of osmolytes such as dimethylsulphoniopropionate (DMSP)    bolic capabilities35. All told, the genomic characteristics of these dif-
and glycine betaine, presumably produced by its algal co-inhabitants,    ferent marine oxygenic photoautotrophs are consistent with, and
which are abundant in coastal environs32. Genomic and physiological    predictive of, their ecophysiology and environmental distributions.
analyses  suggest  a  ‘lithoheterotrophic’  metabolic  strategy  for
S. pomeroyi, allowing energy generation from organic and inorganic   Expanding databases
compounds alike. On the whole, these genomic and physiological fea-   Whole-genome sequencing of marine microbes from different habi-
tures of S. pomeroyi seem to be specific adaptations to microniches    tats and phylogenetic lineages promises to widen the scope of future
typical of coastal ecosystems.                                      comparative genomic analyses36–38. Other recently published marine
                                                                    microbial genome sequences include those of the psychrophilic (cold-
Figure 2 | Selected milestones in marine microbial oceanography. This                                                                        loving) sulphate-reducer Desulfotalea psychrophila38, a bioluminescent
timeline highlights a few of the advances and discoveries that have
                                                                squid  symbiont  Vibrio   fisheri39,  the  marine  planctomycete
influenced marine microbiology over the past 30 years. Many important
                                                                      Rhodopirellula baltica36, a heterotrophic bacterium from a hydrother-contributions could not be included simply owing to space limitation. WGS,
whole-genome shotgun sequencing. PCR applications have led to more       mal vent site Idiomarina loihiensis37 and the pressure-adapted deep-sea
discoveries of novel microbial groups not shown here. QPCR, quantitative     bacterium Photobacterium profundum40. Many other marine microbes
PCR.                                                                 are in the pipeline for sequencing. The Gordon and Betty Moore



                                                                                                                                                            Phylogenetic
                                     Epifluorescence     DNA/RNA synthesis rates                    Cultivation-independent                                       stains4
                                    microscopy8       and growth rates1, 7                        rRNA analyses17


                                                                                                                                Flow cytometry in
                                                                                                                                marine plankton14


               1975                             High cyanobacterial                              1985
                                                   abundance in                                                                           Prochlorococcus in
                                                     marine plankton12, 13;                                                          marine plankton14
   Microbial food
  web theory11                                          Discovery of microbes
                                                               at hydrothermal vents15;                                                                                                                                               High viral
                                                                 Isolation of first obligately                                                          abundance in marine
                                                               barophilic bacterium16                                                                                plankton25


338
                                         ©2005 Nature Publishing Group


[PDF physical page 4]
NATURE|Vol 437|15 September 2005                                                 INSIGHT REVIEW



Foundation is currently funding a marine microbiology initiative that   oceanographic research29.
in part aims to generate draft genome sequences from many ecologi-      Another recent field application of marine genomics employed
cally relevant marine microbial species (http://www.moore.org/   whole-genome shotgun (WGS) sequencing approaches. Spectacularly
program_areas/science/initiatives/marine_microbiology/initiative_    successful for sequencing whole microbial genomes, WGS involves the
marine_microbiology.asp).                                  random sequencing of small (~3 kbp) DNA insert libraries and subse-
  The continued comparative analyses of marine microbial genomes   quent assembly of long consensus DNA sequences in silico. The high-
promises to enhance both the databases and our current understand-   throughput nature of this approach makes it extremely attractive, but
ing. Nevertheless, the phenomenal ‘microdiversity’, disparate evolu-   environmental variation in microbial species richness, evenness and
tionary histories and variable ecological strategies of marine microbial    intraspecific genetic heterogeneity pose challenges to reassembling
species necessitates careful sampling of more habitats and acquisition    large contiguous DNA sequences (contigs) from smaller sequence
of even more genome sequences, from diverse as well as closely related    fragments29. Nevertheless, large amounts of data can be recovered by
species. New and improved methods for cultivating commonly occur-  WGS approaches. The most marked example was the recent genomic
ring, but previously cultivation-resistant, microbial species are now   survey of the Sargasso Sea microbial assemblages, where over 1.6 bil-
being successfully developed2, and these should greatly increase the    lion bp of genome-sequence information and about 1.2 million genes
relevance and use of existing genomic databases. An excellent exam-   were recovered from the collective microbial assemblage44.
ple of this was the cultivation of one of the most abundant bacteria in     The raw power of a massive WGS DNA-sequencing survey was
the ocean Pelagibacter ubique2,41. The genome sequence of this ubiqui-    revealed in the Sargasso Sea study29. A remarkable number of new
tous marine microbe revealed its streamlined nature, as well as the   genes and gene families were recovered in this data set, and gene-
presence of a proteorhodopsin-based photophysiology24,41. Continu-   mining efforts will continue to yield useful results. The reliable extraction
ing efforts will help to provide a comparative database for assessing the    of contiguous, long DNA-sequence assemblies, however, from short
genomic repertoire of cultivated microbial species as well as the cru-  DNA sequences derived from complex, heterogeneous populations
cial context necessary for interpreting nascent environmental genomic     still pose a challenge to current assembly methods and algorithms. It
surveys of marine microbial communities (see below).               seems evident from ongoing analyses that the availability of appropri-
                                                                           ate and relevant reference genomes, as well as the availability of large
Genomic surveys of natural microbial communities               insert clone sequences as a reference, will play an important role in
Biological processes occurring in natural microbial communities have    interpreting WGS sequencing surveys from complex microbial com-
diverse, complex, interdependent intracellular and intercellular reac-    munities29.
tions. Much of this complexity is encoded in the structures, distribu-    New approaches to the interpretation and analysis of microbial
tion and dynamics of interacting genomes in the environment.   assemblage WGS data sets continue to be developed. Tringe et al.45
Recently, it has become possible to directly access the genomes of co-    recently compared, on a gene-by-gene basis, the similarities and dif-
existing microbial species in natural communities en masse, without    ferences between microbial communities from the Sargasso Sea, a
cultivation, using environmental genomic approaches6,29. Variously   whalebone, an acid-mine drainage assemblage and a farm silage
termed environmental genomics, metagenomics or ecogenomics, cul-   assemblage using WGS data sets45. By taking a ‘gene-centric’, as
tivation-independent genomic approaches can provide a new per-   opposed to an assembly-driven ‘genome-centric’, approach, it was pos-
spective on the naturally occurring microbial world.                       sible to compare the patterns of occurrence of specific gene categories
  Some of the first environmental genomic studies were focused on   and assemble ‘community profiles’ of functional gene content. The
marine picoplankton41,42. Initially, large genomic fragments were    over-represented specific categories of ‘environmental gene tags’
cloned directly from marine microbial communities to survey   (EGTs) in different samples (for instance, a disproportionate repre-
genomic features of then-uncultivated phylogenetic groups, such as    sentation of photosynthetic genes and rhodopsins in the Sargasso Sea
marine Archaea5,24,42. Similar genomic surveys recently led to the dis-   sample) verified the usefulness of this approach for identifying meta-
covery of rhodopsins in bacteria, a domain of life not anticipated to    bolic features unique to specific microbial assemblages45.
contain these photoproteins24. Hypotheses about these novel bacterial      There are several ways in which microbial-community genomic
rhodopsins could be tested in vitro and in vivo by heterologous expres-    data are likely to be applied in microbial oceanography and ecology in
sion in Escherichia coli and subsequent biophysical and biochemical    the future. First, a comprehensive microbial ‘parts list’ (for example,
characterization24. Subsequent field studies revealed that the bacteri-    gene, taxon and biochemical pathway content) of the ocean’s microbial
oplankton rhodopsins were diverse, widespread and abundant in the    inhabitants will provide a deeper perspective of their physiological
marine environment43,44. The progression from genome sequence to    potential. These data help formulate biochemical and physiological
biochemical and biophysical experimentation to more refined ecolog-   hypotheses that can be tested in the lab and in the field. Second,
ical observations presents a promising model for future work aimed at    detailed sequence-based genomic data sets will also provide informatic
obtaining new genome sequence data for physiological, ecological and    tools and reagents, in the form of molecular probes and predicted mol-


                                                                 First marine
  PCR of rRNA genes                                 microbial                                 QPCR spatial mapping             Sargasso sea
 from bacterioplankton18                    WGS                                                     of bacterioplankton46         community WGS44

                                                         Fosmid cloning          BAC libraries from
                                                                    of plankton DNA5             bacterioplankton24



                                      1995                                                  Novel                     2005
                                                                                                               picoplankton
 Discovery of                                                                                                                eukaryotes22
 sar11 group18
                                                                                                    Rhodopsins in marine
                        Discovery of planktonic
                                                                                                                bacterioplankton24
                         marine archaea19, 20

                                                                                  Bacteriochlorophyll-containing
                                                                               planktonic bacterial abundance22, 23


                                                                                                                       339
                                       ©2005 Nature Publishing Group


[PDF physical page 5]
INSIGHT REVIEW                                                                        NATURE|Vol 437|15 September 2005



ecular and organic geochemical targets, to better track and quantify   Contemporary challenges in microbial oceanography
specific microorganisms and microbial processes. For example, it is   One common criticism of current massive data-collection efforts is that
now becoming possible to quantitatively map multiple microbial   muchinformation, but little knowledge, is accumulating. Although it is
groups in time and space using quantitative PCR46, and in the future    true that the informatics challenges are significant, they are not insur-
DNA-microarray techniques are likely to play a significant role as well.   mountable. The immediate tasks ahead are to organize, standardize and
Improved gene and gene-expression mapping and inventories in the    coordinate annotation, access and integration of environmentally
field, as well as more targeted and specific quantitative techniques, may    derived genomic data sets. The research community needs to recognize
lead to more meaningful biogeochemical measurements. This quanti-    that environmental genomic data sets are fundamentally different from
tative gene, taxon and metabolic mapping may, in turn, enable the    other existing databases because they are not derived from an individ-
development of models that more accurately reflect the in situ biolog-    ual strain, species, taxon or a single genetic locus. Rather, each discrete
ical details. Third, comparative analyses of entire microbial assem-    data set represents the collective genes recovered randomly from one
blages have the potential to reveal larger-scale patterns of biochemical    single microbial assemblage. These data sets derive from dynamic
interactions and habitat-specific correlations that might otherwise be    microbial populations and environments, where species richness, even-
missed in autoecological studies of individual species. For example,    ness and composition (and so gene richness, evenness and composi-
comparative community genomics can reveal previously unrecog-    tion) are variable in space and time. This is one major reason why any
nized biological interactions. For instance, rhodopsin-mediated light    attempts at assembly need to be qualified and specified, because indi-
utilization in bacteria was entirely unknown until environmental    vidual sequences in any given assembly could be derived from different
genomics was used24.                                                samples, times and origins44. The original sequence reads, and their
   Ultimately, it may be possible to overlay microbial functional    metadata, need to be linked explicitly with assemblies because they are
genes, metabolic pathways and taxonomic distributions upon other    of potentially of heterogeneous origin.
physical, chemical and biological oceanographic data to map micro-     Many other informatic challenges need to be considered as the field
bial features onto oceanic provinces. Finally, the study of genome    of environmental genomics develops. Management, annotation and
structure and dynamics in situ will provide the necessary informa-    archiving of environmental data sets is an ongoing process and many,
tion to interpret evolutionary processes — such as genetic drift,   but not all, of the mechanisms to handle the large datasets now emerg-
recombination and lateral gene transfer — that drive microbial    ing are available. One issue of concern is establishment of standards
adaptation and divergence. These data in turn provide predictive   and requirements for environmental genomic metadata. Additionally,
tools to model the variable complexity of form, function and    tools and algorithms for the annotation of environmental genomic
process that underpin the ocean’s physical, chemical and biotic    data sets need to be better developed. Hidden Markov model methods,
interactions47.                                                             effective for gene-calling in whole-genome sequences, are not as


 Table 1 | Phenotypic and genomic characteristics of some recently sequenced marine microbes and communities


 Isolate or environmental             Habitat or                         Environmentally relevant phenotypic and genomic features                                    References
 gene survey                          origin/habitat

 Thalassiosira pseudonana (K)     Surface water, plankton            Silicic acid metabolism, chitin buoyancy mechanisms, diverse nitrogen                       31
                                                                    acquisition and metabolism, several energy storage and utilization strategies

 Silicibacter pomeroyi DSS-3 (B)    Coastal water, plankton         Lithotrophic energy metabolism (carbon monoxide, reduced sulphur compounds),         32
                                          DMSP metabolism, many amino and carboxlic acid transporters

 Prochlorococcus marinus          Oligotrophic water, upper       High-light adapted, greater number of high-light-inducible proteins, photolyase          33,34
 MED4, SS120 (B)                photic zone                    genes, narrower range of nitrogen sources (nitrite reductase and transporter
                                                                 absent), fewer chlorophyll-binding antenna protein genes

 Prochlorococcus marinus          Oligotrophic waters, lower      Low-light adapted, smaller number of high-light-inducible proteins, no photolyase,         33
 MIT9313 (B)                    photic zone                   wider range of nitrogen sources (nitrite reductase and transporter present),
                                                                  greater number of chlorophyll-binding antenna protein genes

 Synechococcus sp. WH8102 (B)  Open ocean surface water     Wide range of nitrogen sources (organic, nitrate, nitrite), amino-acid                    35
                                                                    transporters, swimming motility, more transporters than Prochlorococcus

 Photobacterium profundum       Deep-sea amphipod          Growth pressure optima > 100 atm, polyunsaturated fatty acids in membrane lipids,       40
 SS9 (B)                                                                 differential gene expression at high and low pressure growth, trimethylamine
                                                              oxide respiration, possible anaerobic amino acid fermentation

 Vibrio fischeri ES114 (B)         Euprymna scolopes light organ    Bioluminescence, specific association with squid Euprymna scolopes, many               39
                                                            adhesions and toxin-like genes shared in common with other vibrio pathogens

 Rhodopirellula baltica (B)          Kiel fjord seawater             Derived absence of peptidoglycan, formaldehyde oxidation pathway, abundant            36
                                                                 sulphatases, high proportion of genes most similar to Eukayra

 Desulfotalea psychrophila        Permanently cold Arctic       Growth below 0 °C, sulphate-reducer, potential oxygen-reducing cytochromes            38
 Lsv54(B)                     marine sediment

 Idiomarina loihiensis (B)         Mixed hydrothermal vent/     Amino-acid fermentation, incomplete amino acid biosynthetic pathways,                 37
                                 cold seawater (1,296 m)        exopolysaccharide and biofilm formation, reduced carbohydrate metabolism

 Pelagibacter ubique               Oligotrophic coastal and open   Represents a group that makes up 25% of planktonic marine bacteria, smallest known        41
                             ocean                    genome of free-living organism, contains proteorhodopsin

 Sargasso Sea environmental      Oligotrophic surface water     High species diversity, high representation of photosynthetic and rhodopsin             44
 gene survey                                                   genes, significant intraspecific microheterogeneity, poor assembly

 Eel River Basin Archaeal methane Deep-sea methane seep       High representation of methanogen-like genes, high representation of two              50
 oxidizer environmental gene     (550 m)                     major Archaeal methane oxidizer phylotypes, absence of one ‘universal’ methanogenic
                                                        gene survey

 Whale fall microbial           Deep-sea whale bone        Low diversity, many glycine-betaine transporters and type IV secretion system           45
 environmental gene survey

 This is an illustrative but not exhaustive list of marine microbial strains whose genomes have been fully sequenced or partial shotgun environmental gene survey efforts.
 *Domain affiliation in parentheses. K, Eukarya; B, Bacteria; A, Archaea.


340
                                         ©2005 Nature Publishing Group


[PDF physical page 6]
NATURE|Vol 437|15 September 2005                                                 INSIGHT REVIEW





           Cell sorting, isolation                                 Design, engineer and field test new
           and cultivation                                  sensors/instruments for autonomous
         Genome libraries                             genomic and metabolic measurements
             Bioinformatics                                          Adaptive sampling

                     DNA arrays, QPCR and proteomics                                   Data and
                                         Field experiments including                                     information synthesis
                                        substrate uptake and                                    Food-web model
                                      growth kinetics                                          development





                                             Microbial                 Remote and
               Microbial                                                                        Ecosystem
                                       metabolism                   continuous
                biodiversity                                                                             modelling
                                         C, N, P, energy flow            sensing of microbes


                                                                                                Figure 3 | Microbial systems analysis in
                                                                                          oceanography. This flow chart outlines the research
          Census, abundance                             Ecosystem perturbation and response
           and distribution                                 Long-term surveillance of physics,                         prospectus for a new international Center for
        Community structure                                     biochemistry and ecology                            Microbial Oceanography: Research and Education
   Hypothesis generation and testing                          Hypothesis generation and testing                    (CMORE), which the authors will direct. The flow
                                                                                         path illustrates some of the linkages that will need to
                                Community function
                                                                                      Ecosystem state prediction     be fostered between and among subdisciplines in                                 and factors controlling
                                                                                             Hypothesis generation
                                   ecosystem dynamics                                                                                         and testing           microbiology, oceanography, ecology and
                               Hypothesis generation and testing                                              engineering to successfully complete the prospectus.

applicable for annotation of shorter sequences typical of metagenomic   changes in near-surface ocean stratification and decreases in the flux
data sets. New gene-calling algorithms are another important area for    of inorganic nutrients from below. These habitat changes are con-
development. In tandem with database issues, there is a strong need    trolled, in part, by the frequency and duration of the basin-scale El
for further development of computational tools to analyse and com-   Niño and Pacific Decadal Oscillation climate systems. The nitrogen-
pare microbial-community genomic data sets. Finally, interoperabil-    fixation potential of the global ocean may ultimately be controlled by
ity between genome and metagenome sequence databases and    the atmospheric deposition of iron, which itself is a time-variable, cli-
environmental and ecological databases will be a crucial requirement    mate-sensitive process. Total atmospheric dust transport is affected by
in the future.                                               humankind, including population demographics, global economies
   According to a recent report by the American Academy of Micro-   and land-use patterns. These complex natural and anthropogenic
biology and by our own independent assessments, the fields of micro-    forces, each with multiple potential feedback loops and possible
bial ecology and genomics are currently poised at a ‘crossroads of    threshold effects, have significant global impacts on microbes in the
opportunity’48. It is important to understand ocean processes and to    sea that are only now being appreciated. The influence of climate vari-
place the emergent genomic-based knowledge of marine microorgan-     ability, especially that which takes place on decadal to centennial time
isms into the ecological context of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and    scales, on marine microbial biogeochemistry is not well understood.
related biogeochemical cycles. The scientific and societal benefits at
stake are profound. This research prospectus must begin with the   Conclusion
complete integration of the disciplines of microbiology, systems biol-   Marine microbes are present at billions of cells per litre in seawater.
ogy, ecosystem dynamics and oceanography, with the goal of develop-   They double every few days and are consumed at about the same rate
ing comprehensive, mechanistic-based numerical models that are   by viral parasites and protistan predators. These activities capture and
essential for scaling the interactions of specific microorganisms and    process energy and drive major elemental cycles. Hidden within these
processes across entire ocean basins47. Some of the tools, approaches   dynamic assemblages and diverse genomic structures are fundamen-
and information flow required in this new synthesis are shown in Fig.    tal but, at present, incomplete lessons about environmental sensing,
3. As an example of the magnitude of the challenge, consider that   response and adaptation, gene regulation, species and community
future climate predictions indicate a warmer and more stratified global    interactions and genomic plasticity and evolution. The genomic diver-
ocean with more acidic near-surface waters, all resulting in large part     sity, evolutionary dynamics and ecological processes contained in
from the increasing burden of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. How    these populations have global effects on the rates and flux of energy
will the present day oceanic ‘genotype’ respond to these new state vari-   and matter in the sea, biogeochemical cycling, the Earth’s atmospheric
ables, and are we prepared to observe and interpret the ocean’s   composition and global climate trends. Over the 3.8 billion years of life
expressed ‘phenotypic response’? New and integrative approaches to   on Earth, microbes have been the stewards of geochemical balance and
link microbial and global geochemical processes are required.           as biotic recorders of evolutionary history their ‘biological memories’
  The establishment of a global network of ocean time-series stations   extend backwards further than other lifeforms. Additionally, they are
for repeated observations of microbial diversity and function repre-    Nature’s biosensors par excellence, but we still need to decipher their
sents one strategy of ecosystem surveillance that would increase our   code to interpret their outputs and understand the underlying strate-
understanding of these complex processes. Despite their recognized    gies and mechanisms of their survival in nature. The current conver-
importance in Earth and ocean sciences, systematic long-term micro-   gence of microbiology, ecology, genomics and ocean science has the
bial observatories in key oceanic habitats are rare. Repeat observations    potential to be focused in unprecedented ways through the lens of
of the North Pacific subtropical gyre over the past four decades have    microbial oceanography. By working together, molecular biologists,
documented fundamental changes in microbial community structure    microbiologists and oceanographers have new opportunities to
and major bioelemental cycling. It has been hypothesized that climate   advance observation, method and theory, which together will better
variability in the North Pacific basin has led to an enhancement of    describe the living ocean system.                        ■
microbial-based nitrogen fixation and a fundamental shift from nitro-
gen limitation to phosphorus limitation with several ecological conse-        1.  Fuhrman, J. A. & Azam, F. Thymidine incorporation as a measure of heterotrophic                                                                                                 bacterioplankton production in marine surface waters. Mar. Biol. 66, 109–120 (1982).
quences, including alterations in food web structure and changes in      2.  Rappé, M. S., Connon, S. A., Vergin, K. L. & Giovannoni, S. J. Cultivation of the ubiquitous
carbon sequestration49. These changes occurred because of subtle       SAR11 marine bacterioplankton clade. Nature 418, 630–633 (2002).

                                                                                                                                341
                                       ©2005 Nature Publishing Group


[PDF physical page 7]
INSIGHT REVIEW                                                                        NATURE|Vol 437|15 September 2005



3.  Olsen, G. J., Lane, D. J., Giovannoni, S. J., Pace, N. R. & Stahl, D. A. Microbial ecology and            31. Armbrust, E. V. et al. The genome of the diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana: ecology, evolution,
    evolution: a ribosomal RNA approach. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 40, 337–365 (1986).                 and metabolism. Science 306, 79–86 (2004).
4. DeLong, E. F., Wickham, G. S. & Pace, N. R. Phylogenetic stains: ribosomal RNA-based           32. Moran, M. A. et al. Genome sequence of Silicibacter pomeroyi reveals adaptations to the
   probes for the identification of single cells. Science 243, 1360–1363 (1989).                      marine environment. Nature 432, 910-913 (2004).
5.  Stein, J. L., Marsh, T. L., Wu, K. Y., Shizuya, H. & DeLong, E. F. Characterization of                 33. Rocap, G. et al. Genome divergence in two Prochlorococcus ecotypes reflects oceanic niche
    uncultivated prokaryotes: isolation and analysis of a 40-kilobase-pair genome fragment              differentiation. Nature 424, 1042–1047 (2003).
   from a planktonic marine archaeon. J. Bacteriol. 178, 591–599 (1996).                          34. Dufresne, A. et al. Genome sequence of the cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus marinus SS120,
6. Handelsman, J. Metagenomics: application of genomics to uncultured microorganisms.           a nearly minimal oxyphototrophic genome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 10020–10025
    Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 68, 669–685 (2004).                                               (2003).
7.  Karl, D. M. Cellular nucleotide measurements and applications in microbial ecology.             35. Palenik, B. et al. The genome of a motile marine Synechococcus. Nature 424, 1037–1042
    Microbiol. Rev. 44, 739–796 (1980).                                                        (2003).
8.  Hobbie, J. E., Daley, R. J. & Jasper, S. Use of NucleporeTM filters for counting bacteria by           36. Glockner, F. O. et al. Complete genome sequence of the marine planctomycete Pirellula sp.
   fluorescence microscopy. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 33, 1225–1228 (1977).                              strain 1. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 8298–8303 (2003).
9.  Karl, D. M. Measurement of microbial activity and growth in the ocean by rates of stable          37. Hou, S. et al. Genome sequence of the deep-sea gammaproteobacterium Idiomarina
    ribonucleic acid synthesis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 38, 850–860 (1979).                                  loihiensis reveals amino acid fermentation as a source of carbon and energy. Proc. Natl Acad.
10. Azam, F. et al. The ecological role of water-column microbes in the sea. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser.              Sci. USA 101, 18036–18041 (2004).
    10, 257–263 (1983).                                                                       38. Rabus, R. et al. The genome of Desulfotalea psychrophila, a sulfate-reducing bacterium from
11. Pomeroy, L. R. The ocean’s food web, a changing paradigm. BioScience 24, 499–504 (1974).         permanently cold Arctic sediments. Environ. Microbiol.6, 887–902 (2004).
12. Waterbury, J. B., Watson, S. W., Guillard, R. R. L. & Brand, L. E. Widespread ocurrence of a         39. Ruby, E. G. et al. Complete genome sequence of Vibrio fischeri: a symbiotic bacterium with
    unicellular marine, planktonic, cyanobacterium. Nature 277, 293–294 (1979).                     pathogenic congeners. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 3004–3009 (2005).
13. Johnson, P. W. & Sieburth, J. M. Chroococcoid cyanobacteria in the sea: a ubiquitous and        40.Vezzi, A. et al. Life at depth: Photobacterium profundum genome sequence and expression
    diverse phototrophic biomass. Limnol. Oceanogr. 24, 928–935 (1979).                                 analysis. Science 307, 1459–1461 (2005).
14. Chisholm, S. W. et al. A novel free-living prochlorophyte abundant in the oceanic euphotic        41. Giovanonni, S. J. et al. Genome streamlining in a cosmopolitan oceanic bacterium. Science
   zone. Nature334, 340–343 (1988).                                                      309, 1242–1245 (2005).
15. Corliss, J. B. et al. Submarine thermal springs on the Galapagos Rift. Science 203, 1073–1083      42. Schmidt, T. M., DeLong, E. F. & Pace, N. R. Analysis of a marine picoplankton community by
    (1979).                                                                               16S rRNA gene cloning and sequencing. J. Bacteriol. 173, 4371–4378 (1991).
16. Yayanos, A. A., Dietz, A. S. & Van Boxtel, R. Obligately barophilic bacterium from the            43. Béjà, O., Spudich, E. N., Spudich, J. L., Leclerc, M. & DeLong, E. F. Proteorhodopsin
   Mariana Trench. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 78, 5212–5215 (1981).                                 phototrophy in the ocean. Nature 411, 786–789 (2001).
17. Stahl, D. A., Lane, D. J., Olsen, G. J. & Pace, N. R. Analysis of hydrothermal vent-associated       44.Venter, J. C. et al. Environmental genome shotgun sequencing of the Sargasso Sea. Science
   symbionts by ribosomal RNA sequences. Science 224, 409–411 (1984).                        304, 66–74 (2004).
18. Giovannoni, S. J., Britschgi, T. B., Moyer, C. L. & Field, K. G. Genetic diversity in Sargasso Sea      45. Tringe, S. G. et al. Comparative metagenomics of microbial communities. Science 308,
   bacterioplankton.Nature 345, 60–63 (1990).                                           554–557 (2005).
19. DeLong, E. F. Archaea in coastal marine environments.Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 89,              46.Suzuki, M. T., Preston, C. M., Chavez, F. & DeLong, E. F. Quantitative mapping of
   5685–5689 (1992).                                                                           bacterioplankton populations in seawater: field tests across an upwelling plume in the
20. Karner, M. B., DeLong, E. F. & Karl, D. M. Archaeal dominance in the mesopelagic zone of the        Monterey Bay. Aquat. Microb. Ecol. 24, 117–127 (2001).
    Pacific Ocean. Nature 409, 507–510 (2001).                                                    47. Doney, S. C., Abbott, M. R., Cullen, J. J., Karl, D. M. & Rothstein, L. From genes to ecosystems:
21. Fuhrman, J. A., McCallum, K. & Davis, A. A. Novel major archaebacterial group from marine         the ocean’s new frontier. Front. Ecol. Environ. 2, 457–466 (2004).
    plankton. Nature 356, 148–149 (1992).                                                        48.Stahl, D. A. & Tiedje, J. M. Microbial Ecology and Genomics: A Crossroads of Opportunity
22. Moon-van der Staay, S. Y., De Wachter, R. & Vaulot, D. Oceanic 18S rDNA sequences from         (American Society for Microbiology, Washington D.C., 2002).
   picoplankton reveal unsuspected eukaryotic diversity. Nature 409, 607–610 (2001).            49. Karl, D. M., Bidigare, R. R. & Letelier, R. M. Long-term changes in plankton community
23. Kolber, Z. S., Van Dover, C. L., Niederman, R. A. & Falkowski, P. G. Bacterial photosynthesis in         structure and productivity in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre: The domain shift
    surface waters of the open ocean. Nature 407, 177–179 (2000).                                    hypothesis. Deep-Sea Res. II 48, 1449–1470 (2001).
24. Béjà, O. et al. Bacterial rhodopsin: evidence for a new type of phototrophy in the sea. Science      50. Hallam, S. J. et al. Reverse methanogenesis: testing the hypothesis with environmental
   289, 1902–1906 (2000).                                                                  genomics. Science 305, 1457–1462 (2004).
25. Bergh, O., Borsheim, K. Y., Bratbak, G. & Heldal, M. High abundance of viruses found in             51. Karl, D. M. Accurate estimation of microbial loop processes and rates. Microbiol. Ecol. 28,
   aquatic environments. Nature 340, 467–468 (1989).                                         147–150 (1994).
26. Paul, J. H., Sullivan, M. B., Segall, A. M. & Rohwer, F. Marine phage genomics. Comp. Biochem.
    Physiol. B Biochem. Mol. Biol. 133, 463–476 (2002).                                Acknowledgements The authors’ work is supported by the NSF, the Gordon and
27. Falkowski, P. G. et al. The evolution of modern eukaryotic phytoplankton. Science 305,          Betty Moore Foundation, and the Department of Energy. We thank our colleagues,
   354–360 (2004).
                                                                                students and CMORE collaborators for their ideas, inspiration and enthusiasm.
28. Lerat, E., Daubin, V., Ochman, H. & Moran, N. A. Evolutionary origins of genomic repertoires
    in bacteria. PLoS Biol. 3, e130 (2005).
29. DeLong, E. F. Microbial community genomics in the ocean. Nature Rev. Microbiol. 3, 459–469    Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at
   (2005).                                                                        npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions. The authors declare no competing
30. Thompson, J. R. et al. Genotypic diversity within a natural coastal bacterioplankton              financial interests. Correspondence should be addressed to E.F.DL
    population. Science 307, 1311–1313 (2005).                                           (delong@mit.edu).





342
                                         ©2005 Nature Publishing Group


[PDF physical page 8]
ERRATA & CORRIGENDA                                                                NATURE|Vol 439|23 February 2006



CORRIGENDUM                                                   incorrectly show results from a Pitx1 sense probe, rather than from an
doi:10.1038/nature04500                                                  antisense probe. Similar staining is not observed for sense probes
Genetic and developmental basis of             from other genes, raising the possibility that sticklebacks may express
                                                      some endogenous antisense transcripts from the Pitx1 region.
evolutionary pelvic reduction in threespine     A new antisense probe (see Fig. 1, below) shows strong expression
sticklebacks                                                    in the mouth, lower jaw and developing pelvis of marine larvae. Pitx1
                                                                   expression appears normal in the mouth and lower jaw of the
Michael D. Shapiro, Melissa E. Marks, Catherine L. Peichel,                                                             Paxton benthic population, but is completely missing in the pelvic
Benjamin K. Blackman, Kirsten S. Nereng, Bjarni Jo´nsson,                                                                        region. No expression was detected in neuromasts, thymus, olfactory
Dolph Schluter & David M. Kingsley                                                                              pits or tail in either population, unlike the pattern seen with the
                                                                          original probe. Despite these differences, our major conclusion, that
Nature 428, 717–723 (2004)                                                                         pelvic reduction results from cis-acting regulatory changes in the
In this Article, we showed that Pitx1 maps to the major locus    Pitx1 locus, remains unchanged. This is because the endogenous
controlling pelvic reduction in sticklebacks and shows altered    sense transcript loses  its expression along with the presumptive
expression, but not altered amino-acid sequence, in a pelvic-reduced    antisense transcript in the pelvic region of the larval progeny of
population. Owing to a technical error, Figs 3 and 4 of the Article   ﬁsh missing the pelvis.



                                                                                                   Figure 1 | Pitx1 is expressed in the prospective
                                                                                                          pelvic region of marine but not Paxton Lake
                                                                                                  benthic sticklebacks. a, Whole-mount in situ
                                                                                                      hybridization shows Pitx1 expression in the
                                                                                      mouth, jaw and pelvic buds of stage-29 marine
                                                                                                                larvae. (Details are available from the
                                                                                               corresponding author, D.M.K.) c, d, Enlarged
                                                                                                 views of the lateral head (c) and ventral pelvis (d)
                                                                                                        of stage-29 marine larvae; arrowheads indicate
                                                                                                                         sites of expression. b, e, f, In Paxton benthic
                                                                                                                larvae, Pitx1 expression is absent from the
                                                                                                      prospective pelvic region (f), but is present in the
                                                                              mouth and jaw (e, arrowheads). Scale bars, 1 mm;
                                                                                                               pect, pectoral ﬁn.




CORRIGENDUM                        CORRIGENDUM

doi:10.1038/nature04575                                                      doi:10.1038/nature04573
Highly variable Northern Hemisphere       Genomic perspectives in microbial
temperatures reconstructed from low- and   oceanography
high-resolution proxy data                        Edward F. DeLong & David M. Karl
Anders Moberg†, Dmitry M. Sonechkin, Karin Holmgren,                                                                  Nature 437, 336–342 (2005)
Nina M. Datsenko, Wibjo¨rn Karle´n & Stein-Erik Lauritzen1
                                                                                         It has been drawn to our attention (by J. A. Fuhrman) that Fig. 2
1Department of Earth Science, University of Bergen, 5007 Bergen, Norway. †Present                                                                    contains a citation error. Speciﬁcally, the citation associated with
address: Department of Physical Geography and Quaternary Geology, Stockholm
University, 10691 Stockholm, Sweden                                      “Discovery of planktonic marine archaea” in Fig. 2 that was incor-
                                                                              rectly given as ref. 20 should instead be ref. 21 (Fuhrman,  J. A.,
Nature 433, 613–617 (2005)                                   McCallum, K. & Davis, A. A. Nature 356, 148–149; 1992).

The authorship of this Letter  is amended to include Stein-Erik
Lauritzen. Details of the Søylegrotta Cave record (series 8), which
should have been accredited to S.-E.L., were not supplied in
the paper but are available from the corresponding author (A.M.,
anders.moberg@natgeo.su.se) on request.
  In addition, the tree-ring-width data from the Indigirka river
region (series G) were inadvertently used without the proper per-
missions: although the series has been discussed in the literature1,
they are unpublished data that have not been made publicly available;
they may, however, be obtained through A.M.

1.   Sidorova, O. V., Naurzbaev, M. M. Response of Larix cajanderi to climatic
    changes at the Upper Timberline and in the Indigirka River Valley [in Russian].
     Lesovedenie 2, 73–-75 (2002).




1014
                                         © 2006 Nature Publishing Group