
[PDF physical page 1]
                                                         Fungal Genetics and Biology 89 (2016) 18–28


                                            Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

                      Fungal Genetics and Biology


                              journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yfgbi



Comprehensive curation and analysis of fungal biosynthetic gene
clusters of published natural products

Yong Fuga Li a,f, Kathleen J.S. Tsai b, Colin J.B. Harvey a, James Jian Li a, Beatrice E. Ary c, Erin E. Berlew b,
Brenna L. Boehman b, David M. Findley b, Alexandra G. Friant c, Christopher A. Gardner d,
Michael P. Gould b, Jae H. Ha c, Brenna K. Lilley d, Emily L. McKinstry b, Saadia Nawal b, Robert C. Parry b,
Kristina W. Rothchild b, Samantha D. Silbert c, Michael D. Tentilucci b, Alana M. Thurston b,
Rebecca B. Wai b, Yongjin Yoon b, Raeka S. Aiyar a, Marnix H. Medema e, Maureen E. Hillenmeyer a,⇑,
                             b,⇑Louise K. Charkoudian

a Stanford Genome Technology Center, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United States
b Department of Chemistry, Haverford College, Haverford, PA, United States
c Department of Chemistry, Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, PA, United States
d Department of Biology, Haverford College, Haverford, PA, United States
e Bioinformatics Group, Wageningen University, The Netherlands
f Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States


a r t i c l e    i n f o              a b s t r a c t


Article history:                               Microorganisms produce a wide range of natural products (NPs) with clinically and agriculturally rele-
Received 15 September 2015                    vant biological activities. In bacteria and fungi, genes encoding successive steps in a biosynthetic pathway
Revised 20 January 2016                       tend to be clustered on the chromosome as biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs). Historically, ‘‘activity-
Accepted 21 January 2016
                                            guided” approaches to NP discovery have focused on bioactivity screening of NPs produced by culturable
Available online 22 January 2016
                                             microbes. In contrast, recent ‘‘genome mining” approaches ﬁrst identify candidate BGCs, express these
                                               biosynthetic genes using synthetic biology methods, and ﬁnally test for the production of NPs. Fungal
Keywords:
                                    genome mining efforts and the exploration of novel sequence and NP space are limited, however, by
Natural product
                                             the lack of a comprehensive catalog of BGCs encoding experimentally-validated products. In this study,
Biosynthetic gene cluster
Manual curation                       we generated a comprehensive reference set of fungal NPs whose biosynthetic gene clusters are
Genome mining                                described in the published literature. To generate this dataset, we ﬁrst identiﬁed NCBI records that
Fungal metabolites                             included both a peer-reviewed article and an associated nucleotide record. We ﬁltered these records
                                       by text and homology criteria to identify putative NP-related articles and BGCs. Next, we manually
                                             curated the resulting articles, chemical structures, and protein sequences. The resulting catalog contains
                                      197 unique NP compounds covering several major classes of fungal NPs, including polyketides, non-
                                            ribosomal peptides, terpenoids, and alkaloids. The distribution of articles published per compound shows
                                           a bias toward the study of certain popular compounds, such as the aﬂatoxins. Phylogenetic analysis of
                                               biosynthetic genes suggests that much chemical and enzymatic diversity remains to be discovered in
                                                   fungi. Our  catalog was  incorporated  into  the  recently  launched Minimum  Information  about
                                               Biosynthetic Gene cluster (MIBiG) repository to create the largest known set of fungal BGCs and associ-
                                            ated NPs, a resource that we anticipate will guide future genome mining and synthetic biology efforts
                                        toward discovering novel fungal enzymes and metabolites.
                                                                                            2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.



                                                                              1. Introduction

    Abbreviations: ACE, abundance-based coverage estimators; BGC, biosynthetic
gene cluster; CI, conﬁdence interval; CID, Compound Identiﬁers; FAS, fatty acid       Microorganisms produce natural products (NPs) with a remark-
synthase; InChI, International Chemical Identiﬁer; KS, ketosynthase; MIBiG, Min-     able range of structures and bioactivities. Fungi produce NPs with
imum Information about Biosynthetic Gene cluster; NP, natural product; NRPS,     particularly diverse properties, including antibiotics  (e.g., peni-
non-ribosomal peptide synthetase; PKS, polyketide synthase; SMILES, Simpliﬁed
Molecular-Input Line-Entry System.                                                    cillin) and  toxins  (e.g., aﬂatoxins) (Amare and  Keller, 2014;
 ⇑Corresponding authors.                                              Hoffmeister and Keller, 2007; Newman and Cragg, 2007). NPs are
    E-mail  addresses:  maureenh@stanford.edu  (M.E.  Hillenmeyer),  lcharkou@     often biosynthesized by multi-enzyme pathways, and the proteins
haverford.edu (L.K. Charkoudian).


http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fgb.2016.01.012
1087-1845/  2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.


[PDF physical page 2]
                                                                      Y.F. Li et al. / Fungal Genetics and Biology 89 (2016) 18–28                                            19


comprising one pathway are often encoded within a clustered set     publications from the PubMed database, each of which was linked
of genes, termed a biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) (Cimermancic     to a fungal nucleotide record in GenBank. We then employed the
et al., 2014; Keller et al., 2005; Medema et al., 2011). Many putative    ‘‘many hands make light work” approach to annotate the fungal
BGCs remain ‘‘cryptic” or ‘‘orphan”, meaning their encoded pro-    NPs described, by integrating this research challenge into the class-
teins and resulting chemicals are not expressed under standard    room. Under the close guidance of NP experts, trained undergrad-
conditions and are currently uncharacterized. The chemicals pro-    uate students curated those publications that experimentally
duced by these silent gene clusters represent untapped chemical    veriﬁed biosynthesis of fungal NPs. The resulting catalog includes
diversity that could hold pharmacological and agricultural value    197 unique fungal NPs from 217 peer-reviewed articles, and 779
(Walsh and Fischbach, 2010).                                        nucleotide records. Here we present a systematic analysis of the
   Researchers employ various approaches to determine the prod-     resulting articles, chemical structures, and protein sequences. We
ucts encoded by cryptic fungal gene clusters (Wiemann and Keller,     contextualize our results within the framework of the recent MIBiG
2014). Synthetic biology and genetic engineering efforts include    (Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic Gene cluster) effort, a
activation  of  transcriptionally  silent  clusters in natural hosts     parallel large-scale community annotation project (Medema et al.,
(Bouhired et al., 2007; Mao et al., 2015; Mattern et al., 2015) and     2015). The information from our study is expected to guide the
expression  of  uncharacterized  clusters  in heterologous  hosts     exploration and engineering of fungal systems for the biosynthesis
(Chang et al., 2013; Heneghan et al., 2010; Kealey et al., 1998;     of novel NPs. Furthermore, the signiﬁcance of our ﬁndings extends
Pel et al., 2007; Richter et al., 2014; Sakai et al., 2012, 2008; Yin     into pedagogical space, as the student-led curation represents a
et al., 2013). The synthetic biology toolset continues to expand    unique educational process with direct beneﬁts to the NP and syn-
with new methods, such as gene cluster refactoring (Shao et al.,     thetic biology research communities.
2013) and the expression of multi-gene pathways (Unkles et al.,
2014).
                                                                              2. Materials and methods
   In the modern era of BGC research that beneﬁts from the con-
tinuous ﬂood of new sequencing data, computational approaches
                                                                                    2.1. Identiﬁcation of NP-related articles in PubMed linked to nucleotide
play a critical role in the discovery of NPs from uncharacterized
                                                                        records
BGCs. BGCs can be computationally identiﬁed by homology and
other techniques, and their chemical product can sometimes be
                                                             To identify a preliminary set of NP-related peer-reviewed arti-
predicted based on the enzymes they encode (Donia et al., 2014;
                                                                           cles for manual curation, we employed an automated search of
Medema and Fischbach, 2015; O’Brien et al., 2014; Pi et al., 2015;
                                                          NCBI PubMed for articles with deposited nucleotide records. We
Throckmorton et al., 2015). These studies have revealed that fungal
                                                                           refer to these as ‘‘article-nucleotide” pairs, since they have both a
genomes encode several classes of BGCs capable of producing valu-
                                                    PubMed article (with a PubMed ID or PMID) and a NCBI nucleotide
able, diverse NPs, including polyketides, non-ribosomal peptides,
                                                                  record ID.
terpenoids, alkaloids, and others. Many of the basic biosynthetic
                                                              As the ﬁrst step in this process, we identiﬁed articles related to
mechanisms for producing the major classes of fungal NPs are well
                                                   NP biosynthesis using three automated searches for: (a) nucleotide
characterized, and new BGCs can therefore be detected in fungal
                                                                   records with homology to known core enzymes, according to
genomic sequences via homology to core biosynthetic enzymes
                                                                   searches using antiSMASH 2.0 (Blin et al., 2013), (b) nucleotide
(Cimermancic  et  al., 2014;  Inglis  et  al., 2013; Medema and
                                                                   records identiﬁed by text queries on full records or record titles
Fischbach, 2015). The number of fungal BGCs yet to be discovered
                                                                         in the NCBI nucleotide database, and (c) published articles identi-
is vast, as a single fungal genome can house 40–80 gene clusters
                                                         ﬁed by text queries of articles in the PubMed database. The text
with homology to major BGC classes (Inglis et al., 2013). With rapid
                                                                    queries were composed of a list of compound classes, names of sec-
advancements in sequencing technologies,  it  is expected that
                                                             ondary metabolites, and keywords indicative of NP gene clusters.
within a decade, millions of bacterial and fungal sequences will
                                                                             Full queries used in the searches are listed in Supplementary Mate-
be available to the public (Medema and Fischbach, 2015), which
                                                                                   rials Section 1.1. From the candidate nucleotide records (a and b),
will be invaluable for NP genome mining efforts.
                                                we retained only those with linked PubMed abstracts or PubMed
   Given the wealth of genomic discovery opportunities at our dis-
                                                                     Central full text articles. From the candidate PubMed articles (c),
posal, the future of fungal NP research relies in part on our ability
                                                                 only those with linked nucleotide records were retained.
to make relevant information about BGCs accessible to the com-
                                            We identiﬁed 2449 articles linked to nucleotide records of fun-
munity (Medema and Fischbach, 2015; Medema et al., 2015). Large
                                                                        gal origin, 1652 articles with nucleotide records of plant origin, and
numbers of BGCs and NP structures have been characterized over
                                                         5904 articles linked to nucleotide records of bacterial origin. Man-
decades of fungal NP research (Lim et  al., 2012; Walsh and
                                                                     ual examination of a subset of the fungal articles revealed that
Fischbach, 2010), but these published  results have not been
                                                         most were not relevant to this study: for example, some describe
curated and made available in a standardized format. A compre-
                                                               a fungal genome sequence with no mention of NPs, and some
hensive catalog of fungal NPs with experimentally characterized
                                                                    describe a non-biosynthetic gene. To remove such articles, we
biosynthetic genes would be of great value to the community.
                                                              developed an automated  ‘‘NP-ﬁlter”, the details of which are
While many catalogs related to fungal genetics and metabolism
                                                                   described in Supplementary Materials Section 1.2.
exist, they either focus on primary metabolism (Cerqueira et al.,
2014; Stajich et  al., 2012), or do not directly link secondary
metabolite structures to the encoding BGCs (Degtyarenko et al.,      2.2. Manual curation of NPs described in peer-reviewed articles
2008; Gaulton et  al., 2012; Pence and Williams, 2010; Wang
et al., 2009). DoBISCUIT (Ichikawa et al., 2013) and ClusterMine360      The ‘‘NP-ﬁlter” step reduced the number of fungal articles to
(Conway and Boddy, 2013)  link molecular structure to DNA    960, but only decreased the coverage of ‘‘gold standard” entries,
sequence, but focus on bacterial NPs.                                                   i.e., the bacteria or fungal entries present in either DoBISCUIT or
   The need for a fungal NP reference catalog inspired us to per-    ClusterMine360, by 1% (Supplementary Materials, Section 1.3 and
form a comprehensive curation of published articles describing    Table S1). Each of the 960 articles linked to fungal nucleotide
fungal NPs and associated biosynthetic genes. To identify all possi-    records was assigned a score from 1 to 8.5 based on the types of
ble published articles related to fungal NP biosynthesis, we devel-    supporting query strategies, with higher scores indicating stronger
oped  an  automated  search  strategy  to  extract  NP-related    supporting evidence (see Supplementary Materials, Section 1.4).


[PDF physical page 3]
20                                                                   Y.F. Li et al. / Fungal Genetics and Biology 89 (2016) 18–28


We observed a strong enrichment of ClusterMine360 entries in the    compounds and all were retained; for example, aﬂaquinolone F
highest-scoring articles. The 349 articles with scores >2 covered    and aﬂaquinolone G.
92% of the fungal ‘‘gold standard articles” (38 articles associated
with the fungal entries in ClusterMine360).                                 2.4. Chemical informatics analysis of compounds
   The titles of the 960 articles were manually examined by two
experts and assigned to three categories based on how likely the       For a given molecule, multiple valid SMILES strings can accu-
articles were to describe NP gene clusters: ‘‘Yes” (high likelihood,     rately represent the chemical structure. To ensure the uniqueness
251 articles), ‘‘Maybe” (99 articles), ‘‘No” (low likelihood, 610 arti-     of each compound in our dataset, we converted all SMILES to the
cles). Among those marked ‘‘No”, 264 were noted as single enzyme     canonical SMILES string, which is a unique SMILES string among
papers,  i.e. those that described a single, possibly NP-related,    the many possible strings and is generated by the normalization
enzyme (such as a cytochrome P450). Other examples of articles     (canonicalization) algorithm. We then used the canonical SMILES
marked ‘‘No” include whole-genome sequence articles that men-     to generate compound ﬁngerprints using the Chemistry Develop-
tioned a NP in the article text but did not describe a BGC. We    ment Kit (Guha, 2007; Steinbeck et al., 2003). The ﬁngerprint of a
observed strong enrichment of ClusterMine360 articles in the    compound is represented as a bit vector indicating the presence
‘‘Yes” category (79.0%), while the ‘‘Maybe,” ‘‘Single Enzyme,” and     of substructures in the compound. The similarity between two
‘‘not Single Enzyme” categories covered 2.6%, 5.3%, and 13.2% of    compounds is measured by the Tanimoto coefﬁcient (Nikolova
ClusterMine360, respectively. We selected 275 articles with score    and Jaworska, 2003), deﬁned  as, T = a  b/[1   (1   a)  (1   b)],
>3 across all categories, or in the ‘‘Yes” category with a score >2    where a b is the dot product between two ﬁngerprint bit vectors
for further full-text curation.                                     a and b for the two compounds. The Tanimoto coefﬁcient is inter-
   The ﬁrst-pass curation of the 275 articles was conducted by 19    preted as the ratio of shared bits (substructures) to the total bits
undergraduate students (junior and senior chemistry and biology     (substructures) in two compounds. We performed hierarchical
majors at Haverford and Bryn Mawr colleges) with aid from the     clustering of the compounds using the neighbor-joining algorithm
Pubtator (Wei et  al., 2013) text-mining tool (http://www.ncbi.    with 1  T as the distance  metric. Compound  clusters were
nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Lu/Demo/PubTator/).    Articles   were    obtained with a cutoff 0.75 for Tanimoto coefﬁcient. Based on
assigned at random, with each article being assigned to two differ-    our manual inspection, this provides a proper resolution that
ent students. Curators used a standardized workﬂow to ensure    groups most compound analogs and intermediates (compounds
consistent methodologies. Curators ﬁrst read the abstract and arti-    from the same BGC) together (Table S2).
cle to identify all relevant NPs linked to the nucleotide record(s) of     We compared the chemical similarity and performed hierarchi-
interest. For each NP, curators catalogued the name, molecular     cal clustering of curated compounds together with other fungal
structure (as a Simpliﬁed Molecular-Input Line-Entry System or    NPs, which are represented by the ChEBI chemicals under ontology
SMILES  string),  chemical  resource  IDs  (found on PubChem,    term ChEBI: 76946 (fungal metabolite) (Degtyarenko et al., 2008).
ChEMBL, and ChemSpider), and NP classiﬁcation (non-ribosomal   An NP in ChEBI with a Tanimoto coefﬁcient of similarity P0.75 to
peptide synthetase or NRPS, terpene, polyketide synthase or PKS,    any compound in our catalog was considered covered by our
hybrid, or other). When a compound was not available in existing     catalog.
databases, curators drew the compound structure in ChemDraw
software and extracted the SMILES string (Weininger, 1988). Cura-
                                                                                    2.5. AntiSMASH annotation and phylogenetic analysis of biosynthetic
tors also identiﬁed experimental evidence from the article con-
                                                                   genes
ﬁrming an association between the NP(s) and gene cluster(s). If
the NP was a non-ribosomal peptide, curators identiﬁed adenyla-
                                                                        Certain types of core enzymes are known to biosynthesize the
tion domain substrate speciﬁcities. The link between nucleotide
                                                            major classes of fungal NPs, and these enzymes can be readily
records and NPs was conﬁrmed by searching for the associated
                                                                   identiﬁed by homology. We identiﬁed core enzymes in the nucleo-
nucleotide accession numbers in PubMed. An entry supported by
                                                                         tide records from the curated catalog using the set deﬁned by anti-
two independent curators was viewed as conﬁrmed. The remain-
                                                 SMASH 2.0 (Blin et al., 2013). In an analogous fashion, we identiﬁed
ing entries were examined by experts in a separate round of cura-
                                                                   core enzymes in 581 annotated fungal genomes in GenBank. For
tion and were marked as either conﬁrmed or rejected.
                                                                  phylogenetic analyses of these enzymes (or selected domains
                                                                           therein), we ﬁrst performed multiple sequence alignment using
                                                    MAFFT  (Katoh,  2002),  followed by  approximate maximum-
2.3. Conﬁrmation of unique compound names and structures
                                                                        likelihood phylogenic inference using FastTree (Price et al., 2010).
                                                                   Phylogenetic trees were visualized in R using the APE package.
   To obtain the best-matched PubChem Compound Identiﬁers
                                                          The PKS tree was rooted at the common ancestor of the mitochon-
(CIDs), we converted each SMILES string to the International
                                                                             drial ketosynthase (KS) and type  I  fatty acid synthase (FAS)
Chemical Identiﬁer (InChI) key (Heller et al., 2013), and searched
                                                                         proteins.
for the InChI key in PubChem. If an exact match of the isomeric
SMILES (SMILES with isotopic and/or chiral speciﬁcations) was
located in PubChem, we used the corresponding PubChem CID.     3. Results
Otherwise, we converted isomeric SMILES to non-isomeric canon-
ical SMILES and used the corresponding PubChem CID. We cross-      3.1. High-quality curation of articles that link fungal nucleotide
checked the compound names from the student curators with     sequences to natural products
the synonyms from each PubChem entry and resolved conﬂict by
manually re-examining the associated articles. For conﬂicting iso-      To identify publications that link fungal nucleotide sequences to
meric SMILES or CIDs of the same connectivity and compound    NPs, we combined multiple query strategies on PubMed article and
name, we manually examined the chemical structures and retained    NCBI nucleotide databases (Fig. 1). We identiﬁed 960 NP-related
only the SMILES with the most complete stereochemical informa-     articles that were linked to one or more nucleotide records of fun-
tion. Errors in structure or missing stereochemistry were corrected.     gal origin. Of these, we selected 275 articles with a high probability
Multiple conﬂicting isomeric SMILES bearing different compound     of linking gene sequences to NPs (see Methods for details). Under-
names  in a  single research  article were viewed as  different    graduate students manually curated these 275 full-text articles as


[PDF physical page 4]
                                                                      Y.F. Li et al. / Fungal Genetics and Biology 89 (2016) 18–28                                            21





                   Fig. 1. Workﬂow of article identiﬁcation and curation for experimentally veriﬁed BGCs. NT refers to the nucleotide records in GenBank.


part of a class assignment. Each student recorded the NP com-    and were marked as either conﬁrmed or rejected. 453 (75%) entries
pound name(s) associated with each article, or ‘‘no compound” in    were conﬁrmed, while 155 (25%) were rejected. Among the 453
cases where there was none. Structures of NPs were recorded as    conﬁrmed entries, 393 had SMILES entered, corresponding to 217
SMILES strings (Weininger, 1988).                                         articles (see Fig. S1 for details). The 155 rejected entries spanned
   To ensure quality of curation, we randomly assigned each of the    83 articles, most of which were articles that also contained a con-
275 articles to two independent student curators (see Methods).    ﬁrmed entry. These tended to be compounds assigned by one cura-
An ‘‘entry” was deﬁned as an article-compound pair (or article-     tor because they had been mentioned in the article, but ultimately
no-compound pair if there was no compound). The student cura-     rejected because their biosynthesis was not deﬁnitively veriﬁed.
tion resulted in 608 unique entries. An entry supported by two       Stereochemistry is a vital consideration when looking at NP
independent curators was marked as conﬁrmed. The remaining     structure, with stereoisomers often possessing distinct biological
entries were examined by experts in a separate round of curation,      activities. In some cases, multiple stereoisomers naturally co-occur





Fig. 2. Overlaps between curated articles and nucleotide records in this study versus those in the ClusterMine360 database (CM360). The ﬁrst row (A and B) represents the
overlaps at the article level, while the second row (C and D) represents the overlaps at the nucleotide entry level. ‘‘Initial Set” (in A and C) includes the 275 articles and
associated nucleotide records obtained by semi-automated selection. The ‘‘Final curation” set (in B and D) includes the conﬁrmed article-nucleotide pairs from 217 articles,
which are annotated with at least one compound.


[PDF physical page 5]
22                                                                   Y.F. Li et al. / Fungal Genetics and Biology 89 (2016) 18–28


and  are  assigned  distinct names,  e.g.,  solanapyrone A and     (Crutcher et al., 2013). The former article (Mukherjee et al., 2006)
solanapyrone D. To distinguish such compounds, we obtained    was detected by our text-mining pipeline, and subsequently man-
isomeric SMILES when possible.                                        ually curated as describing viridiol/viridin. Such errors are a conse-
  We compared collated gene clusters in various stages of our    quence of the evolving research.
pipeline with those in the ClusterMine360 (Conway and Boddy,     We identiﬁed 10 NPs (5.1% of our catalog) that are currently not
2013), a crowd sourced BGC database that was the largest online    covered by PubChem. Among those NPs in PubChem, there are sev-
resource for fungal BGCs available at the study outset. Our original     eral cases where PubChem entries are incomplete or inaccurate,
list of 960 articles covers all 38 articles that are linked to 26 fungal     generally containing the compound structures but lacking the
nucleotides in ClusterMine360. Subsequent ﬁltering dramatically    compound names. We also observed two cases where the struc-
reduced the total number of articles while retaining the majority     tures provided in the original articles contained errors, and three
of NP-related articles in this database. The set of 275 articles we     cases where the PubChem entries provided the wrong structures.
selected for full text curation covered 33 of the 38 articles in Clus-    Our ﬁnal catalog contains 217 articles for 197 unique compounds,
terMine360 (87%, Fig. 2A) and 25 of their 26 fungal BGCs (96%,    which are linked to 779 nucleotide records from 174 species.
Fig. 2C), while our ﬁnal curation covers 29 (76%) of  articles
(Fig. 2B), and 23 (88%) of the BGCs (Fig. 2D).                               3.2. Literature bias toward certain compound families and fungal
   Although we adopted a strict procedure to ensure curation    genera
quality, we still observed errors during manual post-processing,
some resulting from errors in the literature itself. For example,      To create a global view of existing literature on BGCs, we visu-
curators included a gene cluster for viridiol and viridin from Tricho-     alized the annotated article-compound relationships as a network
derma virens (Mukherjee et al., 2006) based on gene expression evi-    between articles and compounds (Fig. 3A). The nodes in the graph
dence, but later research suggested that the BGC is responsible for    represent articles or compounds, and the edges represent con-
the synthesis of structurally distinct volatile terpene compounds    ﬁrmed article-compound relationships in our catalog.





Fig. 3. Global network view of conﬁrmed article-compound relationships. A. An overview of the network between the articles and compounds. The network contains 393
article compound pairs between 217 articles (purple nodes) and 197 compounds (green nodes). B. The node degree distributions of the article nodes and compound nodes
both follow the power-law distributions. C. The sub-network (a connected component) containing T-2 Toxin. D. The sub-network containing aﬂatoxins.


[PDF physical page 6]
                                                                      Y.F. Li et al. / Fungal Genetics and Biology 89 (2016) 18–28                                            23


   Plotting the node degrees in the log-scale revealed that both the    metabolites in general. For comparison of chemical structures,
number of compounds per article and the number of research arti-   we converted each compound to a chemical ﬁngerprint represent-
cles per compound follow power-law distributions with exponents     ing the presence or absence of a string of substructures (O’Boyle
approximately equal to two (Fig. 3B). According to theories in net-     et  al., 2011). The Tanimoto coefﬁcient of two such ﬁngerprints
work biology, such a power-law distribution indicates a ‘rich-get-     reﬂects the chemical similarity between two compounds. Cluster-
richer’ circumstance (Barabási, 1999). The power-law distribution     ing compounds by these ﬁngerprints revealed products and inter-
of articles per compound suggests a preferential attachment of    mediate compounds from identical and related BGCs (Table S2).
research activities around popular compounds. For example, the    For example, one compound cluster includes aﬂatoxin B1, B2, G1,
top 15 (11.7%) compound families are described by 38.2% of the    and G2, and a second compound cluster includes fumonisin C1–
articles. Fig. 4A shows the most frequently studied compounds.     C3, B1–B4, fumonisin C1–OH, and isofumonisin C1.
Aﬂatoxins alone are the focus of 31 BGC-associated research arti-      To compare the compounds in our catalog to known fungal
cles (14.3%).                                                          metabolites, we used the chemical database ChEBI, which contains
   Similarly, we found that certain fungal genera are dispropor-    a repository of 685 fungal metabolites (Degtyarenko et al., 2008).
tionally represented in the literature. For example, 51 of 197 com-    These include both primary metabolites (such as amino acids)
pounds are reported from Aspergilli (26% of the compound set)    and NPs. We clustered this set of 685 compounds together with
(Fig. 4B). At the class level, only 9 out of 46 fungal classes are cov-    compounds in our catalog according to their substructure ﬁnger-
ered, while the majority of compounds are produced by the Sordar-     prints (Fig. 5 and Supplemental Fig. S5). The NPs in our catalog
iomycetes,  Eurotiomycetes,  Dothideomycetes,  and  Leotiomycetes     are spread fairly evenly across the larger set of fungal metabolites.
classes (Fig. 4C). We observed a correlation between the number    Clades not represented in our catalog include many primary
of articles per compound and the number of species producing    metabolites as well as fungal NPs for which the encoding biosyn-
the compound (Pearson correlation = 0.43, p-value 4  10 10 for     thetic pathways have not been characterized. For example, the
individual  compounds;  Pearson   correlation = 0.72,   p-value    genes encoding the strobilurin fungicides (Clough, 1993) do not
5  10 22 for compound families). Presence of a BGC in multiple    appear in our literature-based catalog; these compounds originate
species could explain why a compound would be studied more,    from the understudied Basidiomycete phylum of fungi. Overall, 26%
although the reverse could also be true (those more extensively     of the 685 fungal metabolites are similar to at least one compound
studied tend to be discovered in more species).                        in our catalog at a Tanimoto similarity cutoff of 0.75. We note that
                                                             ChEBI focuses on high quality curation rather than completeness,
3.3. Chemical diversity of natural products in the curated catalog        so not all structurally characterized fungal NPs are present.
                                                             To further examine the relationship between compound struc-
  We sought to understand the chemical diversity of compounds     tures and biosynthetic genes, we compared the core enzyme anno-
in our curated catalog, compared with a larger set of fungal     tation (from antiSMASH 2.0) with the chemical structure-based





Fig. 4. The 15 most frequently studied compounds (A), and the most frequently studied fungal genera (B) and classes (C) associated with compounds in the curated set of
experimentally veriﬁed natural product gene clusters. For (A), Closely related compounds are manually merged into compound families. # Articles: number of unique articles
covering one or more compounds in each family. # Species: number of unique species origins of the nucleotides associated with these articles.


[PDF physical page 7]
24                                                                   Y.F. Li et al. / Fungal Genetics and Biology 89 (2016) 18–28





Fig. 5. Hierarchical clustering of 685 fungal metabolites in ChEBI and 197 compounds in our catalog (marked yellow). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this
ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)


clustering of compounds (Fig. S2). As expected, we observe a strong      3.4. Phyla of origin of nucleotide sequences
clustering of compounds according to the associated core-enzyme
types. Speciﬁcally, compounds synthesized by single types of core       Nucleotides in our reference catalog originate primarily from
enzymes (PKS, NRPS, or terpene cyclase) form separate clusters,    Ascomycetes,  especially from  the Pezizomycotina subphylum
while the compounds produced by multiple types of core enzymes     (98%), which contains the ﬁlamentous fungi such as Aspergilli. This
(‘‘hybrids”) tend to be more scattered.                                 bias was expected, as most fungal NPs characterized to date have


[PDF physical page 8]
                                                                      Y.F. Li et al. / Fungal Genetics and Biology 89 (2016) 18–28                                            25


been identiﬁed in ﬁlamentous fungi. The bias highlights an oppor-    revealed that proteins generally group by phylum of origin (Fig. 6
tunity for identifying novel NPs and enzyme activities in more    and Supplemental Fig. S6). While many of the major Ascomycete
diverse species, particularly those that are uncultivable.              clades harbor at least one characterized enzyme, there are numer-
   Fungal genome sequencing projects are rapidly expanding our    ous sub-clades that are ‘‘orphans,” or harbor no curated enzyme
knowledge of fungal genetic diversity (Grigoriev et al., 2014). Gen-    from our catalog. Similar trends were observed in the phylogenies
Bank currently harbors 581 annotated fungal genomes (genomics     of the other classes of core enzymes (Fig. S3): homologs from the
set), comprising 338 unique species (accessed July 2015). We com-     Basidiomycete phylum tend to represent uncharacterized clades,
pared the phylogenetic diversity in our curated catalog with that in    and enzymes from these clades may therefore encode novel com-
the genomics set, ﬁnding that the public genomes were more    pounds. Basidiomycetes are underrepresented in the genomics
evenly distributed across phyla and subphyla than our catalog,     set (Table 1). As more genomes are sequenced, we anticipate that
though they were still biased toward Ascomycetes (Table 1).         the Basidiomycete clades on the phylogenies (Fig. 6) will become
                                                                       better resolved.

3.5. Natural product biosynthetic core enzymes in curated catalog
versus genomic sequences                                                       3.6. Integration with the MIBiG repository


  Many known fungal NPs are biosynthesized in part by a core      The MIBiG repository, a community annotation of published,
enzyme(s) that can be readily identiﬁed by homology, such as    experimentally characterized BGCs, was a parallel effort to our cat-
the polyketide synthase (PKS) for polyketide pathways and the     alog (Medema et al., 2015). Comparison of the two datasets indi-
non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) for non-ribosomal pep-     cates they  are complementary,  as  different  article  selection
tide pathways. Alkaloid and terpenoid classes are broader, but     criteria were used. The fungal entries in MIBiG correspond to 110
their subclasses also share certain biosynthetic enzymes.               articles in total, 65 of which were included in the 275 articles of
  We searched for core enzymes in the curated set of nucleotide    our  ﬁnal  set,  leaving 210  articles  unique  to  our  curation
sequences using antiSMASH2.0, and identiﬁed ﬁve classes of com-      (Fig. S4A). The remaining 45 MIBiG articles were not included in
mon core enzymes: PKSs, NRPSs, dimethyl allyl tryptophan syn-     this study either because they did not have a deposited nucleotide
thases (DMATSs, involved in the biosynthesis of certain ergot    record (required for our initial searches) or because they were
alkaloids), trichodiene synthases (involved in biosynthesis of a     linked  with  full genome  sequences.  Such  clusters  require
type of terpenoid), and geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthases    software-based cluster predictions to locate in genome sequences,
(GGPPSs, also terpenoid). To evaluate the potential prevalence of    and hence are excluded from the curation pipeline by our ﬁltering
these core enzymes across fungal species, we searched for proteins     strategies. At the biosynthetic gene level (which corresponds to
bearing homology to these ﬁve types of core enzymes in the 581    MIBiG entries), 76 BGCs (106 compounds) overlapped between
fungal genome sequences in GenBank. We identiﬁed 326 instances    our catalog and MIBiG, including two MIBiG entries that were
of these ﬁve enzymes in our curated set, and 8879 instances in the    updated based on our catalog (Fig. S4B). 45 BGCs (69 compounds)
genomics set (Table 2). The large number of enzyme homologs for    were unique to our catalog. The remaining 22 entries in our catalog
which the NPs are not known suggests undiscovered chemical    were mostly partial genes or non-core enzyme genes, not included
diversity.                                                               in the MIBiG repository. There are 44 BGCs (46 compounds) in the
   The  large number  of  uncharacterized  biosynthetic  genes    MIBiG repository that are not in our catalog. 33 of these were
(Table 2) prompted us to investigate the phylogenetic distribution     linked  to whole genome/chromosome sequence  records, and
of characterized vs. uncharacterized core enzymes (Figs. 6 and S3).    hence did not meet our inclusion criteria for article-nucleotide
Alignment of the ketosynthase (KS) domains of all PKS proteins     pairs. Nine of the 44 BGCs were not linked with published articles



Table 1
Taxonomy origins of nucleotide records in curated set and in genomic set. Taxonomy is based on NCBI taxonomy levels 5 and 7 starting from level 1 Eukaryota.

  Taxonomy                                                              Fungal nucleotide records in curated set                Fungal genomes in GenBank

  Ascomycetes                  Pezizomycotina (ﬁlamentous)              765 (98%)                                      253 (43.5%)
                                Schizosaccharomycetes                   0                                             4 (.7%)
                               Saccharomycotina                       1 (.1%)                                        182 (31.3%)

   Basidiomycetes               Agaricomycetes (mushrooms)              9 (1.2%)                                       55 (9.5%)
                                 Ustilaginomycetes                       3 (.4%)                                         10 (1.7%)
                               Tremellomycetes                        0                                             24 (4.1%)
                               Malasseziomycetes                      1 (.1%)                                        2 (.3%)

  Other                                                            0                                             51 (8.8%)

   Total                                                           779                                           581




Table 2
Types of core enzymes identiﬁed in curated nucleotides in the catalog and in 581 fungal genomes in GenBank. Published Clusters: the experimentally veriﬁed clusters curated in
this study. Predicted clusters: number of clusters predicted based on 581 fungal genomes in GenBank, majority of which are not experimentally veriﬁed.

  Core enzyme type                                       No. core enzymes in published clusters                       No. core enzymes in predicted clusters

   Ketosynthase-containing (PKS, FAS)                     127                                                 4984
   Condensation-containing (NRPS)                        81                                                 2983
  DMATS (alkaloid)                                    44                                                  550
   Trichodiene synthase (terpene)                            49a                                                   26
  GGPPS (terpene)                                     25                                                  336

   Total                                             326                                                 8879

  a The number is biased by one article that sequenced 39 homologous gene clusters.


[PDF physical page 9]
26                                                                   Y.F. Li et al. / Fungal Genetics and Biology 89 (2016) 18–28





Fig. 6. Phylogenetic tree constructed using the KS domains of the PKS core enzymes identiﬁed by homology in sequenced fungal genomes from GenBank. Characterized PKSs
from this study are highlighted with yellow diamonds. The numerical values associated with the internal nodes are estimated reliability values for the splits generated by the
Shimodaira–Hasegawa test.



(or were linked with articles not indexed by PubMed). One was     biosynthetic genes published in peer-reviewed articles thus far.
linked to an article published after we ﬁnalized the article list. Only    Given the scope of the cataloging process and the large number
one BGC was truly missed by our standards (see Table S3 for details).     of potential peer-reviewed articles to be curated, we developed a
  We converted our catalog into the minimal format of MIBiG and    unique approach that involved the computational identiﬁcation
submitted it to the MIBiG repository (see Table S3 for the full list).     of articles that both (1) discuss fungal metabolite biosynthesis
The combination  of  this  literature-based  catalog and MIBiG    and (2) contain a nucleotide record deposited in NCBI, linked to
resulted in 165 unique fungal BGCs with at least one core enzyme    the article by the authors. We then leveraged the abilities and
fully sequenced. To our knowledge, this represents the largest col-     interests of motivated undergraduate students and experts to col-
lection of experimentally validated fungal NP gene clusters to date.     late a comprehensive list of fungal NPs each with at least one asso-
The complete resulting reference set of fungal BGCs is available     ciated gene sequence, and further integrated  this  list into a
from the MIBiG web page (http://mibig.secondarymetabolites.    community repository. We note that our automated article priori-
org) in GenBank, FASTA, and JSON formats.                             tization pipeline was designed to retain only the most promising
                                                                              articles in order to minimize the workload for manual annotation.
                                                              Although some true BGCs may be missed due to the stringent cut-
4. Discussion
                                                                                          off, our ﬁnal curation covers over 88% of the fungal nucleotide
                                                                        entries in ClusterMine360 (see Section 3.1) and virtually all of
   For natural product discovery and research to fully beneﬁt from
                                                                  the fungal BGCs in MIBiG that are linked with non-full genome
the genomic revolution, it is imperative that existing ﬁndings be
                                                             sequence records in GenBank and articles in indexed in PubMed
straightforward to access and analyze in a systematic manner.
                                                                       (see Section 3.6). In addition, our approach successfully retrieved
Recent calls to the community to systematically catalog NP biosyn-
                                                               a large number of BGCs otherwise missed by MIBiG.
thetic gene-associated metadata  will  facilitate the systematic
                                                             The success of our approach is highlighted by the fact that we
deposition of newly-characterized NP gene clusters into databases
                                                                        disclose 197 fungal NPs associated with sequenced genes and iden-
(Medema et al., 2015). However, there remains a wealth of infor-
                                                                                    tify new areas ripe for investigation. We observed certain biases in
mation spread out over the past few decades of scientiﬁc literature
                                                               experiments on fungal metabolite biosynthesis. First, we noted
that will not be captured by these future efforts. Our work here
                                                                      that certain molecules, such as aﬂatoxins, dominate the literature,
addresses this challenge, by generating an extensive list of fungal


[PDF physical page 10]
                                                                      Y.F. Li et al. / Fungal Genetics and Biology 89 (2016) 18–28                                            27


with >10% of articles focused on this single class. Second, certain         boundaries using the transcriptional regulator LaeA. Fungal Genet. Biol. 44,
fungal genera are disproportionally studied, with compounds from        1134–1145. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fgb.2006.12.010.
                                                                                        Cerqueira, G.C., Arnaud, M.B., Inglis, D.O., Skrzypek, M.S., Binkley, G., Simison, M.,
Aspergilli alone comprising 25% of the compound set; by contrast,         Miyasato, S.R., Binkley, J., Orvis, J., Shah, P., Wymore, F., Sherlock, G., Wortman, J.
only 3.4% (20/581) of sequenced fungal genomes are from Asper-             R.,  2014. The  Aspergillus Genome  Database:  multispecies  curation and
gilli. Third, researchers have only sampled a small portion of the         incorporation  of RNA-Seq  data  to improve  structural gene  annotations.
                                                                                        Nucleic Acids Res. 42, D705–W710. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkt1029.
sequence diversity of important core enzymes such as PKSs. There     Chang, S.-L., Chiang, Y.-M., Yeh, H.-H., Wu, T.-K., Wang, C.C.C., 2013. Reconstitution
are certain species and clades (e.g., Basidiomycete; Figs. 6 and S3)          of the early steps of gliotoxin biosynthesis in Aspergillus nidulans reveals the role
that remain completely uncharacterized and may therefore repre-          of the monooxygenase GliC. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 23, 2155–2157. http://dx.
                                                                                          doi.org/10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.01.099.
sent untapped chemical diversity.                                         Cimermancic,  P., Medema, M.H., Claesen,   J.,  Kurita,  K., Wieland Brown,  L.C.,
  Our methods can be applied more generally to collate gene        Mavrommatis, K., Pati, A., Godfrey, P.A., Koehrsen, M., Clardy,  J., Birren, B.W.,
information for secondary metabolites produced by other microor-         Takano, E., Sali, A., Linington, R.G., Fischbach, M.A., 2014. Insights into secondary
                                                                               metabolism from a global analysis of prokaryotic biosynthetic gene clusters.
ganisms, such as plants and bacteria. Only the initial queries (text           Cell 158, 412–421. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.034.
and homology) require adjustment; subsequent steps can be      Clough, J.M., 1993. The strobilurins, oudemansins, and myxothiazols, fungicidal
directly employed. By including undergraduate students in the          derivatives of B-methoxyacrylic acid. Nat. Prod. Rep. 10, 565–574. http://dx.doi.
curation process, we were able to make rapid progress while also         org/10.1039/np9931000565.
                                                                         Conway, K.R., Boddy, C.N., 2013. ClusterMine360: a database of microbial PKS/NRPS
providing students with a unique opportunity to contribute original          biosynthesis. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, 402–407. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/
research to the biosynthetic community. Notably, this challenge         gks993.
inspired several students to pursue postgraduate opportunities in      Crutcher, F.K., Parich, A., Schuhmacher, R., Mukherjee, P.K., Zeilinger, S., Kenerley, C.
                                                                                            M., 2013. A putative terpene cyclase, vir4, is responsible for the biosynthesis of
natural product research. Our efforts to curate the history of           volatile terpene compounds in the biocontrol fungus Trichoderma virens. Fungal
research on fungal gene-molecule connections thus also helped to         Genet. Biol. 56, 67–77. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fgb.2013.05.003.
cultivate the future of the ﬁeld. By sharing our positive experience     Degtyarenko, K., de Matos, P., Ennis, M., Hastings,  J., Zbinden, M., McNaught, A.,
                                                                                             Alcántara, R., Darsow, M., Guedj, M., Ashburner, M., 2008. ChEBI: a database and
with the community, we hope to inspire others to consider inte-         ontology for chemical entities of biological interest. Nucleic Acids Res. 36,
grating original research challenges into the classroom.                   D344–D350. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkm791.
  Our collaborative effort yielded a reference catalog linking fun-      Donia, M.S., Cimermancic, P., Schulze, C.J., Wieland Brown, L.C., Martin, J., Mitreva,
                                                                                            M., Clardy,  J., Linington, R.G., Fischbach, M.A., 2014. A systematic analysis
gal  nucleotide sequence  to NP chemical  structure,  enabling          of biosynthetic gene clusters in the human microbiome reveals a common
researchers to more efﬁciently exploit past information to guide         family of  antibiotics.  Cell 158, 1402–1414.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.
future research and discovery. By integrating new entries into         2014.08.032.
                                                                                    Gaulton, A., Bellis, L.J., Bento, A.P., Chambers,  J., Davies, M., Hersey, A., Light, Y.,
the MIBiG data repository in several standardized formats, our data         McGlinchey, S., Michalovich, D., Al-Lazikani, B., Overington, J.P., 2012. ChEMBL:
can be readily retrieved and analyzed by others (Medema et al.,         a large-scale bioactivity database for drug discovery. Nucleic Acids Res. 40,
2015). Modern genomic approaches  to  biosynthesis research        D1100–D1107. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkr777.
require a systematic understanding of characterized molecules      Grigoriev, I.V., Nikitin, R., Haridas, S., Kuo, A., Ohm, R., Otillar, R., Riley, R., Salamov,
                                                                                                                   A., Zhao, X., Korzeniewski, F., Smirnova, T., Nordberg, H., Dubchak, I., Shabalov,
and  biosynthetic  genes,  particularly  in  synthetic  biology                  I., 2014. MycoCosm portal: gearing up for 1000 fungal genomes. Nucleic Acids
approaches involving comparative analyses of gene sequences.          Res. 42, D699–D704. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkt1183.
Such efforts include mining genomic DNA for new classes of mole-     Guha, R., 2007. Chemical informatics functionality in R.  J. Stat. Softw. 18, 1–16.
                                                                                         http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LPT.2009.2020494.
cules, testing putative NP gene clusters through heterologous      Heller, S., McNaught, A., Stein, S., Tchekhovskoi, D., Pletnev,  I., 2013. InChI – the
expression, and rationally designing hybrid synthases to produce        worldwide chemical structure identiﬁer standard. J. Cheminform. 5, 1,7. http://
‘‘unnatural natural products”. In the era of synthetic biology, that         dx.doi.org/10.1186/1758-2946-5-7.
                                                                            Heneghan, M.N., Yakasai, A.A., Halo, L.M., Song, Z., Bailey, A.M., Simpson, T.J., Cox, R.
efforts like ours, combined with future MIBiG standard-compliant                  J.,  Lazarus,  C.M., 2010.  First heterologous  reconstruction  of a complete
data, will provide fertile ground for future developments in fungal          functional fungal biosynthetic multigene cluster. ChemBioChem 11, 1508–
natural product research.                                                       1512. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cbic.201000259.
                                                                                      Hoffmeister, D., Keller, N.P., 2007. Natural products of ﬁlamentous fungi: enzymes,
                                                                                          genes, and their regulation. Nat. Prod. Rep. 24, 393–416. http://dx.doi.org/
Acknowledgments                                                              10.1039/b603084j.
                                                                                     Ichikawa, N., Sasagawa, M., Yamamoto, M., Komaki, H., Yoshida, Y., Yamazaki, S.,
                                                                                                          Fujita, N., 2013. DoBISCUIT: a database of secondary metabolite biosynthetic
  We thank Yi Tang and Mancheng Tang for helpful discussions.        gene clusters. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D408–D414. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/
We gratefully acknowledge support from Haverford College, the         gks1177.
Research Corporation for Science Advancement Cottrell College       Inglis, D.O., Binkley,  J., Skrzypek, M.S., Arnaud, M.B., Cerqueira, G.C., Shah,  P.,
                                                                       Wymore, F., Wortman, J.R., Sherlock, G., 2013. Comprehensive annotation of
Scholars Award (L.K.C), and NIH grant U01 GM110706 (Y.F.L., M.         secondary metabolite biosynthetic genes and gene  clusters  of  Aspergillus
E.H, C.J.B.H).                                                                                 nidulans, A. fumigatus, A. niger and A. oryzae. BMC Microbiol. 13, 91. http://dx.
                                                                                     doi.org/10.1186/1471-2180-13-91.
                                                                                    Katoh, K., 2002. MAFFT: a novel method for rapid multiple sequence alignment
Appendix A. Supplementary material                                      based on fast Fourier transform. Nucleic Acids Res. 30, 3059–3066. http://dx.
                                                                                          doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkf436.
                                                                                       Kealey,  J.T., Liu,  L., Santi, D.V., Betlach, M.C., Barr,  P.J., 1998. Production of a
   Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in         polyketide  natural  product  in  nonpolyketide-producing  prokaryotic and
the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fgb.2016.01.012.          eukaryotic hosts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 505–509. http://dx.doi.org/
                                                                                        10.1073/pnas.95.2.505.
                                                                                                  Keller, N.P., Turner, G., Bennett, J.W., 2005. Fungal secondary metabolism – from
References                                                                        biochemistry to genomics. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 3, 937–947. http://dx.doi.org/
                                                                                   10.1038/nrmicro1286.
Amare,  M.G.,  Keller,  N.P., 2014. Molecular mechanisms  of  Aspergillus ﬂavus      Lim, F.Y., Sanchez, J.F., Wang, C.C.C., Keller, N.P., 2012. Toward awakening cryptic
    secondary metabolism and development. Fungal Genet.  Biol.  66, 11–18.         secondary metabolite gene clusters in ﬁlamentous fungi.  In: Methods in
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fgb.2014.02.008.                                       Enzymology,  ﬁrst ed. Elsevier Inc., pp. 303–324. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
Barabási, A., 1999. Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science 286 (80),         B978-0-12-404634-4.00015-2.
   509–512. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.286.5439.509.                      Mao, X.-M., Xu, W., Li, D., Yin, W.-B., Chooi, Y.-H., Li, Y.-Q., Tang, Y., Hu, Y., 2015.
Blin, K., Medema, M.H., Kazempour, D., Fischbach, M.a., Breitling, R., Takano, E.,          Epigenetic genome mining of an endophytic fungus leads to the pleiotropic
   Weber, T., 2013. AntiSMASH 2.0–a versatile platform for genome mining of          biosynthesis of natural products. Angew. Chem. 127, 7702–7706. http://dx.doi.
    secondary metabolite producers. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, W204–W212. http://dx.         org/10.1002/ange.201502452.
    doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkt449.                                                     Mattern, D.J., Valiante, V., Unkles, S.E., Brakhage, A.A., 2015. Synthetic biology of
Bouhired,  S., Weber, M., Kempf-Sontag,  A., Keller, N.P., Hoffmeister, D., 2007.         fungal natural products. Front. Microbiol. 6, 775. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/
    Accurate prediction  of the  Aspergillus nidulans terrequinone gene  cluster         fmicb.2015.00775.


[PDF physical page 11]
28                                                                   Y.F. Li et al. / Fungal Genetics and Biology 89 (2016) 18–28


Medema, M.H., Blin, K., Cimermancic, P., de Jager, V., Zakrzewski, P., Fischbach, M.a.,         Roubos, J.A., Sagt, C.M.J., Schmoll, M., Sun, J., Ussery, D., Varga, J., Vervecken, W.,
   Weber,  T., Takano,  E., Breitling,  R., 2011. antiSMASH: rapid identiﬁcation,        van de Vondervoort, P.J.J., Wedler, H., Wösten, H.A.B., Zeng, A.-P., van Ooyen, A.J.
    annotation and analysis of secondary metabolite biosynthesis gene clusters in                  J., Visser, J., Stam, H., 2007. Genome sequencing and analysis of the versatile cell
    bacterial and fungal genome sequences. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, W339–W346.          factory Aspergillus niger CBS 513.88. Nat. Biotechnol. 25, 221–231. http://dx.doi.
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkr466.                                               org/10.1038/nbt1282.
Medema, M.H., Fischbach, M.A., 2015. Computational approaches to natural product      Pence,  H.E., Williams,  A., 2010. ChemSpider: an online chemical information
    discovery.   Nat.  Chem.   Biol.   11,  639–648.   http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/          resource. J. Chem. Educ. 87, 1123–1124. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ed100697w.
   nchembio.1884.                                                                                       Pi, B., Yu, D., Dai, F., Song, X., Zhu, C., Li, H., Yu, Y., 2015. A genomics based discovery
Medema, M.H., Kottmann, R., Yilmaz, P., Cummings, M., Biggins, J.B., Blin, K., de          of secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters in Aspergillus ustus. PLoS
    Bruijn,  I., Chooi, Y.H., Claesen,  J., Coates, R.C., Cruz-Morales, P., Duddela,  S.,       ONE 10, e0116089. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0116089.
    Düsterhus, S., Edwards, D.J., Fewer, D.P., Garg, N., Geiger, C., Gomez-Escribano, J.       Price, M.N., Dehal, P.S., Arkin, A.P., 2010. FastTree 2–approximately maximum-
     P., Greule, A., Hadjithomas, M., Haines, A.S., Helfrich, E.J.N., Hillwig, M.L., Ishida,          likelihood trees for large alignments. PLoS ONE 5, e9490. http://dx.doi.org/
     K., Jones, A.C., Jones, C.S., Jungmann, K., Kegler, C., Kim, H.U., Kötter, P., Krug, D.,         10.1371/journal.pone.0009490.
    Masschelein, J., Melnik, A.V., Mantovani, S.M., Monroe, E.A., Moore, M., Moss, N.,      Richter, L., Wanka, F., Boecker, S., Storm, D., Kurt, T., Vural, Ö., Süßmuth, R., Meyer,
   Nützmann, H.-W., Pan, G., Pati, A., Petras, D., Reen, F.J., Rosconi, F., Rui, Z., Tian,            V., 2014. Engineering of Aspergillus niger for the production of secondary
     Z., Tobias, N.J., Tsunematsu, Y., Wiemann, P., Wyckoff, E., Yan, X., Yim, G., Yu, F.,          metabolites. Fungal Biol. Biotechnol. 1, 1–13. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s40694-
    Xie,  Y.,  Aigle,  B., Apel,  A.K.,  Balibar,  C.J., Balskus,  E.P., Barona-Gómez,  F.,         014-0004-9.
    Bechthold, A., Bode, H.B., Borriss, R., Brady,  S.F., Brakhage, A.A., Caffrey,  P.,      Sakai,  K., Kinoshita,  H.,  Nihira,  T., 2012. Heterologous expression system  in
    Cheng, Y.-Q., Clardy,  J., Cox, R.J., De Mot, R., Donadio, S., Donia, M.S., van der           Aspergillus  oryzae  for  fungal  biosynthetic  gene  clusters  of  secondary
   Donk, W.A., Dorrestein, P.C., Doyle, S., Driessen, A.J.M., Ehling-Schulz, M., Entian,          metabolites. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 93, 2011–2022. http://dx.doi.org/
    K.-D., Fischbach, M.A., Gerwick, L., Gerwick, W.H., Gross, H., Gust, B., Hertweck,         10.1007/s00253-011-3657-9.
     C., Höfte, M., Jensen, S.E., Ju,  J., Katz, L., Kaysser, L., Klassen, J.L., Keller, N.P.,      Sakai, K., Kinoshita, H., Shimizu, T., Nihira, T., 2008. Construction of a citrinin gene
   Kormanec, J., Kuipers, O.P., Kuzuyama, T., Kyrpides, N.C., Kwon, H.-J., Lautru, S.,          cluster expression system in heterologous Aspergillus oryzae. J. Biosci. Bioeng.
    Lavigne, R., Lee, C.Y., Linquan, B., Liu, X., Liu, W., Luzhetskyy, A., Mahmud, T.,         106, 466–472. http://dx.doi.org/10.1263/jbb.106.466.
    Mast, Y., Méndez, C., Metsä-Ketelä, M., Mickleﬁeld, J., Mitchell, D.A., Moore, B.S.,      Shao,  Z., Rao, G.,  Li,  C., Abil,  Z., Luo, Y., Zhao, H., 2013. Refactoring the silent
    Moreira, L.M., Müller, R., Neilan, B.A., Nett, M., Nielsen, J., O’Gara, F., Oikawa, H.,          spectinabilin gene cluster using a plug-and-play scaffold. ACS Synth. Biol. 2,
    Osbourn, A., Osburne, M.S., Ostash, B., Payne, S.M., Pernodet, J.-L., Petricek, M.,        662–669. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/sb400058n.
     Piel, J., Ploux, O., Raaijmakers, J.M., Salas, J.A., Schmitt, E.K., Scott, B., Seipke, R.F.,       Stajich, J.E., Harris, T., Brunk, B.P., Brestelli, J., Fischer, S., Harb, O.S., Kissinger, J.C., Li,
    Shen, B., Sherman, D.H., Sivonen, K., Smanski, M.J., Sosio, M., Stegmann, E.,         W., Nayak,  V., Pinney,  D.F., Stoeckert,  C.J., Roos,  D.S., 2012. FungiDB: an
   Süssmuth, R.D., Tahlan, K., Thomas, C.M., Tang, Y., Truman, A.W., Viaud, M.,          integrated functional genomics database for fungi. Nucleic Acids Res. 40, D675–
    Walton, J.D., Walsh, C.T., Weber, T., van Wezel, G.P., Wilkinson, B., Willey, J.M.,        D681. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkr918.
   Wohlleben, W., Wright, G.D., Ziemert, N., Zhang, C., Zotchev, S.B., Breitling, R.,      Steinbeck, C., Han, Y., Kuhn, S., Horlacher, O., Luttmann, E., Willighagen, E., 2003.
    Takano, E., Glöckner, F.O., 2015. Minimum Information about a Biosynthetic        The Chemistry Development Kit (CDK): an open-source Java library for chemo-
   Gene  cluster.  Nat.  Chem.  Biol.  11,  625–631.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/        and bioinformatics.  J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 43, 493–500. http://dx.doi.org/
   nchembio.1890.                                                                  10.1021/ci025584y.
Mukherjee, M., Horwitz, B.A., Sherkhane, P.D., Hadar, R., Mukherjee, P.K., 2006. A     Throckmorton, K., Wiemann, P., Keller, N.P., 2015. Evolution of chemical diversity in
    secondary metabolite biosynthesis cluster in Trichoderma virens: evidence from         a group of non-reduced polyketide gene clusters: using phylogenetics to inform
    analysis of genes underexpressed in a mutant defective in morphogenesis and         the search for novel fungal natural products. Toxins (Basel) 7, 3572–3607.
    antibiotic production. Curr. Genet. 50, 193–202. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/          http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/toxins7093572.
   s00294-006-0075-0.                                                              Unkles, S.E., Valiante, V., Mattern, D.J., Brakhage, A.A., 2014. Synthetic biology tools
Newman, D.J., Cragg, G.M., 2007. Natural products as sources of new drugs over the           for bioprospecting of natural products in eukaryotes. Chem. Biol. 21, 502–508.
    last 25 years. J. Nat. Prod. 70, 461–477. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/np068054v.           http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2014.02.010.
Nikolova, N., Jaworska,  J., 2003. Approaches to measure chemical similarity– a     Walsh, C.T., Fischbach, M.A., 2010. Natural products version 2.0: connecting genes
    review.  QSAR  Comb.   Sci.   22,  1006–1026.   http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/          to  molecules.    J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  132,  2469–2493.  http://dx.doi.org/
    qsar.200330831.                                                                  10.1021/ja909118a.
O’Boyle, N.M., Banck, M., James, C.A., Morley, C., Vandermeersch, T., Hutchison, G.R.,     Wang, Y., Xiao,  J., Suzek, T.O., Zhang,  J., Wang,  J., Bryant, S.H., 2009. PubChem: a
    2011. Open Babel: an open chemical toolbox. J. Cheminform. 3, 33. http://dx.          public information system  for analyzing  bioactivities of small molecules.
    doi.org/10.1186/1758-2946-3-33.                                                    Nucleic Acids Res. 37, W623–W633. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkp456.
O’Brien,  R.V., Davis, R.W., Khosla,  C., Hillenmeyer, M.E., 2014. Computational     Wei, C.H., Kao, H.Y., Lu,  Z., 2013. PubTator: a web-based text mining tool for
    identiﬁcation and analysis of orphan assembly-line polyketide synthases.  J.          assisting biocuration. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, W518–W522. http://dx.doi.org/
    Antibiot. 67, 89–97. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ja.2013.125 (in Tokyo).                  10.1093/nar/gkt441.
Pel, H.J., de Winde, J.H., Archer, D.B., Dyer, P.S., Hofmann, G., Schaap, P.J., Turner, G.,     Weininger, D., 1988. SMILES, a chemical language and information system. 1.
   de Vries, R.P., Albang, R., Albermann, K., Andersen, M.R., Bendtsen, J.D., Benen, J.         Introduction to methodology and encoding rules. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 28, 31–36.
     A.E., van den Berg, M., Breestraat, S., Caddick, M.X., Contreras, R., Cornell, M.,          http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ci00057a005.
    Coutinho, P.M., Danchin, E.G.J., Debets, A.J.M., Dekker, P., van Dijck, P.W.M., van     Wiemann, P., Keller, N.P., 2014. Strategies for mining fungal natural products. J. Ind.
    Dijk, A., Dijkhuizen,  L., Driessen, A.J.M., d’Enfert, C., Geysens, S., Goosen, C.,          Microbiol.  Biotechnol.  41, 301–313.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10295-013-
    Groot, G.S.P., de Groot, P.W.J., Guillemette, T., Henrissat, B., Herweijer, M., van         1366-3.
   den Hombergh, J.P.T.W., van den Hondel, C.A.M.J.J., van der Heijden, R.T.J.M., van      Yin, W.-B., Chooi, Y.H., Smith, A.R., Cacho, R.A., Hu, Y., White, T.C., Tang, Y., 2013.
    der Kaaij, R.M., Klis, F.M., Kools, H.J., Kubicek, C.P., van Kuyk, P.A., Lauber, J., Lu,         Discovery  of  cryptic  polyketide  metabolites  from  dermatophytes  using
     X., van der Maarel, M.J.E.C., Meulenberg, R., Menke, H., Mortimer, M.A., Nielsen,         heterologous expression in Aspergillus nidulans. ACS Synth. Biol. 2, 629–634.
       J., Oliver, S.G., Olsthoorn, M., Pal, K., van Peij, N.N.M.E., Ram, A.F.J., Rinas, U.,         http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/sb400048b.