
[PDF physical page 1]
      NIH Public Access
          Author Manuscript
          ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.
                Published in final edited form as:
           ChemBiol. 2012 August 24; 19(8): 1049–1059. doi:10.1016/j.chembiol.2012.07.004.
NIH-PA
Author       DiscoveryProduces Azaphilonesand Characterizationfrom Aspergillusof a SilentnigerGeneATCCCluster1015thatReveal
         a Hydroxylation-Mediated Pyran-Ring Formation

             Angelica O. Zabala1, Wei Xu1, Yit-Heng Chooi1,1, and Yi Tang1,2,*
              1Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles,Manuscript
                California 90095, USA

              2Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, California
              90095, USA

        SUMMARY
                   Azaphilones are a class of fungal metabolites characterized by a highly oxygenated pyrano-
                   quinone bicyclic core and exhibits a broad range of bioactivities. While widespread among various
                      fungi, their biosynthesis has not been thoroughly elucidated. By activation of a silent (aza) geneNIH-PA                       cluster in AspergillusnigerATCC 1015, we have discovered six new azaphilone compounds,
                    azanigerones A-F (1, 3-7). Transcriptional analysis and deletion of a key polyketide synthase
                 (PKS) gene further confirmed the involvement of the azagene cluster. The biosynthetic pathwayAuthor              was shown to involve the convergent actions of a highly-reducing and a non-reducing PKSs. Most
                       significantly, invitroreaction of a key flavin-dependent monooxygenase encoded in the cluster
                    with an early benzaldehyde intermediate revealed its roles in hydroxylation and pyran-ring
                    formation to afford the characteristic bicylic core shared by azaphilones.Manuscript
         INTRODUCTION

                             Filamentous fungi are known to be prolific producers of secondary metabolites, such as the
                                   penicillin, lovastatin and cyclosporine, and are an important resource for discovering small
                             molecules of pharmaceutical and industrial value (Keller, et al., 2005). In the last decade,
                          whole genome sequencing of various fungi has revealed that these microorganisms have
                         immense biosynthetic potential that far surpasses the chemical diversity that we observe in
                               laboratory culture (Sanchez, et al., 2012). For example, the genome of many aspergilli are
                            found to encode for a combined 30 to 80 polyketide synthases (PKSs), nonribosomal peptideNIH-PA                            synthetases (NRPSs) and PKS-NRPS hybrids, which far exceeds the total number of known
                               polyketides and nonribosomal peptides (Sanchez, et al., 2012). Of these, the fungal PKSs are
                               of considerable interest due to their interesting enzymology and the polyketide structuralAuthor                               diversity.

                            Fungal type I PKSs contain multiple catalytic domains and resemble the animal fatty acid
                                synthases, where a single set of catalytic domains is used iteratively. The chain extension by
                              decarboxylative condensation of malonyl-CoA units is catalyzed by the minimal PKSManuscript

           © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
                    *Correspondence: yitang@ucla.edu (Y. T.), yhchooi@ucla.edu (Y.H.C) .
                    Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
                   customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
                     the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
                    discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


[PDF physical page 2]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                   Page 2

                            domains, including ketosynthase (KS), malonyl-CoA:ACP transacylase (AT) and acyl
                                   carrier protein (ACP) (Cox, 2007). Non-reducing PKSs (NR-PKSs) synthesize a poly-β-
                             ketone backbone which is cyclized by a product template (PT) domain to yield aromatic
                         compounds such as orsellinic acid and norsolorinic acid (Crawford, et al., 2009). In contrast,
                              highly-reducing PKSs (HR-PKSs) utilize different combinations of ketoreductase (KR),
                              dehydratase (DH), and enoyl reductase (ER) domains following each chain extension toNIH-PA
                             reduce the β-keto positions in different extent, and produces reduced polyketides such as
                                 lovastatin and fumonisin (Cox, 2007). Together with tailoring enzymes that are typically
                                clustered in a biosynthetic pathway at the genetic level, the different fungal PKSs produce aAuthor
                                large array of polyketides (Keller, et al., 2005).

                              Bioinformatic analyses of different fungal genomes have revealed that it is common for two
                       PKSs to be located in the same gene cluster (Sanchez, et al., 2012). The polyketide products
                               of several of these dual PKS-containing gene clusters are known, including hypothemycinManuscript                           (Reeves, et al., 2008; Zhou, et al., 2010), asperfuranone (Chiang, et al., 2009) and lovastatin
                            (Kennedy, et al., 1999; Ma, et al., 2009). The two PKSs can either work in sequence or in
                            convergence to synthesize the polyketide product. When the two PKSs function
                                 sequentially, the polyketide chain formed by the first PKS is transferred to the second PKS
                                 to continue the chain extension process. This has been demonstrated in the biosynthesis of
                                the resorcylic acid lactones and asperfuranone, in which the upstream HR-PKS produces a
                                   partially reduced polyketide chain that is transferred to the downstream NR-PKS to be
                                 further elongated (Chiang, et al., 2009; Zhou, et al., 2010). In the convergent model, the two
                       PKSs can function independently in parallel, and the two polyketide products are ultimatelyNIH-PA                          connected via accessory enzymes. An example is the biosynthesis of the lovastatin, in which
                                the nonaketide and a diketide chains produced by two different HR-PKSs are combined via
                                the action of the acyltransferase LovD (Xie, et al., 2009). With a limited number of dual-
                     PKS systems characterized so far, it is currently not possible to predict which mode ofAuthor
                                 crosstalk (sequential or convergent) between the two PKSs will take place through
                               bioinformatic means alone. Therefore, characterization of additional dual PKS-containing
                           pathways will facilitate our understanding of the molecular and genetic basis that underlie
                                the differences between the PKS-PKS partnerships, and enable better prediction of the gene
                                  cluster products.Manuscript
                            Aspergillusnigerand closely related black aspergilli are known to produce a large number
                               of secondary metabolites, with up to 145 compounds catalogued (Nielsen, et al., 2009).
                             Annotation of the sequenced A.nigergenomes unveiled an impressive number of PKS
                               genes, including 34 PKSs and 7 PKS-NRPS hybrids (Andersen, et al., 2011; Pel, et al.,
                              2007). In this work, we mined the genome of A.nigerATCC 1015 and identified a
                               polyketide gene cluster that contains a pair of HR-PKS and NR-PKS. Overexpression of a
                              pathway-specific transcriptional regulator found in the gene cluster led to the overproduction
                               of a number of previously unknown azaphilone natural products. Azaphilones possess aNIH-PA                            signature bicyclic chromophore and is known to react readily with amines to produce the
                             vinylogous γ-pyridones (Osmanova, et al., 2010). This family is structurally diverse and
                               includes bioactive compounds such as the antifungal lunatoic acid (Nukina and Marumo,
                              1977), the anti-inflammatory agent monascorubrin (Yasukawa, et al., 1994), theAuthor
                             lipoxygenase inhibitor sclerotiorin (Chidananda and Sattur, 2007), the food dye ankaflavin
                           (Manchand, et al., 1973) as well as the nephrotoxic mycotoxin citrinin (Endo and Kuroda,
                            1976; Sakai, et al., 2008) (Figure 1). We show here that the two partnering PKSs function in
                             a convergent manner toward azaphilone biosynthesis.Manuscript





                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 3]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                   Page 3

         RESULTS

              Bioinformatic analysis of A. niger ATCC 1015 genome reveals a gene cluster with two PKS
            genes
                   We scanned the sequenced genome of A.nigerATCC 1015 for dual PKS gene clusters andNIH-PA                         found a single gene cluster containing an HR- and an NR-PKS. The NR-PKS gene
                       ASPNIDRAFT_56946 and the HR-PKS gene ASPNIDRAFT_188817 (herein referred to as
                     azaAand azaB, respectively) appear to be homologs of afoEand afoG(44% and 43%
                                protein identity) in the A.nidulansafocluster, which is responsible for the synthesis ofAuthor
                              asperfuranone (Chiang, et al., 2009) (Figure 2 and Table 1). The azaAgene encodes for a
                            Clade III NR-PKS according to a previous fungal PKS phylogenetic classification scheme
                             (Kroken, et al., 2003). In addition to the minimal PKS domains, it also includes an N-
                             terminus starter unit: acyl-CoA transacylase (SAT) and a C-terminus didomain of C-
                               methyltransferase (CMeT) and reductase (R). On the other hand, AzaB is a typical HR-PKSManuscript
                                consisting of the minimal PKS domains, the β-keto processing domains (DH, ER and KR)
                           and CMeT domain. The domain organizations of AzaA and AzaB are parallel to that of
                        AfoE and AfoG, respectively.

                             Analysis of nearby genes in the dual-PKS cluster reveals the presence of
                       ASPNIDRAFT_132962 (azaR) encoding for a Zn(II)2Cys6 zinc finger transcription factor,
                          which could regulate the coordinated expression of the genes in a cluster (Keller, et al.,
                              2005). Upstream and downstream of the PKSs, we find several tailoring enzymes that may
                           modify the polyketide product. Interestingly, most of these genes have a correspondingNIH-PA                       homolog in the asperfuranone gene cluster, including azaC(afoChomolog), azaG(afoF
                            homolog), azaH(afoDhomolog), azaJ(AN1030.3 homolog), azaL(afoFhomolog), each
                             with > 30% identity to their afocounterparts (Table 1). However, four new genes are also
                            found in the cluster including an acyltransferase (azaD), a ketoreductase (azaE), an AMP-Author
                            dependent CoA ligase (azaF) and a P450 monooxygenase (azaI) (Table 1). The extensive
                              overlap between the azaand afogene clusters suggests that the azacluster may encode for
                                the production of an asperfuranone-like compound.

             Overexpression of azaR activates the aza pathwayManuscript
                     Among the polyketide metabolites catalogued for A.niger(Nielsen, et al., 2009), none
                              appears to be a likely candidate of the azacluster. Reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR)
                                analysis of azaAand azaBshowed that both PKS genes were weakly transcribed under our
                               laboratory culturing conditions (Figure 3A). Ectopic integration and overexpression of
                              pathway-specific transcriptional activator has been used as a strategy to activate the
                              expression of silent gene cluster for production of cryptic metabolites (Bergmann, et al.,
                              2007). In order to interrogate the azacluster, we constructed the overexpression plasmid
                       pAZ44 by cloning azaRinto pBARGPE1 (obtained from FGSC), which contains a PgpdA for
                           gene expression in fungi and a bargene that confers resistance to glufosinate. Upon PEG-NIH-PA
                            mediated protoplast transformation and selection, several transformants emerged and
                            produced a yellow pigmentation not observed in the wild type strain. The genomic DNA
                           from one of the transformants (T1) was extracted and integration of the vector wasAuthor                            confirmed via amplification of PgpdA::azaRpresent in the pAZ44 plasmid.

                               In order to determine which genes are transcriptionally activated by the regulator, RT-PCR
                                analysis was performed on the wild type (WT) and the A.nigerT1 strains under identical
                                conditions. We amplified a ~600 bp segment in each gene, particularly in those regions withManuscript                             introns in order to distinguish between the products from spliced cDNA and potential
                          genomic DNA carryover during RNA extraction. In addition to azaA,azaBand azaR, 10
                               other genes were significantly upregulated (Figure 3A). The genes immediately upstream of



                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 4]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                   Page 4

                      azaCand downstream of azaBshowed no increase in transcription levels compared to the
                 WT (Figure 3A). We therefore hypothesize that the 13 transcribed genes comprise the aza
                                   cluster.

                     LC-MS analysis of the metabolic profile of the activated A.nigerT1 reveals the presence of
                                several new compounds not found in the WT strain (Figure 3B). The culture was scaled upNIH-PA
                                 to 2 L to obtain sufficient compound for structure elucidation. In addition, a time course of
                                the metabolites produced by T1 was performed in order to identify possible biosynthetic
                               intermediates of the azapathway (Figure 3B).Author
                        From the second and fourth day cultures of A.nigerT1, compound 1 (m/z363 [M+H]+,
                         λmax 330 nm) was the most abundant product (Figure 3B and S1A); it was purified as a
                            yellow gum from the 4-day culture at an approximate yield of 60 mg/L. High-resolution
                          mass of 1 is consistent with the molecular formula of C19H22O7 (observed m/z363.1465 [MManuscript                         +H]+, calculated 363.1444). The pure compound was characterized by 1H and 13C NMR
                               spectroscopy, which showed all of the 19 carbon and 22 proton signals (Table S1 and Figure
                               S5). From the 2D HSQC-INEPT135 and HMBC correlations (Figure S5), it is apparent that
                                there are two substructures in the molecule – a fully-saturated aliphatic chain and a
                             conjugated cyclic moiety. The highly-reduced chain is consistent with a 2,4-dimethyl
                            hexanoyl structure characterized by 3 methyls, 2 methylenes and 2 methines. We did not
                                find any HMBC correlation beyond the carbonyl carbon with a chemical shift of 176.86 ppm
                               (Figure S5D). Meanwhile, we assigned the rest of the signals to a bicyclic ring system
                                consisting of three aromatic protons [δH 7.93 ppm (s), 7.31 ppm (s), 5.88 ppm (s)] with a
                               carboxylic acid moiety, which corresponded to a low-field proton signal [δH 10.2 ppm (brNIH-PA
                                        s)]. We identified that the only available position on the bicyclic ring system for the linkage
                                 to the 2,4-dimethyl hexanoyl moiety is the oxygen atom bonded to the methylated carbon
                            (δC 84.06 ppm). We therefore propose the structure of 1 as shown in Figure 2, with the twoAuthor                                substructures connected by an ester bond at C1’ and C4. MS/MS analysis supports this
                                linkage, which showed a fragment consistent with the mass of the bicyclic core (m/z237 [M
                           +H]+) (Figure S2). Thus, 1 was determined to be a new member of azaphilones, which bears
                                the typical pyrano-quinone bicyclic core, and was named azanigerone A. The configurations
                               of the chiral centers in 1 are yet to be determined. The structure of 1 resembles lunatoic acid,Manuscript                             a previously characterized azaphilone from the plant pathogen Cochlioboluslunatus(Nukina
                           and Marumo, 1977) (Figure 1). The aliphatic acyl chains of the two molecules are identical
                               as evidenced by comparison to published values for lunatoic acid (Nukina and Marumo,
                              1977). The main structural difference is the side chain on C9, where a longer acrylic acid is
                                 in place in lunatoic acid instead of the C1 carboxylic acid in 1.

                               In addition to 1, several other compounds were observed in the culture at different time
                                  points. Compound 2 (m/z251 [M+H]+, λmax 300 nm) is produced on day 2 but disappeared
                                    at day 4 and beyond (Figure 3B and S1B). This compound was purified and its structure wasNIH-PA                          determined to be the tetra-substituted benzaldehyde FK17-P2a (Figures 3C and Table S1)
                                  that was previously isolated from Aspergillusversicolorand Pseudobotrytisterrestris(Arai
                              T, 1994; Yamaguchi, et al., 2004). FK17-P2a should be a polyketide that originates from a
                             methylated hexaketide that can be synthesized by a NR-PKS, which undergoes C2-C7Author
                               intramolecular cyclization and reductive release to yield a 1,3-diketo benzaldehyde (Bailey,
                                    et al., 2007). Further ketoreduction of the terminal ketone affords 2.

                       Compound 3 (m/z377 [M+H]+, λmax 330 nm) was produced at a much lower yield during
                                the earlier culture periods (Figure 3B and S1C). The bicyclic core structure was resolved toManuscript                           be similar to 1, but instead of the carboxylic acid moiety three new proton signals were
                                detected: a terminal methyl doublet (δH 1.32 ppm), a methylene doublet (δH 2.54 ppm) and
                             a methane multiplet (δH 4.16 ppm) (Table S2 and Figure S7). These signals are consistent



                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 5]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                   Page 5

                             with a 2-hydroxypropyl substitution at the C9, which is consistent with the m/z251 [M+H]+
                             fragment from MS/MS analysis (Figure S3). The 2-hydroxypropyl moiety is reminiscent of
                                the terminal portion of the 2-oxo-4-hydroxypentyl substituent in 2, which suggests that 2
                      may be an intermediate in the synthesis of 3 (Figure 3C). Meanwhile, 4 (m/z393 [M+H]+,
                         λmax 330 nm) was produced at an even lower titer and its structure was not fully elucidatedNIH-PA                       by NMR due to insufficient material obtained (Figure 3B and S1D). Through comparison of
                    MS/MS peaks of 3 and 4, as well as the molecular formula of 4 obtained through high
                                resolution MS (C21H28O7, observed m/z393.1908 [M+H]+,calculated 393.1913) (Figure S3
                           and S4), we propose that 4 could be a 10-hydroxy derivative of 3 (Figure 3C), and may alsoAuthor
                           be an intermediate toward the biosynthesis of 1.

                               After seven days of culturing, a new compound 5 (m/z362 [M+H]+, λmax 357 nm) replaces
                          1 as the dominant product in the A.nigerT1 culture (Figure 3B and S1E). 5 was purified
                           from a 7-day culture and its structure was confirmed via NMR to be the vinylogous γ-Manuscript                             pyridone derivative of 1 (Figures 3C and S8, Table S2). This compound is likely originated
                           from 1 via a characteristic azaphilone reaction with amines present in the culture medium.
                              Indeed, a compound with the identical retention time, mass and λmax was obtained by
                                reacting purified 1 with NH4OH (data not shown).

            Knockout of azaB demonstrates a convergent synthesis of 1 by AzaA and AzaB
                               Inspection of the structure of 1 suggests that the molecule is assembled convergently from
                          two discrete polyketide chains. We propose that the dimethylhexanoate moiety is produced
                          by the HR-PKS AzaB, while the bicyclic core is cyclized from an unreduced polyketideNIH-PA                           backbone synthesized by the NR-PKS AzaA. This is in stark contrast to the sequential mode
                               of collaboration between AfoE and AfoG in the highly parallel asperfuranone gene cluster
                              (Chiang, et al., 2009), and underscores the difficulties in accurately predicting productAuthor                              structures among fungal PKSs.

                             Therefore in the convergent synthesis model, disruption of azaBin T1 should not affect the
                               function of AzaA, and should lead to accumulation of the pyrano-quinone. To test this
                            model, genetic disruption of azaBin A.nigerT1 was performed using a double-crossover
                             recombination with the zeocin-resistant gene ble(Figure 4A). Two desired azaBManuscript
                              transformants were identified via diagnostic PCR (Figure 4A). After culturing and
                               metabolite analysis, the production of 1 was confirmed to be abolished in the azaBstrains.
                                 Instead, two new compounds (6 and 7) that have UV spectra characteristic of pyrano-
                            quinone (identical to that of 1) emerged (Figure 4B). Compound 6 and 7 have molecular
                           masses of 250 and 292, respectively (Figure S1F and S1G). Both compounds were purified
                           and their structures were elucidated by 1D and 2D NMR (Table S3 and Figure S9-10). 6
                               contains the same bicyclic core and the 2-hydroxypropyl side chain as 3, but lacks the 2,4-
                             dimethylhexanoyl ester as a result of azaBdisruption (Figure 3C). Compound 7 is the O4
                                acetylated version of 6 (Figure 3C). In addition, the benzaldehyde 2 observed in the A.nigerNIH-PA                       T1 strain was present in the early cultures of the azaBstrains (Figure 4B). Upon closer
                              examination, trace amounts of 6 and 7 were also found in A.nigerT1 culture on Day 2
                               (Figure 3B); the non-acetylated 6 is likely an intermediate in the biosynthesis of 1.Author
                In vitro reaction of AzaH with the benzaldehyde intermediate confirms its roles in
              hydroxylation and pyran-ring formation
                         The formation of the bicyclic core of azaphilones has not been elucidated to date. It has been
                             suggested that it proceeds from a benzaldehyde precursor in asperfuranone biosynthesisManuscript                              (Chiang, et al., 2009), which is structurally similar to 2 isolated from A.nigerT1 in early
                                culturing times. Since 2 is isolated in stable form, the route to the formation of the pyran
                                ring in the biosynthesis of 1 must be enzyme-catalyzed.


                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 6]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                   Page 6

                   We initially proposed that AzaC is involved in the pyran-ring cyclization. NCBI Conserved
                        Domain Search results indicate that both AzaC and its homologs (CtnB from the citrinin
                            pathway, and AfoD) belong to the esterase-lipase family of serine hydrolases and are not
                              oxidoreductases as assigned previously for CtnB and AfoD (Chiang, et al., 2009; Sakai, et
                                          al., 2008). Since 1, citrinin and asperfuranone all contain a fused heterocyclic ring system,NIH-PA                       AzaC, CtnB and AfoB may be responsible for their corresponding heterocycle formation; a
                                 similar hypothesis has been proposed in a recent study as well (Davison, et al., 2012).
                             Accordingly, the recombinant AzaC protein (30 kDa) was purified and assayed with 2.
                          However, no conversion of the substrate 2 was observed in the invitroreaction (Figure 5A).Author
                   We therefore reasoned that AzaC might act on a different substrate, possibly the C4-
                             hydroxylated derivative of 2.

                   We then searched for genes in the azacluster that may hydroxylate the C4 position in 2.
                         AzaH, an FAD-dependent monooxygenase, was found to be homologous to a recentlyManuscript                               characterized monooxygenase TropB (43% identity, 61% similarity), which was recently
                         shown to hydroxylate the corresponding carbon of 3-methylorcinaldehyde during tropolone
                               biosynthesis (Davison, et al., 2012). To examine its role in the synthesis of 1, AzaH was
                             expressed and purified from E.coliBL21(DE3) and a series of invitroassays including
                      AzaH and AzaC/AzaH in the presence of 2 was performed. Surprisingly, incubation of both
                                 purified AzaH or AzaC/AzaH with 2 and NADPH yielded a new product that has an
                                  identical UV spectrum, retention time and mass as 6 (Figure 5A). This indicates that AzaH
                              alone is capable of converting 2 to 6. However, in the absence of NADPH, which is needed
                                 for the regeneration of the reduced flavin cofactor, no substrate conversion by AzaH wasNIH-PA                           observed. Therefore, the flavin-dependent hydroxylation of C-4 is likely a prerequisite for
                                the subsequent pyran formation. Further LC/MS time-course analysis of the reaction of
                      AzaH with 2 showed that the conversion proceeds rapidly with no detectable uncyclized C4-
                             hydroxylated intermediate (Figure 5B). These results confirmed the critical role of AzaH inAuthor
                           morphing the benzaldehyde intermediate into the bicyclic, pyran-containing azaphilone
                            chromophore.

            Proposed pathway for biosynthesis of the azanigeronesManuscript                      The RT-PCR transcriptional analysis indicates that there are a total of 12 genes in the aza
                                   cluster, which were activated upon overexpression of the pathway-specific regulator azaR
                               (Figure 3A). Combining the structural characterization of the compounds from the activated
                   A.nigerT1 culture and T1 ΔazaB,as well as invitroconfirmation of the role of AzaH, a
                                biosynthetic pathway leading to the production of 1 can be proposed (Figure 6). Based on
                                the time course studies of the metabolic profile of A.nigerT1 (Figure 3B), 1 is most likely
                                 to be the end product of the pathway, as it is the dominant compound in the culture after 4
                               days. We propose that the biosynthesis of 1 begins with the polyketide assembly by AzaA,
                          which is a typical Clade III NR-PKS with a domain organization of SAT-KS-AT-PT-ACP-
                     CMeT-R from the N- to C-terminal. AzaA forms the hexaketide precursor from successiveNIH-PA
                              condensations of five malonyl-CoA units presumably with a simple acetyl-CoA starter unit.
                         The reactive polyketide chain then undergoes a PT-mediated C2-C7 cyclization to afford the
                             aromatic ring and is eventually released as an aldehyde through the R-domain, in a mannerAuthor                                 similar to the previously characterized 3-methylorcinaldehyde synthase in Acremonium
                            strictum(Bailey, et al., 2007). The putative ketoreductase, AzaE, a homolog of the
                             methylglyoxal reductase in Saccharomycescerevisiae(35% identity), is proposed to
                               catalyze the reduction of the terminal ketone resulting in the early culture product 2.Manuscript                      The monooxygenase AzaH was demonstrated to be the only enzyme required to convert 2 to
                          6 invitro. We propose that AzaH first hydroxylates the benzaldehyde intermediate 2 at C4,
                          which triggers the formation of the pyran-ring to afford 6 (Figure 6). In parallel, the 2,4-



                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 7]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                   Page 7

                             dimethylhexanoyl chain is synthesized by the HR-PKS AzaB, and is proposed to be
                                 transferred to the C4-hydroxyl of 6 by the acyltransferase AzaD directly from the ACP
                          domain of AzaB via a similar mechanism to the LovD acyltransferase (Xie, et al., 2009).
                                 Alternatively, the 2,4-dimethylhexanoyl chain may be offloaded from the HR-PKS as a
                               carboxylic acid and converted to an acyl-CoA by AzaF, which shares 35% identity to the 4-NIH-PA                        coumarate:CoA ligase (Silber, et al., 2008). The resulting acyl-CoA molecule could then be
                              taken up as a substrate by AzaD to form 3 (Figure 6). Like the homolog acetyltransferase
                            Tri101 in trichothecene biosynthesis (33% identity to AzaD) (Garvey, et al., 2008), AzaD
                             belongs to the BAHD family of acyltransferases that catalyze transfer of various acyl-CoAAuthor
                                 substrates (D’Auria, 2006). It is interesting to note that the C4-O-acetylated 7 is also
                             observed in the activated A.nigerT1 and azaBcultures (Figure 4B). This suggests that
                      AzaD may have a relaxed specificity toward acyl-CoA substrates, although it is entirely
                               possible that other endogenous acyltransferases might be involved in this reaction.Manuscript                               In order to yield the carboxylic acid substituent in 1, the hydroxypropyl side chain of 3
                          would need to undergo a C-C oxidative cleavage. We propose that this C-C bond cleavage is
                               catalyzed by a cytochrome P450 AzaI encoded in the cluster. Similar reactions have been
                             observed in other P450s, with the CYP11A involved in the decomposition of cholesterol
                                 into pregnenolone and 4-methylpentanal as the archetypal enzyme (Burstein and Gut, 1971).
                          Such P450 is proposed to act on a vicinal diol that leads to a C-C bond scission either
                             through an alkoxyradical intermediate or a peroxy complex (Ortiz de Montellano, 2005). In
                                the biosynthesis of 1, we propose that 3 first undergoes hydroxylation at C10, possibly
                               catalyzed by one of the two FAD-dependent monooxygenases encoded in the cluster, AzaGNIH-PA                            or AzaL, resulting in the vicinal diol (Figure 6). A small amount of this putative
                               intermediate 4, with mass and fragmentation pattern consistent with such a diol, was isolated
                           from the 2-day culture of A.nigerT1 (Figure 3B and S4). Oxidative cleavage 4 by AzaI
                          would yield the corresponding aldehyde derivative of 1. A homolog of AzaI, CypX, alsoAuthor
                                  exists in the aflatoxin biosynthesis in A.parasiticus(35% identity) and is found to convert
                               averufin to hydroxyversicolorone via a still unknown oxidative cleavage and ring
                             rearrangement step (Wen, et al., 2005). Finally, the dehydrogenase AzaJ (homologous to the
                          AN1030.3, 40% identity) is proposed to convert the aldehyde functional group into the
                               carboxylic acid, completing the conversion from 3 to 1. Alternatively, the oxidation ofManuscript
                             aldehyde to carboxylic acid may be catalyzed by the same P450 enzyme AzaI via
                              consecutive oxidation or by endogenous alcohol dehydrogenase. Interestingly, the proposed
                               oxidative chain-shortening does not occur in the absence of the 2,4-dimethylhexanoate ester.
                           Both 5 and 6 contain the hydroxypropyl chain and are not converted to the corresponding
                               acids in azaBculture.

         DISCUSSION

                       Genome mining, in particular activation of silent secondary metabolic pathways byNIH-PA                           overexpression of pathway-specific regulator, is becoming a useful strategy for natural
                              product discovery in fungi (Brakhage, et al., 2008; Winter and Tang, 2012). From
                              overexpression of the cluster-specific regulator, we have uncovered novel compounds thatAuthor                         belong to the family of azaphilones. The hallmark feature of azaphilones is the presence of a
                              highly oxygenated pyrano-quinone bicyclic core of polyketide origin (Osmanova, et al.,
                              2010). The name derives from their tendency to react with primary amines to yield γ-
                             pyridones that result from the exchange of the pyrane oxygen with nitrogen. Over 170
                                  different azaphilone compounds have been identified from hundreds of fungal species across
                          23 genera from 13 families, and many of the azaphilones exhibit diverse biologicalManuscript
                                     activities, including antibacterial, antifungal and antitumor (Osmanova, et al., 2010). Several
                      common modifications that contribute to the structural diversification of the common
                                 bicyclic chromophore include but are not limited to a) aliphatic side chains at C9; b)


                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 8]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                   Page 8

                                  aliphatic esters at O4; c) halogen substitution on the bicyclic core, as in sclerotiorin
                            (Chidananda and Sattur, 2007); d) additional fused rings, as in ankaflavin (Manchand, et al.,
                              1973); e) aromatic esters at O4, as in mitorubrinol (Quang, et al., 2005); and f) molecular
                              dimers, as in chaetoglobin A (Ge, et al., 2008) (Figure 1).

                              Despite their apparent ubiquity among fungi, the genetic and molecular basis for theNIH-PA
                               biosynthesis of these azaphilones has not been thoroughly explored or understood. Besides
                                labeling studies suggesting a polyketide origin for the bicyclic core (Ogihara, et al., 2000),
                             only the azaphilone-like compound asperfuranone and citrinin have been linked to theirAuthor                             corresponding biosynthetic gene clusters (Chiang, et al., 2009; Sakai, et al., 2008). In this
                                study, we have discovered a silent gene cluster in A.nigerresponsible for producing a series
                               of azaphilones. Characterization of this azagene cluster has provided important insights on
                                the biosynthesis of this family of compounds.Manuscript                            In total, six new azaphilones, azanigerone A-F, were isolated and all share a substituted
                                 bicyclic core indicative of a common biosynthetic origin. We also observed their signature
                                reaction with amine groups in the conversion of the major product 1 into the vinylogous γ-
                             pyridone 5. All six compounds contain a C4 hydroxyl group, which is a post-PKS tailoring
                              modification observed in a multitude of other azaphilones. With the exception of 6, the
                                    tertiary alcohol at C4 of azanigerones is acylated with an aliphatic acyl or an acetyl group,
                          which is another common feature among many azaphilones. The isolation of pyran
                               intermediates at early stages of the A.nigerT1 culture underscores the convergent actions of
                                the two PKSs in the production of these molecules (Figure 3B).NIH-PA
                  A key discovery in this study is the enzyme responsible for the formation of the
                                  characteristic pyrano-quinone core common to all azaphiliones. It has been proposed that the
                               biosynthesis of azaphilones proceeds from a benzaldehyde intermediate (Chiang, et al.,Author                              2009), but the enzymology of the pyran-ring formation step has not been elucidated. We
                           have discovered that the cyclization of the benzaldehyde is mediated by the C4-
                              hydroxylation catalyzed by the FAD-dependent monooxygenase AzaH. We propose that the
                              hydroxylation at C4 by AzaH dearomatizes the ring and causes keto-enol tautomerization at
                                the C1 aldehyde leading to the condensation between the C1 enol and the C9 carbonyl toManuscript                             yield the pyran ring (Figure 6). Our finding that the C4-hydroxylation and pyran-ring
                                cyclization occur very rapidly suggests that these two features are coupled. This is supported
                          by the fact that with a few exceptions, majority of the azaphilones contain such geminal
                              methyl, hydroxyl (or ester) substitution at the pyrano-quinone core (Figure 1) (Osmanova, et
                                          al., 2010). For the few azaphilones that do not have this feature, such as in the case of
                                     citrinin, a different mechanism of cyclization might take place. Coincidentally, the citrinin
                           gene cluster lacks the azaHhomolog (Sakai, et al., 2008).

                                          It is curious to note that with the exception of a few genes, the azaand the afoclusters are
                              highly similar, with multiple gene homologs sharing >30% protein sequence identity (FigureNIH-PA
                          2 and Table 1). However, the structures of the two compounds are considerably different. A
                                  striking disparity between the two biosynthetic pathways is on how the dual PKS systems
                                partner to form their respective products. In the case of the afocluster, the HR-PKS AfoGAuthor                               synthesizes the tetraketide intermediate, which is passed on to the SAT domain of the NR-
                     PKS AfoE. Such sequential mode of collaboration occurs in other HR/NR-PKS tandem
                              systems, such as in the biosynthesis of resorcylic acid lactones (Zhou et al. 2010). We were
                              expecting the two PKSs in azacluster, AzaA and AzaB, to follow the same tandem mode of
                       PKS-PKS collaboration. To our surprise, the two PKSs acted independently of each other inManuscript                            the convergent synthesis of the two substructures of 1. Whereas the afoGculture completely
                               disrupted the production of asperfuranone or any appreciable intermediate, compounds 6
                           and 7 lacking the reduced triketide chain were isolated in the azaBculture. Previous studies



                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 9]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                   Page 9

                           have pointed to the N-terminus SAT as a specificity-conferring domain that selects the
                                    starter unit (Crawford, et al., 2008). By multiple protein sequence alignment, it was noticed
                                  that the SAT domains of AzaB and AfoG have a lower identity (35% vs. 43%) compared to
                                the rest of the protein, although both contain the GXCXG motif found in most SATs. It is
                                  likely that the selectivity of the SAT and its ability to interact with HR-PKS hold the key for
                          which mode of collaboration will take place between a pair of HR- and NR-PKSs. TheNIH-PA
                        azaA-azaBdual PKS system in A.nigeris the first example of a convergent mode of
                                collaboration between an HR and an NR-PKS; elucidation of the basis for the intriguing
                                difference between azaand afopathways could facilitate better prediction of polyketideAuthor
                              products from such pathways.

                            Another notable difference between the structures of azanigerones and asperfuranone is the
                             formation of a furan in the latter pathway instead of a pyran ring that is common in
                               azaphilones. Both pathways are proposed to go through a benzaldehyde intermediate.Manuscript                        However, in the case of asperfuranone, it is likely that the benzylic carbon hydroxylation
                              precedes the dearomatizing hydroxylation. It was previously proposed that AfoD catalyzes
                                    this benzylic carbon hydroxylation, which is the key branching point in the biosynthesis of
                              asperfuranone and the azaphilone sclerotiorin (Davison, et al., 2012; Somoza, et al., 2012).
                          However, it is more likely that AfoD has a similar function as the homolog AzaH
                               characterized in this study, i.e. the formation of the tertiary alcohol. Thus, AfoF, another
                          FAD-dependent monooxygenase, may catalyze this benzylic carbon hydroxylation step in
                                the asperfuranone pathway. Two AfoF homologs, AzaG and AzaL, are also found in the A.
                           nigerazacluster (Table 1). We proposed that one of them may act later in the pathway in theNIH-PA                           hydroxylation of C10 to form the pre-cleavage vicinal diol.

                     Among the azagenes that share a homolog to the afocluster, the function of AzaC remains
                               enigmatic. The possibility of its involvement in the heterocycle formation has been excludedAuthor                          by the results in this study. In line with the NCBI Conserved Domain Search results that
                              suggest an esterase-lipase function for this enzyme, we propose that AzaC might participate
                                 in the offloading of the 2,4-dimethylhexanoyl chain from the ACP of AzaB (Figure 6). The
                                 role of the homologs AfoC and CtnB in the biosynthesis of asperfuranone and citrinin
                                respectively is also unclear and should be the subject of further investigation.Manuscript
          SIGNIFICANCE

                               Activation of the silent azacluster has led to the discovery of new compounds named
                               azanigerones, which have not been isolated from A.nigerbefore. Characterization of the
                           pathway has shed light to the biosynthesis of the azaphilone group of compounds, which are
                                  structurally diverse and exhibit a wide range of bioactivities. The azapathway represents the
                                        first example of a convergent mode of collaboration between an HR- and an NR-PKS, as
                           opposed to the sequential mode of collaboration commonly observed in other dual PKS
                              systems. More importantly, the enzymatic basis for the formation of the pyrano-quinoneNIH-PA
                              core common to azaphilones has been revealed for the first time, and the mechanism can
                                  likely be generalized to biosynthesis of other azaphilones. Thus, this study provides an
                              important basis for further molecular genetics and biochemical investigations of azaphiloneAuthor                             pathways. The sequence information will aid in identification of the gene clusters encode for
                        known bioactive azaphilones and discovery of new azaphilones by genome mining. The
                       many structural diversifications on a common bicyclic core observed among this family of
                              fungal natural products also offer a unique opportunity for combinatorial biosynthesis to
                           expand the library of azaphilones and screen for enhanced bioactivities.Manuscript





                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 10]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                  Page 10

         EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

               Strain and culture conditions
                   A.nigerATCC 1015 was obtained from Agricultural Research Service (ARS) culture
                                 collection (as NRRL 328) and cultured at 28 °C in potato dextrose agar medium. TheNIH-PA                             activated A.nigerT1 strain and the azaBmutant strains were maintained in glucose minimal
                        medium (GMM) containing 10 mM ammonium tartrate as nitrogen source (Chooi, et al.,
                            2010; Li, et al., 2011) or yeast glucose medium (YG) (Szewczyk, et al., 2006). E.colistrains
                     XL1 (Stratagene) and TOPO10 (Invitrogen) were used for routine cloning. SaccharomycesAuthor
                             cerevisiaeBJ5464 was used for invivoyeast DNA recombination cloning. E.coli
                        BL21(DE3) was used for protein expression.

             Molecular genetic manipulationsManuscript                         Polymerase chain reactions were performed using Phusion high-fidelity DNA polymerase
                       (New England Biolabs), Platinum Pfx DNA polymerase (Invitrogen) and GoTaq Green
                            Master Mix (Promega). PCR products were cloned into a PCR-Blunt vector (Invitrogen) for
                  DNA sequencing and subcloning. Restriction enzymes (New England Biolabs) and T4
                                 ligase (Invitrogen) were used respectively for the digestion and ligation of DNA fragments.
                             Primers used for amplification were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies and are
                                    listed in Table S4.

                         Genomic DNA of A.nigerATCC 1015 was extracted using the ZYMO ZR fungal/bacterial
                  DNA kit according to manufacturer’s protocols. The azaRgene (including introns) wasNIH-PA                              amplified from the genomic DNA and inserted into the fungal shuttle vector pBARGPE1
                                (digested with BglII and EcoRI) to yield pAZ44. The pBARGPE1 vector was obtained from
                            Fungal Genetic Stock Center (FGSC) (Pall and Brunelli, 1993). The intronless azaHandAuthor                   azaCwere also amplified from genomic DNA and inserted into the p8HIS expression vector
                                   (Jez, et al., 2000) digested with EcoRI and NotI to yield pAZ81 and pAZ83, respectively.

                         The knockout cassette for azaBwas assembled in yeast using the yeast recombination
                          method (Colot, et al., 2006). The two homologous regions were amplified from A.niger
                          genomic DNA using primers containing overlapping regions with the yeast vector and theManuscript
                                zeocin-resistance cassette. The zeocin-resistance cassette containing the blegene under the
                    gpdApromoter was amplified from pAN8-1 (Punt, et al., 1987) using gpdAfor and blerev.
                         The three DNA fragments were co-transformed with the linearized vector backbone derived
                           from YEplac195 (Gietz and Sugino, 1988) into the S.cerevisiaeBJ5464 (Jones, 1991) using
                                S. c. EasyComp™ Transformation Kit (Invitrogen) and selected on uracil-dropout
                              semisynthetic media. The resulting transformants were screened by colony-direct PCR and
                                the plasmid in the correct transformant was rescued using the Zymoprep Yeast Plasmid
                            Miniprep Kit (Zymo Research) and transformed into E.colifor propagation and sequencing
                                   verification. The resulting plasmid was designated AZ61. This plasmid was used as templateNIH-PA                                 to obtain the linear azaBknockout cassette for transformation of A.nigerT1.

             Fungal transformationAuthor                         The preparation of A.nigerprotoplasts and the PEG-mediated transformations were carried
                              out as previously described (Li, et al., 2011). The A.nigertransformed with pAZ44 for azaR
                              overexpression was selected on approximately 8 mg/mL of glufosinate prepared as
                              described previously (Chooi, et al., 2010). For genetic manipulation in the activated A.niger
                                   strain T1, a modified protocol was used derived from the one developed for AspergillusManuscript                           nidulans(Szewczyk, et al., 2006). The following modifications were implemented: a) the 2x
                                protoplasting solution was prepared with 3g of VinoTaste Pro; b) the PEG solution used
                            comprised of 25% PEG 4000, 10mM CaCl2 and 10mM Tris-HCl; c) the transforming



                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 11]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                  Page 11

                                protoplasts were first plated on non-selective media for five hours before overlaying with
                                  soft agar (8g/L) with 200 μg/mL of Zeocin; and d) the protoplasts were stabilized with 1.2M
                                   sorbitol.

             Expression analysis by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)NIH-PA                      The total RNA of A.nigermutant and wild-type strains were extracted using the Ambion
                  RNA extraction kit. The first strand cDNA was synthesized using the Oligo-dT primer and
                            Improm-II reverse transcription system (Promega) according to the manufacturer’sAuthor                               instructions. cDNA was then amplified with GoTaq Green Master Mix using gene-specific
                              primers (Table S4).

             Expression and purification of AzaC and AzaH
                       pAZ81 and pAZ83 were used to transform the BL21(DE3) cells for expression of AzaC andManuscript                      AzaH, respectively. The cells were cultured at 37 °C and 250 rpm in 500 mL of LB medium
                            supplemented with 35 g/mL kanamycin to a final OD600 of 0.4-0.6 followed by addition of
                               0.1 M isopropylthio-β-D-galactoside (IPTG) to induce protein expression. The proteins were
                                 purified by Ni2+ affinity chromatography as described previously (Li, et al., 2011). Purified
                       AzaC and AzaH was concentrated and exchanged into PBS (50mM, pH 7.4) with the
                                centriprep filters (Amicon). Protein concentration was determined with the Bradford assay
                              using bovine serum albumin as a standard.

                In vitro assays with AzaC and AzaHNIH-PA                      The reactions were performed at 50 L scale containing 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) in
                                the presence of 50 μM of 2, 0.5 mM NADPH and 10 μM of AzaH and/or AzaC. After 2
                               hours, the reactions were quenched by precipitating the enzyme/s with 100 μL ofAuthor                                acetonitrile. The acetonitrile/aqueous solution was concentrated 5-fold and directly analyzed
                          on the LC-MS (Figure 5A). The time course analysis was performed with the same assay
                               condition except that 0.5 M AzaH was used and the reactions were quenched at different
                             time points (Figure 5B).

           LC/MS analysisManuscript
                            For small-scale analysis, the A.nigerwild-type and transformants were grown in 10 mL
                 GMMT under shaking conditions at 28 °C. The cult ures were extracted with equal volume
                               of ethyl acetate (EA) with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and evaporated to dryness. The
                               dried extracts were dissolved in methanol for LC/MS analysis using a Shimadzu 2010 EV
                             Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometer with positive and negative electrospray
                                ionization and Phenomenex Luna 5μL 2.0×10mm C18 reverse phase column. The samples
                           were resolved on a linear gradient from 5 to 95% with CH3CN/H2O + 0.05% formic acid
                               solvent system.NIH-PA
               Isolation of compounds
                         Most compounds were purified from shake flask cultures, except for 2, which was obtained
                           from 2-day static culturing. 1, 3 and 4 were extracted with EA after four days of culturing, 5Author
                                   after seven days, and the azaBknockout compounds, 6 and 7, after two days. The following
                          scheme was generally used to purify each compound from the crude extract: a) chloroform-
                             water partitioning; b) hexane - 9:1 methanol:water partitioning; c) Sephadex LH-20 (GE)
                            chromatography; and d) preparative high pressure liquid chromatography with Phenomenex
                         Luna 5μL 250×1000mm C18 reverse phase column using CH3CN/H2O + 0.1% TFA orManuscript
                        +0.2% formic acid solvent system. DRX500 or ARX500 instruments were used to perform
                                the NMR spectroscopy of the different compounds.




                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 12]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                  Page 12

          Supplementary Material

                                Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

          AcknowledgmentsNIH-PA
                       We would like to thank Prof. Neil Garg and Dr. Jaclyn Winter for their useful suggestions. This work is supported
                                by NIH Grants 1R01GM085128 to Y.T. and the NIH Biotechnology Training Grant 5T32GM067555 to A.Z. The
                     NMR instrument in The Magnetic Resonance Facility at UCLA used in this study is based upon work supported by
                                        the NSF under equipment Grant no. CHE-1048804. The MS instrument used in the UCLA Mass SpectrometryAuthor                                    Laboratory was supported by the National Center for Research Resources Grant no. S10RR025631.

        REFERENCES

                              Andersen MR, Salazar MP, Schaap PJ, van de Vondervoort PJ, Culley D, Thykaer J, Frisvad JC,Manuscript                                Nielsen KF, Albang R, Albermann K, et al. Comparative genomics of citric-acid-producing
                                     Aspergillus niger ATCC 1015 versus enzyme-producing CBS 513.88. Genome Res. 2011; 21:885–
                                   897. [PubMed: 21543515]
                                Arai T, S H. Novel UV-absorbing compounds FK17-P2a, FK17-P2b1, FK17-P2b2, and FK17-P3 and
                                  manufacture of the compounds with Aspergillus sp. (in Japanese) Jpn. Kokai Tokkyo Koho JP.
                                 1994:93–121677.
                                 Bailey AM, Cox RJ, Harley K, Lazarus CM, Simpson TJ, Skellam E. Characterisation of 3-
                                   methylorcinaldehyde synthase (MOS) in Acremonium strictum: first observation of a reductive
                                       release mechanism during polyketide biosynthesis. Chem. Commun. (Camb). 2007:4053–4055.
                               [PubMed: 17912413]NIH-PA                         Bergmann S, Schumann J, Scherlach K, Lange C, Brakhage AA, Hertweck C. Genomics-driven
                                    discovery of PKS-NRPS hybrid metabolites from Aspergillus nidulans. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2007;
                                  3:213–217. [PubMed: 17369821]Author                           Brakhage AA, Schuemann J, Bergmann S, Scherlach K, Schroeckh V, Hertweck C. Activation of
                                    fungal silent gene clusters: a new avenue to drug discovery. Prog. Drug. Res. 2008; 66(1):3–12.
                                  Burstein S, Gut M. Biosynthesis of pregnenolone. Recent Prog. Horm. Res. 1971; 27:303–349.
                               [PubMed: 4946132]
                              Chiang YM, Szewczyk E, Davidson AD, Keller N, Oakley BR, Wang CC. A gene cluster containing
                               two fungal polyketide synthases encodes the biosynthetic pathway for a polyketide, asperfuranone,Manuscript
                                        in Aspergillus nidulans. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009; 131:2965–2970. [PubMed: 19199437]
                              Chidananda C, Sattur AP. Sclerotiorin, a novel inhibitor of lipoxygenase from Penicillium frequentans.
                                                J. Agric. Food. Chem. 2007; 55:2879–2883. [PubMed: 17385879]
                             Chooi YH, Cacho R, Tang Y. Identification of the viridicatumtoxin and griseofulvin gene clusters
                                from Penicillium aethiopicum. Chem Biol. 2010; 17:483–494. [PubMed: 20534346]
                             Chooi YH, Cacho R, Tang Y. Identification of the viridicatumtoxin and griseofulvin gene clusters
                                 from Penicillium aethiopicum. Chem. Biol. 2010; 17:483–494. [PubMed: 20534346]
                                Colot HV, Park G, Turner GE, Ringelberg C, Crew CM, Litvinkova L, Weiss RL, Borkovich KA,
                                 Dunlap JC. A high-throughput gene knockout procedure for Neurospora reveals functions forNIH-PA                                   multiple transcription factors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2006; 103:10352–10357. [PubMed:
                                 16801547]
                          Cox RJ. Polyketides, proteins and genes in fungi: programmed nano-machines begin to reveal their
                                           secrets. Org. Biomol. Chem. 2007; 5:2010–2026. [PubMed: 17581644]Author
                              Crawford JM, Korman TP, Labonte JW, Vagstad AL, Hill EA, Kamari-Bidkorpeh O, Tsai SC,
                               Townsend CA. Structural basis for biosynthetic programming of fungal aromatic polyketide
                                         cyclization. Nature. 2009; 461:1139–1143. [PubMed: 19847268]
                              Crawford JM, Vagstad AL, Ehrlich KC, Townsend CA. Starter unit specificity directs genome mining
                                      of polyketide synthase pathways in fungi. Bioorg. Chem. 2008; 36:16–22. [PubMed: 18215412]Manuscript
                              D’Auria JC. Acyltransferases in plants: a good time to be BAHD. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 2006; 9:331–
                                     340. [PubMed: 16616872]




                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 13]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                  Page 13

                              Davison J, Al Fahad A, Cai M, Song Z, Yehia SY, Lazarus CM, Bailey AM, Simpson TJ, Cox RJ.
                                      Genetic, molecular, and biochemical basis of fungal tropolone biosynthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
                            USA. 2012
                           Endo A, Kuroda M. Citrinin, an inhibitor of cholesterol synthesis. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 1976; 29:841–
                                     843. [PubMed: 791911]
                             Garvey GS, McCormick SP, Rayment I. Structural and functional characterization of the TRI101NIH-PA
                                       trichothecene 3-O-acetyltransferase from Fusarium sporotrichioides and Fusarium graminearum:
                                         kinetic insights to combating Fusarium head blight. J. Biol. Chem. 2008; 283:1660–1669.
                                [PubMed: 17923480]Author                      Ge HM, Zhang WY, Ding G, Saparpakorn P, Song YC, Hannongbua S, Tan RX. Chaetoglobins A and
                                   B, two unusual alkaloids from endophytic Chaetomium globosum culture. Chem. Commun.
                                  2008:5978–5980.
                                 Gietz RD, Sugino A. New yeast-Escherichia coli shuttle vectors constructed with in vitro mutagenized
                                       yeast genes lacking six-base pair restriction sites. Gene. 1988; 74:527–534. [PubMed: 3073106]Manuscript                              Jez JM, Ferrer JL, Bowman ME, Dixon RA, Noel JP. Dissection of malonyl-coenzyme A
                                     decarboxylation from polyketide formation in the reaction mechanism of a plant polyketide
                                       synthase. Biochemistry. 2000; 39:890–902. [PubMed: 10653632]
                                Jones EW. Tackling the protease problem in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Methods Enzymol. 1991;
                                   194:428–453. [PubMed: 2005802]
                                  Keller NP, Turner G, Bennett JW. Fungal secondary metabolism - from biochemistry to genomics.
                                      Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2005; 3:937–947. [PubMed: 16322742]
                            Kennedy J, Auclair K, Kendrew SG, Park C, Vederas JC, Hutchinson CR. Modulation of polyketide
                                     synthase activity by accessory proteins during lovastatin biosynthesis. Science. 1999; 284:1368–
                                    1372. [PubMed: 10334994]NIH-PA                             Kroken S, Glass NL, Taylor JW, Yoder OC, Turgeon BG. Phylogenomic analysis of type I polyketide
                                     synthase genes in pathogenic and saprobic ascomycetes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2003;
                                  100:15670–15675. [PubMed: 14676319]Author                             Li Y, Chooi YH, Sheng Y, Valentine JS, Tang Y. Comparative characterization of fungal
                                    anthracenone and naphthacenedione biosynthetic pathways reveals an alpha-hydroxylation-
                                   dependent Claisen-like cyclization catalyzed by a dimanganese thioesterase. J Am Chem Soc.
                                   2011; 133:15773–15785. [PubMed: 21866960]
                                Li Y, Chooi YH, Sheng Y, Valentine JS, Tang Y. Comparative characterization of fungal
                                    anthracenone and naphthacenedione biosynthetic pathways reveals an alpha-hydroxylation-Manuscript
                                   dependent Claisen-like cyclization catalyzed by a dimanganese thioesterase. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
                                   2011; 133:15773–15785. [PubMed: 21866960]
                      Ma SM, Li JW, Choi JW, Zhou H, Lee KK, Moorthie VA, Xie X, Kealey JT, Da Silva NA, Vederas
                                     JC, et al. Complete reconstitution of a highly reducing iterative polyketide synthase. Science.
                                   2009; 326:589–592. [PubMed: 19900898]
                           Manchand PS, Whalley WB, Chen FC. Isolation and structure of ankaflavin - new pigment from
                                Monascus Anka. Phytochemistry. 1973; 12:2531–2532.
                                 Nielsen KF, Mogensen JM, Johansen M, Larsen TO, Frisvad JC. Review of secondary metabolites and
                                  mycotoxins from the Aspergillus niger group. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry. 2009;NIH-PA                               395:1225–1242. [PubMed: 19756540]
                             Nukina M, Marumo S. Lunatoic acid A and acid B aversion factor and its related metabolite of
                                    Cochliobolus lunata. Tetrahedron Letters. 1977:2603–2606.Author                            Ogihara J, Kato J, Oishi K, Fujimoto Y. Biosynthesis of PP-V, a monascorubramine homologue, by
                                      Penicillium sp AZ. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 2000; 90:678–680. [PubMed: 16232932]
                                   Ortiz de Montellano, PR. Cytochrome P450: structure, mechanism, and biochemistry. Kluwer
                                Academic/Plenum Publishers; New York: 2005. p. 211-213.
                           Osmanova N, Schultze W, Ayoub N. Azaphilones: a class of fungal metabolites with diverse
                                        biological activities. Phytochemistry Reviews. 2010; 9:315–342.Manuscript
                                     Pall M, Brunelli J. A series of six compact fungal transformation vectors containing polylinkers with
                                      multiple unique restriction sites. Fungal Genet. Newslett. 1993:59–62.




                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 14]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                  Page 14

                                  Pel HJ, de Winde JH, Archer DB, Dyer PS, Hofmann G, Schaap PJ, Turner G, de Vries RP, Albang R,
                                Albermann K, et al. Genome sequencing and analysis of the versatile cell factory Aspergillus niger
                         CBS 513.88. Nat. Biotechnol. 2007; 25:221–231. [PubMed: 17259976]
                               Punt PJ, Oliver RP, Dingemanse MA, Pouwels PH, van den Hondel CA. Transformation of
                                      Aspergillus based on the hygromycin B resistance marker from Escherichia coli. Gene. 1987;
                                   56:117–124. [PubMed: 2824287]NIH-PA
                           Quang DN, Hashimoto T, Stadler M, Radulovic N, Asakawa Y. Antimicrobial azaphilones from the
                                   fungus Hypoxylon multiforme. Planta Med. 2005; 71:1058–1062. [PubMed: 16320209]
                              Reeves CD, Hu Z, Reid R, Kealey JT. Genes for the biosynthesis of the fungal polyketidesAuthor                              hypothemycin from Hypomyces subiculosus and radicicol from Pochonia chlamydosporia. Appl.
                                     Environ. Microbiol. 2008; 74:5121–5129. [PubMed: 18567690]
                                Sakai K, Kinoshita H, Shimizu T, Nihira T. Construction of a citrinin gene cluster expression system
                                         in heterologous Aspergillus oryzae. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 2008; 106:466–472. [PubMed: 19111642]
                              Sanchez JF, Somoza AD, Keller NP, Wang CC. Advances in Aspergillus secondary metaboliteManuscript                                   research in the post-genomic era. Nat. Prod. Rep. 2012
                                    Silber MV, Meimberg H, Ebel J. Identification of a 4-coumarate:CoA ligase gene family in the moss,
                                     Physcomitrella patens. Phytochemistry. 2008; 69:2449–2456. [PubMed: 18722632]
                           Somoza AD, Lee KH, Chiang YM, Oakley BR, Wang CC. Reengineering an azaphilone biosynthesis
                                 pathway in Aspergillus nidulans to create lipoxygenase inhibitors. Org. Lett. 2012; 14:972–975.
                                [PubMed: 22296232]
                            Szewczyk E, Nayak T, Oakley CE, Edgerton H, Xiong Y, Taheri-Talesh N, Osmani SA, Oakley BR.
                                   Fusion PCR and gene targeting in Aspergillus nidulans. Nat Protoc. 2006; 1:3111–3120. [PubMed:
                                 17406574]
                            Szewczyk E, Nayak T, Oakley CE, Edgerton H, Xiong Y, Taheri-Talesh N, Osmani SA, Oakley BR.NIH-PA                                   Fusion PCR and gene targeting in Aspergillus nidulans. Nat. Protoc. 2006; 1:3111–3120.
                                [PubMed: 17406574]
                       Wen Y, Hatabayashi H, Arai H, Kitamoto HK, Yabe K. Function of the cypX and moxY genes inAuthor                                     aflatoxin biosynthesis in Aspergillus parasiticus. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2005; 71:3192–3198.
                                [PubMed: 15933021]
                               Winter JM, Tang Y. Synthetic biological approaches to natural product biosynthesis. Curr. Opin.
                                      Biotechnol. 2012
                              Xie X, Meehan MJ, Xu W, Dorrestein PC, Tang Y. Acyltransferase mediated polyketide release fromManuscript                                 a fungal megasynthase. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009; 131:8388–8389. [PubMed: 19530726]
                            Yamaguchi Y, Masuma R, Kim Y-P, Uchida R, Tomoda H, Omura S. Taxonomy and secondary
                                      metabolites of Pseudobotrytis sp. FKA-25. Mycoscience. 2004; 45:9–16.
                            Yasukawa K, Takahashi M, Natori S, Kawai K, Yamazaki M, Takeuchi M, Takido M. Azaphilones
                                           inhibit tumor promotion by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate in two-stage carcinogenesis in
                                    mice. Oncology. 1994; 51:108–112. [PubMed: 8265094]
                           Zhou H, Qiao K, Gao Z, Meehan MJ, Li JW, Zhao X, Dorrestein PC, Vederas JC, Tang Y. Enzymatic
                                       synthesis of resorcylic acid lactones by cooperation of fungal iterative polyketide synthases
                                     involved in hypothemycin biosynthesis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010; 132:4530–4531. [PubMed:
                                 20222707]NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript





                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 15]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                  Page 15


                                             HIGHLIGHTS
                                          •   Discovery of an azaphilone pathway in Aspergillusniger
                                          •   Six new azaphilone compounds were isolated and characterizedNIH-PA                                      •   The biosynthesis involves convergent actions of an HR-PKS and an NR-PKS
Author                                      •   Hydroxylation by a monooxygenase promotes pyran-ring formation
Manuscript


NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript


NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript





                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 16]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                  Page 16

NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript


NIH-PA                              Figure 1.
                          Examples of azaphilone compounds isolated from fungi. The conserved bicyclic core
                                (highlighted in gray) is the hallmark of these compounds.Author
Manuscript


NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript





                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 17]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                  Page 17

NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
                              Figure 2.
                          Comparison of the A.nigerazacluster and the A.nidulansafocluster and their respective
                               products. PKS domain abbreviations: SAT, starter unit:ACP transacylase; KS, ketosynthase;
                        AT, malonyl-CoA:ACP transacylase; PT, product template; ACP, acyl carrier protein;
                       CMeT, C-methyltransferase; DH, dehydratase; KR, ketoreductase; ER, enoyl reductase; R,
                                reductase. Structure of 1 is confirmed by NMR (see Table S1 and Figure S5) and MS/MS
NIH-PA                             analysis (Figure S2).
Author
Manuscript


NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript





                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 18]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                  Page 18

NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript
                              Figure 3.
                               Activation of the azapathway via overexpression of azaR. (A) Transcriptional analysis of
                                the azagenes in (i) A.nigerWT and (ii) the activated T1 strain by RT-PCR. (ii) PCR from
                          genomic DNA are shown for comparison. # indicates intron-less genes. (B) Time course of
                   A.nigerT1 metabolites. Metabolic profiles of the activated A.nigerT1 strain on day 2, 4
                           and 7; and WT profile at day 2 are shown (C) Compounds observed in culture of A.niger
                       T1 strain (see Figure S1). Structures indicated with * are confirmed by NMR (see Tables
                           S1-3 and Figures S6-10). MS/MS analyses of 3 and 4 are in Figures S3-4.NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript


NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript





                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 19]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                  Page 19

NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript


NIH-PA

                              Figure 4.Author                           Deletion of azaBconfirms the involvement of the cluster in biosynthesis of 1. (A) Knockout
                                 strategy employed for azaB.Correct integration is verified by using 3 sets of primers shown.
                             (B) HPLC traces demonstrating the abolishment of 1 production in the azaBstrain and the
                             accumulation of 6 and 7 (See Table 3 and Figures S9-10).Manuscript


NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript





                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 20]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                  Page 20

NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript


NIH-PA

                              Figure 5.
                     Invitroassays demonstrate AzaH-mediated pyran-cyclization. (A) HPLC analysis of the inAuthor
                            vitroassays of AzaH and/or AzaC (10 μM) with 2 (50 μM), and comparison with the
                              standard 6. Conversion of 2 to 6 was observed in the presence of AzaH and NADPH (0.5
                       mM). (B) Time course of AzaH-catalyzed formation of 6 from 2. 0.5 M AzaH was assayed
                             with 50 M substrate 2 and 0.5mM NADPH. Reactions were quenched at specified time with
                          100 L of acetonitrile.Manuscript


NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript





                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 21]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                  Page 21

NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript



                              Figure 6.
                            Proposed biosynthetic pathway for production of azanigerones from the azacluster.
NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript


NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript





                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.


[PDF physical page 22]
                Zabala et al.                                                                                                  Page 22



                                                        Table 1

              Putative functions and homologs of the genes in the azacluster.

                   Locus Tag     Gene                          Characterized        Protein Identity                                               Putative function              (ASPNIDRAFT_)  Name                        Homolog                 / Similarity (%)NIH-PA                      54405           n/a         hydrolase                        -                             -

                     127101          n/a        thioesterase                       -                             -

                      50208       azaC     esterase/lipase        AN1032.3, afoC           44/56Author
                     189181      azaD     acyltransferase   F.sporotrichioidesTri101        33/49

                     212676       azaE     ketoreductase      S.cerevisiaeGRE2           35/50

                                                                   Physcomitrellapatens                     188806       azaF    acyl:CoA ligase                                   35/53                                                           4CL2

                                           FAD-dependentManuscript                  189194      azaG                        AN1035.3, afoF            37/64                                                oxygenase

                                                            salicylate                     188800      azaH                        AN1033.3, afoD           41/58                                           monooxygenase

                      43449        azaI   cytochrome P450     A.flavusCypX            30/49

                      56946       azaA     NR-PKS          AN1034.3, afoE            44/60

                     132962      azaR   Zn2Cys6 regulator       AN1029.3, afoA           34/48

                      43447        azaJ     dehydrogenase          AN1030.3               40/53

                     188912      azaK    efflux transporter                    -                             -

                                           FAD-dependentNIH-PA                  132654       azaL                                                                AN1035.3, afoF            33/55                                                oxygenase

                     188817      azaB     HR-PKS          AN1036.3, afoG           43/60

                     188504          n/a     cytochrome P450                    -                             -Author
                      50199           n/a      oxidoreductase                     -                             -

                 Note: Assignment of genes to azacluster is based on transcriptional analysis on A.nigerT1 (Figure 3A); n/a, not assigned (upstream and
                downstream genes).Manuscript


NIH-PA
Author
Manuscript




                           ChemBiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 24.