
[PDF physical page 1]
Plant Communications                                                                                                                                                                                  llll
Resource article

Engineering Salvia miltiorrhiza hairy roots as a
scalable platform for high-yield production of
paclitaxel and ginsenoside precursors

Junjie Lin 1,8, Wei Li 1,8, Yang Liu 1, Furui Yang 1, Liang Liang 1, Youran Zeng 1, Yihong Li1 ,
Zheyong Xue 2, Christopher E. French 3, Juan Guo 4,5,*, Beimi Cui 6, *, Zongsuo Liang 1,7, *
and Dongfeng Yang 1,7, *
1 College of Life Sciences and Medicine, Key Laboratory of Plant Secondary Metabolism and Regulation in Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University,
Hangzhou 310018, China
2 State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology and Breeding, Northern Center of China National Rice Research Institute, China National Rice Research Institute, Hangzhou
310006, China
3 Centre for Engineering Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK
4 State Key Laboratory for Quality Ensurance and Sustainable Use of Dao-di Herbs, National Resource Center for Chinese Materia Medica, China Academy of
Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100700, China
5 Dalian Institute of Marine Traditional Chinese Medicine, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences & Dalian University, Dalian 116023, China
6 Institute of Molecular Plant Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK
7 Shaoxing Biomedical Research Institute of Zhejiang Sci-Tech University Co., Ltd., Zhejiang Engineering Research Center for the Development Technology of
Medicinal and Edible Homologous Health Food, Shaoxing 312075, China

8 These authors contributed equally to this article.

*Correspondence: Juan Guo (guojuanzy@163.com), Beimi Cui (beimi.cui@gmail.com), Zongsuo Liang (liangzs@ms.iswc.ac.cn), Dongfeng Yang (ydf807@
sina.com)

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xplc.2026.101830


ABSTRACT

Plant-derived natural products offer a rich source of therapeutic agents. However, sustainable and high-
yield production remains a grand challenge. We engineered Salvia miltiorrhiza hairy roots to produce
taxadiene, a key precursor for the anticancer drug paclitaxel, and protopanaxadiol, a precursor for ginseno-
sides. The heterologous expression of two key biosynthetic genes, taxadiene synthase from Taxus wallichi-
ana and protopanaxadiol synthase from Panax notoginseng, enabled the production of taxadiene and pro-
topanaxadiol, respectively. Our strategy combined multiple approaches to enhance terpenoid production,
including genome editing to redirect metabolic flux by eliminating a competing GGPP sink (via SmCPS1
disruption), transcriptional reprogramming through SmWRKY61 overexpression to enhance terpenoid pre-
cursor pathways (MVA/MEP), and optimization of cultivation conditions. This holistic approach yielded
65.17 ± 5.25 mg/kg fresh weight (FW) taxadiene in batch cultures, and the protopanaxadiol yield reached
50.04 ± 2.94 mg/kg dry weight (DW) without optimization. These results highlight the potential of this plat-
form for industrial-scale production. Our findings demonstrate that S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots can serve as a
robust and scalable platform to produce valuable plant-derived compounds. This work paves the way for
future metabolic engineering efforts to achieve cost-effective and sustainable production of high-value
natural products using medicinal plant systems, addressing critical supply bottlenecks for pharmaceutical
compounds.

Key words: Salvia miltiorrhiza hairy roots, transcriptional reprogramming, heterologous synthesis, gene editing,
chassis optimization

Lin J., Li W., Liu Y., Yang F., Liang L., Zeng Y., Li Y., Xue Z., French C.E., Guo J., Cui B., Liang Z., and Yang D.
(2026). Engineering Salvia miltiorrhiza hairy roots as a scalable platform for high-yield production of paclitaxel and
ginsenoside precursors. Plant Comm. 7, 101830.





                                       Plant Communications 7, 101830, May 11 2026 © 2026 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of     1
     CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Chinese Society for Plant Biology.
                 This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).


[PDF physical page 2]
Plant Communications               Rewiring hairy root metabolism for paclitaxel/ginsenoside precursors

INTRODUCTION                                           reports on plant-based synthesis of ginsenosides. For instance,
                                                        a hairy root system of Vietnamese ginseng has been used to
Plant-derived natural products represent the largest and most    generate  dammarane-type  saponins  (Loan  et   al.,  2016).
diverse class of natural products, including diterpenoids such    Overexpression  of the NAC72 TF  in Panax ginseng  callus
as paclitaxel, a clinically used anticancer drug, and triterpenoids     significantly enhanced total saponin content, particularly that of
such as ginsenosides, a group of compounds isolated from   dammarane-type ginsenosides (Ting et al., 2024). However, the
ginseng with reported pharmacological properties and exhibiting    levels achieved were suboptimal, and there were constraints
a wide range of biological activities (Goddard et  al., 2024).    related to substrate limitations.
Biosynthesis of these complex compounds involves a series
of  modifications,  including   cyclizations,  oxidations,  and   Compared with microbial systems (E. coli and yeast) and model
glycosylations, catalyzed by a diverse array of enzymes, such    plants (A. thaliana and N. benthamiana), cell culture systems
as terpene synthases and cytochrome P450 monooxygenases    derived from medicinal plants present a compelling and often
(Singh et  al., 2023). Although numerous attempts have been   more advantageous platform for the biosynthesis of complex
made  to  bioengineer  the  production  of  these  natural    plant  natural  products.  This  advantage  arises  from  two
compounds or  their precursors  in microbial or model plant    principal attributes: first, the capacity to generate essential pre-
systems, the achievement of high yields remains challenging    cursors and substrates  via endogenous high-flux metabolic
owing to inherent limitations, including supply chain issues that    pathways and second, the  natural endowment  of  diverse,
hinder the reliable and sustainable supply of these valuable    specialized enzyme systems—notably cytochrome P450 mono-
compounds (Hu et al., 2023). Consequently, the production of    oxygenases (P450s) and their associated reductases. These en-
plant-derived bioactive compounds relies primarily on plant cell   zymes intrinsically contribute to the transformation of diterpenoid
culture techniques or semi-synthesis (Lin et  al., 2023). This   and triterpenoid core structures into a spectrum of high-value,
necessitates  the   exploration   of   alternative,  sustainable     typically bioactive metabolites (Bohlmann and Keeling, 2008;
biomanufacturing  platforms  to  ensure  a  consistent  and   Guo et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2023; Perez-Matas et al., 2024). By
adequate supply of plant-derived natural products for medicinal    contrast, microbial hosts often require extensive engineering for
and other applications.                                           the  functional  incorporation  of  plant  P450s—a  process
                                                                     frequently challenged by protein misfolding, low stability, and
The rapid development of metabolic engineering and synthetic     inefficient electron transfer—and model plants generally lack a
biology offers promising avenues for bioengineering the produc-      full complement of specialized modifying enzymes. Medicinal
tion of plant-derived natural compounds, intermediates, or pre-    plant cells, however, inherently harbor these advanced catalytic
cursors (Engler et  al., 2014; Wu et  al., 2021; Bradley et  al.,    systems. Salvia  miltiorrhiza hairy roots are a representative
2023; Jiang et al., 2024). Microbial hosts such as Escherichia   example of such an ideal chassis. Recognized for the high-
coli have been successfully bioengineered to synthesize the     yield  production  of  pharmaceutically  relevant  diterpenoids
paclitaxel precursors taxadiene and taxadien-5α-ol by integrating    (tanshinones) and phenolic acids (salvianolic acids), these root
the upstream methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway and    cultures demonstrate  intrinsically elevated  flux through the
terpenoid-forming pathway (Ajikumar et  al., 2010). Similarly,   endogenous diterpenoid biosynthetic pathway (Supplemental
yeast has been used as a host organism to biosynthesize the    Figure 1). The hairy roots of S. miltiorrhiza therefore constitute
diterpene  precursor  geranylgeranyl  pyrophosphate  (GGPP)   an innovative and versatile platform for the synthesis of other
through manipulation of native mevalonate (MVA) pathways,    valuable terpenoids, including paclitaxel and ginsenoside precur-
leading  to the production  of taxadiene and taxadien-5α-ol    sors. Importantly, in addition to its rich native metabolite profile,
(Malcı et  al., 2023). Similarly, engineering the MVA pathway    S. miltiorrhiza inherently possesses an array of P450s and reduc-
in  yeast  has  enabled  the  efficient  synthesis  not  only    tases that facilitate regio- and stereospecific hydroxylations and
of  protopanaxadiol  but  also  of   its  downstream  product    other complex oxidative modifications. This native enzymatic
ginsenoside Rh2 (Wang et al., 2019). Furthermore, strategies    repertoire alleviates a major bottleneck in heterologous biosyn-
involving the overexpression of MVA pathway genes, plant-     thesis, offering a distinct advantage over systems that require
derived protopanaxadiol biosynthetic enzymes, and transcription    co-expression and optimization of multiple heterologous P450s
factors (TFs) in yeast, coupled with the use of strong promoters    (Bohlmann and Keeling, 2008; Wu et al., 2021). S. miltiorrhiza
and the inhibition of competing pathways, have achieved a proto-    hairy  roots  are  also  supported  by  established,  efficient
panaxadiol titer of 93.1 mg/l (Zhou et al., 2023). These advances    genetic transformation protocols, advanced gene-editing tools
in  metabolic  engineering  have  propelled  the  production    (CRISPR–Cas9), and strategies for transcriptional metabolic re-
of  essential  natural  products.  However,  these  strategies    programming. Together, these features render them a tractable
necessitate   intricate  bioengineering  techniques,  including   and promising chassis for targeted metabolic engineering and
the  introduction  of  upstream  pathways  such  as GGPP   pathway refinement (Shi et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Xia
biosynthesis  and  the  modification  of  cytochrome  P450    et al., 2023). By harnessing their inherent high precursor flux,
expression or structural modifications to address issues such   endogenous enzymatic diversity, and genetic plasticity, S. mil-
as incorrect folding and incorporation in microbial biosynthesis     tiorrhiza hairy roots can be used as a robust and sustainable plat-
of plant natural products (Lin et al., 2023). Model plants such as    form for the production of complex plant-derived compounds. In
Arabidopsis  thaliana and Nicotiana benthamiana have been    recent years, our group and others have extensively explored this
exploited to harness the native pathway for GGPP production    metabolic engineering system to enhance the production of
by expressing rate-limiting enzymes to produce paclitaxel pre-    native secondary metabolites through a multipronged approach
cursors  (Supplemental  Table   1)  (Barja  and  Rodriguez-   encompassing genome editing, metabolic pathway optimization,
Concepcion, 2021; Dong et  al., 2022). In addition, there are     elicitation, and transcriptional reprogramming (Kai et al., 2011;

2     Plant Communications 7, 101830, May 11 2026


[PDF physical page 3]
Rewiring hairy root metabolism for paclitaxel/ginsenoside precursors              Plant Communications

Zhao et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2016; Hao et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2022; Cheng et  al., 2023; Hsu et  al., 2024). By synergizing
this  interdisciplinary expertise, we aim to develop a novel,
universal medicinal plant  cell chassis capable of producing
valuable bioactive compounds, exemplified by paclitaxel and
ginsenosides.  In  this work, we  successfully  heterologously
synthesized the key precursors of paclitaxel and ginsenosides,
taxadiene and protopanaxadiol, and used a multi-dimensional
approach to optimize taxadiene biosynthesis in S. miltiorrhiza
hairy roots, achieving a yield of 65.17 ± 5.25 mg/kg fresh weight
(FW).  The  content  of  protopanaxadiol  reached  50.04 ±
2.94 mg/kg dry weight (DW) without further optimization strate-
gies. Our findings underscore the potential for S. miltiorrhiza hairy
roots to serve as a robust and sustainable platform for the pro-
duction of complex terpenoid compounds. This work provides
a foundation for future metabolic engineering endeavors focused
on optimizing the production of valuable natural products.


RESULTS

Establishment of S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots for
heterologous production of paclitaxel and ginsenoside
precursors

To evaluate the heterologous expression of natural compounds
in the S. miltiorrhiza hairy root system, we initially established the
pathway to the paclitaxel precursor, taxadiene. The taxadiene
synthase gene (TwTS) from Taxus wallichiana, whose encoded
enzyme converts GGPP to taxadiene, was cloned into the plant
binary  vector pK7WG2R  to  generate  the pK7WG2R-TS
                                                                Figure 1. Heterologous expression of taxadiene in S.
construct (Figure 1A). Agrobacterium rhizogenes ATCC15834                                                                        miltiorrhiza hairy roots.
harboring the pK7WG2R-TS vector, which contained a red fluo-     (A) Schematic diagram of the TwTS overexpression vector pK7WG2R-TS.
rescent protein, was used to infect S. miltiorrhiza and generate    p35S and pNOS denote the promoters, and tNOS denotes the terminator.
TwTS-expressing  hairy  root  lines. Two independent  lines,    DsRed denotes red fluorescent protein. RB and LB are the right boundary
TS(+)#1 and TS(+)#8, were established through multiple rounds    and left boundary, respectively.
of selection with the appropriate antibiotic (Figure 1B and     (B) Visualization and analysis of the heterologous expression of TwTS in S.
Supplemental Figure 2).                                                        miltiorrhiza hairy roots using a LUYOR-3415RG dual fluorescent protein
                                                                        viewing lamp. Scale bars, 1 cm.
                                                                              (C) Biomass was measured in the indicated lines.
Under controlled conditions for 30 days, the TS(+) lines displayed
                                                                              (D) GGPP concentration was measured in the indicated lines.
reduced  biomass  compared  with  the  wild-type  (WT)  line
                                                                                    (E) Taxadiene concentration was measured in the indicated lines.
(Figure  1C). We  also observed a  reduction  in GGPP,  the                                                                                        (F) Gas chromatogram information for taxadiene in recombinant S. mil-
precursor of both taxadiene and other diterpenoids, in the TS(+)     tiorrhiza TS(+) hairy root lines. WT, wild-type hairy roots; TS(+), TwTS
lines compared with the WT  (Figure  1D). Although TS(+)#1     overexpression.
showed no statistically significant reduction in GGPP content,    Values represent the mean ± SD, n = 3. *p < 0.05; ns, no significant
TS(+)#8 showed a significant reduction in GGPP (Figure 1D). Gas     difference (Student’s t test).
chromatography–mass    spectrometry   (GC–MS)    analysis
confirmed taxadiene production in the selected TS-expressing S.
miltiorrhiza hairy root lines (Figure 1E and 1F and Supplemental   To demonstrate the versatility of S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots as a
Figure  3), with yields of 3.02 ± 0.78 mg/kg FW and 4.29 ±    platform for heterologous biosynthesis of other terpenoid precur-
0.28 mg/kg FW in the recombinant lines, and taxadiene levels    sors, we reconstituted the biosynthesis of protopanaxadiol, a
were inversely correlated with intracellular GGPP accumulation    precursor  of  ginsenosides, by  expressing  protopanaxadiol
(Figure 1D and 1E). We propose that the observed reduction in    synthase (PPDS). The PPDS gene CYP716A47 (PnPPDS) from
GGPP pool size was due primarily to its biosynthetic conversion   Panax notoginseng was cloned into the plant binary vector
into taxadiene. This interpretation is supported by the restoration   pK7WG2R, creating the pK7WG2R-PPDS recombinant vector
of GGPP to WT levels in CPS(− )/TS(+) lines, which coincided    (Supplemental  Figure  4A).  This  recombinant  vector  was
with elevated taxadiene production, indicating effective diversion    introduced into S. miltiorrhiza via A. rhizogenes ATCC15834,
of GGPP toward taxadiene synthesis. Nonetheless, contributions    generating a hairy root line capable of expressing PnPPDS.
from  other  GGPP-utilizing  metabolic  pathways,  such  as    After multiple rounds of antibiotic selection, three independent
gibberellin biosynthesis, cannot be ruled out. Together, these     lines, PPDS(+)#4, PPDS(+)#8, and PPDS(+)#9, were obtained
results confirm the successful functional expression of TwTS in    (Supplemental Figures 4B and 4C). The PPDS(+)#8 hairy root
S. miltiorrhiza for the production of taxadiene.                           line accumulated  the  highest  content  of  protopanaxadiol,

                                                                                     Plant Communications 7, 101830, May 11 2026    3


[PDF physical page 4]
Plant Communications               Rewiring hairy root metabolism for paclitaxel/ginsenoside precursors

                                                               reaching 50.04 ± 2.94 mg/kg DW, whereas no detectable
                                                             product was produced in the WT (Supplemental Figure 4D).
                                                            High-performance  liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry
                                                     (HPLC–MS) analysis confirmed the heterologous synthesis of
                                                               protopanaxadiol in PnPPDS-expressing S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots
                                                              (Supplemental Figure 4E). Collectively, our data demonstrate the
                                                                                 feasibility of using S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots as a platform for het-
                                                              erologous production of terpenoid precursors.


                                                       Metabolic flux engineering via genomic editing to
                                                 enhance precursor supply for taxadiene production

                                                     To increase the metabolic flux toward taxadiene biosynthesis and
                                                           reduce competitive consumption of the shared precursor GGPP
                                                        by native diterpenoid pathways, we targeted the recently re-
                                                              ported enzyme copalyl diphosphate synthase (CPS) (Zheng
                                                                       et al., 2025). This enzyme catalyzes the committed cyclization
                                                                       of GGPP  to  copalyl diphosphate  (CPP), which  represents
                                                                 the  entry  step  into  the  tanshinone  biosynthetic  pathway
                                                              (Supplemental Figure 1). Disruption of CPS thus limits flux toward
                                                              tanshinone synthesis and enriches the intracellular GGPP pool
                                                                      available for heterologous taxadiene production. Guided by this
                                                                          rationale, we used CRISPR-Cas9-mediated knockout of the
                                             CPS gene in S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots to redirect GGPP toward
                                                               taxadiene synthesis, an approach conceptually aligned with
                                                                              earlier metabolic engineering efforts (Wang and Peters, 2022).
                                                Among the CPS family members in S. miltiorrhiza, SmCPS1
                                                   was selected as the target because it encodes the predominant
                                                             isoform—highly expressed and enzymatically active  in hairy
                                                       roots—and is functionally essential for tanshinone biosynthesis
                                                      (Ma et al., 2021). Owing to its central role in partitioning GGPP
                                                                          into the tanshinone pathway, SmCPS1 represents an  ideal
                                                       genomic editing target for efficient metabolic redirection with
                                                              minimal off-target effects. First, we designed an sgRNA targeting
                                                                 the first exon of the SmCPS1 gene and generated the SmCPS1
                                                                 gene-editing vector 2218A-CPS1 (Figure 2A). PCR amplification
                                                      and sequencing  of  the  target  loci  revealed  various base
                                                        changes in SmCPS1 in the recombinant lines CPS(− )#4 and
                                                            CPS(− )#5  (Figure  2B).  The  two  recombinant  hairy  root
                                                                           lines were noticeably whiter than the WT, possibly owing to
                                                          reduced tanshinone production (Xia et  al., 2023) (Figure 2C
                                                      and  Supplemental  Figure   1). We  next  investigated  the
Figure 2. Gene editing of SmCPS1 enhances the GGPP pool
                                                       downstream  biosynthesis  of  diterpenoids  to  confirm  the
and taxadiene biosynthesis in S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots.
                                                                       biological consequences of SmCPS1 knockout. As shown in
(A) Schematic diagram of the SmCPS1 gene-editing vector 2218A-CPS1.
                                                                  Figure 2D and  2E,  the  biosynthesis  of  tanshinones waspNOS, pU6, and pUBQ10 denote the promoters, and tNOS and tMAS
denote the terminators. NPTII denotes a resistance gene. RB and LB are    compromised, and the expression levels of SmCYP76AH3 and
the right boundary and left boundary, respectively.                 SmCYP76AK1, which are involved  in the native tanshinone
(B) Target sites for the SmCPS1 gene in hairy roots of S. miltiorrhiza. Solid    biosynthetic pathway, were also reduced  in CPS(− )#4 and
arrows indicate base substitutions, and dashed arrows indicate base indels.    CPS(− )#5 relative to the WT (Supplemental Figure 5A). These
(C) Phenotypic analysis of SmCPS1-knockout S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots.    observations suggest that SmCPS1 is important for tanshinone
(D) Cryptotanshinone concentration was measured in the indicated lines.    biosynthesis in S. miltiorrhiza, consistent with previous findings
(E) HPLC analysis of different tanshinones in WT and two types of re-
combinant S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots. (1), (2), (3), and (4) represent dihy-
drotanshinone  I, cryptotanshinone, tanshinone  I, and tanshinone  IIA,     (L) Biomass was measured in the indicated lines.
respectively.                                                          (M) GGPP concentration was measured in the indicated lines.
(F) Target sites for the SmCPS1 gene in hairy roots of S. miltiorrhiza. Solid     (N) Taxadiene concentration was measured in the indicated lines.
arrows indicate base substitutions, and dashed arrows indicate base in-    WT, wild-type hairy roots; CPS(−  ), CRISPR-Cas9-mediated knockout of
dels.                                                    SmCPS1; CPS(− )/TS(+), CRISPR-Cas9-mediated knockout of SmCPS1
(G) Visualization and analysis of the heterologous expression of TwTS in S.    and TwTS overexpression. CT, DT I, TA I, and TA IIA represent crypto-
miltiorrhiza hairy roots in the SmCPS1-knockout background using a     tanshinone, dihydrotanshinone   I, tanshinone   I, and tanshinone  IIA,
LUYOR-3415RG dual fluorescent protein viewing lamp.                       respectively. Scale bars, 1 cm in (C) and (G). Values represent the mean ±
(H–K) Concentrations of different tanshinones were measured in the    SD, n = 3. ***p < 0.001, *p < 0.05; ns, no significant difference (Student’s
indicated lines.                                                                                         t test).

4     Plant Communications 7, 101830, May 11 2026


[PDF physical page 5]
Rewiring hairy root metabolism for paclitaxel/ginsenoside precursors              Plant Communications

                                                                                    Figure 3. Heterologous production of taxa-
                                                                                 diene  in transgenic S. miltiorrhiza hairy
                                                                                    roots overexpressing SmWRKY61.
                                                                                                           (A) Schematic diagram of the SmWRKY61 over-
                                                                                             expression vector. pUBQ10 and pNOS denote
                                                                                                the promoters, and tNOS denotes the terminator.
                                                                  RB and LB are the  right boundary and  left
                                                                                          boundary, respectively.
                                                                                                         (B) Visualization and analysis of the heterologous
                                                                                             expression   of  TwTS   in  SmWRKY61-over-
                                                                                             expressing S. miltiorrhiza hairy root lines. Scale
                                                                                                    bars, 1 cm.
                                                                                           (C–E) Comparison of biomass (C), GGPP content
                                                                                                                (D), and taxadiene content (E) in the indicated
                                                                                                 S. miltiorrhiza hairy root lines.
                                                                                                                   (F) Gas chromatogram analysis of taxadiene in
                                                                                                 transgenic S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots. TS(+)#1 was
                                                                                  used as a reference for the analysis of signifi-
                                                                                   cance in (E).
                                                                                        W61(+)/CPS(− )/TS(+),   SmWRKY61    over-
                                                                                              expression, CRISPR-Cas9-mediated knockout
                                                                                                       of SmCPS1, and TwTS overexpression. Values
                                                                                             represent the mean ± SD, n = 3. ***p < 0.001,
                                                                                              *p < 0.05; ns, no significant difference (Student’s
                                                                                                                                                t test).





                                                                                                     level  of  tanshinone  IIA  in  the  CPS(−  )/
                                                                                  TS(+)#3   line  compared  with  the WT
                                                                                             (Figure 2E and 2H–2K),  consistent  with
                                                                                                         earlier findings (Wang and Peters, 2022).
                                                                         The expression  of SmCYP76AH1, which
                                                                                                                is  involved   in  the  native  tanshinone
                                                                                          biosynthetic pathway, was also significantly
                                                                             reduced   in   the  CPS(− )/TS(+)#2  and
                                                                                CPS(− )/TS(+)#3  lines compared with the
                                                                    WT, whereas a significant increase in the
                                                                                   expression  of SmKSL1  was  observed
                                                                            owing  to  the  feedback-regulatory  effect
                                                                                  (Supplemental  Figure  5B).  To  examine
                                                                               whether  metabolic  flux was  redirected
                                                                              toward taxadiene biosynthesis by inhibiting
                                                                                           native terpenoid biosynthesis from GGPP,
(Gao et al., 2009). We then analyzed the accumulation of GGPP   we performed a 30-day  culture  experiment and measured
and biomass in these SmCPS1-edited hairy roots and found    the biomass and relevant metabolite contents  in  different
that SmCPS1(−  ) increased the GGPP pool in S. miltiorrhiza hairy    types of recombinant hairy roots (Figure 2L and 2M). GC–MS
roots and resulted in growth inhibition (Figure 2L and 2M). Our    analysis revealed that the production of taxadiene in CPS(−  )/
results suggest that SmCPS1 knockout can increase the GGPP    TS(+)#2 and CPS(− )/TS(+)#3 lines was significantly increased
pool for metabolic engineering of terpenoid biosynthesis.           to 4.53 ± 0.32 mg/kg FW and 7.69 ± 1.23 mg/kg FW, respec-
                                                                                 tively, representing a 1.5-fold and 2.5-fold increase compared
We next co-transformed the SmCPS1 gene-editing vector 2218A-    with the TS(+)#1 line (Figure 2N). Notably, the CPS(− )#4 and
CPS1 with the TwTS overexpression vector pK7WG2R-TS, result-    CPS(− )#5  lines exhibited reduced biomass and increased
ing in CPS(− )/TS(+) recombinant hairy root lines that exhibited   GGPP accumulation compared with the WT (Figure 2L and
simultaneous SmCPS gene knockout and TwTS overexpression.    2M). By contrast, the CPS(− )/TS(+)#2 and CPS(− )/TS(+)#3
PCR  amplification and sequencing  of  the SmCPS1  loci  in     lines displayed biomass and GGPP levels similar to those of
CPS(− )/TS(+)#2 and CPS(− )/TS(+)#3 confirmed knockout  of    the WT. We also determined the content of miltiradiene in
CPS (Figure 2F). Red fluorescent protein expression was also    the  CPS(− )#4  and  CPS(− )/TS(+)#3  lines  (Supplemental
observed  in these  lines, demonstrating successful integration    Figure  6) and found that the recombinant  lines contained
and expression  of  the TwTS transgene  (Figure  2G). HPLC     significantly  less  miltiradiene  than  the WT and  that  the
analysis  revealed  significantly  lower  levels  of  diterpenoids,    CPS(− )/TS(+)#3   line  contained   less   miltiradiene   than
including dihydrotanshinone, cryptotanshinone, and tanshinone I,    CPS(− )#4. These findings suggest that deletion of SmCPS1
in the CPS(− )/TS(+)#2 and CPS(− )/TS(+)#3 lines and a lower   can increase the GGPP pool and direct the metabolic flux of

                                                                                     Plant Communications 7, 101830, May 11 2026    5


[PDF physical page 6]
Plant Communications               Rewiring hairy root metabolism for paclitaxel/ginsenoside precursors

                                                                                    Figure 4. Taxadiene accumulation in the
                                                                                    transgenic S. miltiorrhiza hairy root line
                                                                                  CPS(− )/TS(+)#3 under elicitor treatment.
                                                                                                           (A) Accumulation and comparison of taxadiene in
                                                                                                the indicated S. miltiorrhiza hairy root lines.
                                                                                               (B–F) RT–qPCR analysis of the expression of
                                                                                   genes related to diterpenoid precursor synthesis
                                                                                                                     in CPS(− )/TS(+)#3 hairy roots after treatment with
                                                                                              yeast extract (YE, 25 mg/l).
                                                                                        (G–K) RT–qPCR analysis of the expression of
                                                                                   genes related to diterpenoid precursor synthesis
                                                                                                                     in CPS(− )/TS(+)#3 hairy roots after treatment with
                                                                                           methyl jasmonate, (MeJA, 200 μM). TS(+)#1 was
                                                                                   used as the reference for the analysis of signifi-
                                                                                   cance in (A). β-Actin was used as the internal
                                                                                                reference gene for RT–qPCR.
                                                                                           Values  represent  the mean ± SD, n =  3.
                                                                                                             ***p < 0.001, *p < 0.05; ns, no significant differ-
                                                                                   ence (Student’s t test).





                                                                                    the known  transcriptional  activation  of
                                                                                   terpenoid biosynthesis by WRKY61 (Chen
                                                                                             et   al.,  2022).  Whereas  biomass  was
GGPP to the taxadiene synthesis pathway, thereby facilitating    reduced in the W61(+)/CPS(− )/TS(+) lines, GGPP content was
taxadiene production.                                          increased compared with the parental line (Figure 3C and 3D).
                                                           Taxadiene accumulation reached 45.53 ± 1.07 mg/kg FW in
Transcriptional reprogramming of early terpenoid           W61(+)/CPS(− )/TS(+)#1 and 41.84 ± 4.64 mg/kg FW in W61(+)/
biosynthesis in S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots through           CPS(− )/TS(+)#3, representing a 15.1-fold and 13.9-fold  in-
overexpression of SmWRKY61 to boost taxadiene           crease, respectively, compared with the TS(+)#1 hairy root line
production                                                         (Figure  3E  and  3F  and  Supplemental  Figure  10).  The
                                                              overexpression of SmWRKY61 thus led to increased GGPPTF engineering is a promising strategy for enhancing metabolite
                                                                        levels and a dramatic upregulation of taxadiene production.production in plants (Butelli et  al., 2008). To investigate the
potential of TF engineering to enhance metabolite production in
S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots, we genetically modified S. miltiorrhiza   Large-scale production of taxadiene in bioengineered S.
hairy roots by expressing the TF SmWRKY61, a previously char-    miltiorrhiza hairy roots through elicitation
acterized positive regulator of diterpene biosynthesis (Zhang     Elicitors, such as yeast extract (YE) and methyl jasmonate (MeJA),
et al., 2021). In a previous omics analysis of S. miltiorrhiza, we    are well-established signaling molecules that can stimulate the
discovered  that SmWRKY61 can  significantly  regulate  the    biosynthesis of plant secondary metabolites (Zheng et al., 2021;
expression  of genes  in  the  precursor MEP pathway and   Cao et  al., 2024). To optimize taxadiene production  in our
the tanshinone pathway, thereby promoting the synthesis of    bioengineered S.  miltiorrhiza  hairy  roots, we subjected the
downstream products (Chen  et  al.,  2022). We cloned the    CPS(− )/TS(+)#3 line to treatments with YE and MeJA. The elicita-
SmWRKY61 gene into a plant expression vector driven by the     tion treatments significantly increased taxadiene biosynthesis
UBQ10 promoter (Figure 3A) and introduced it into the CPS(−  )/    (Figure 4A) by  2.4-fold and  3.5-fold,  respectively, although
TS(+)#3 line (Supplemental Figures 7 and 8 and Supplemental    they also led to reduced biomass (Supplemental Figure 11A
Table   2)  to  generate  W61(+)/CPS(− )/TS(+)  recombinant   and  11B),   likely  due  to  the  redirection  of  resources
transgenic  lines. Two  independent  lines,  W61(+)/CPS(−  )/    toward secondary metabolite production. Notably, this trade-
TS(+)#1 and W61(+)/CPS(− )/TS(+)#3, were selected for further     off  was  mitigated  by   significantly  higher  accumulation
analysis. We observed red fluorescent protein expression in    of taxadiene  in response to MeJA treatment relative to YE
both of these lines, similar to TS(+) and CPS(− )/TS(+) lines    treatment  (Figure  4). To determine the molecular basis  of
(Figure 3B), demonstrating the successful expression of TwTS.     this phenomenon, we performed RT–qPCR  to explore the
Quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (RT–qPCR) confirmed    expression  of genes encoding enzymes  of  the  terpenoid
that the expression of SmWRKY61 was higher in these lines    biosynthetic  pathway  in  CPS(− )/TS(+)#3  with  or  without
than in the WT (Supplemental Figure 9).                                  elicitation.  Key  genes  involved   in  the  early  terpenoid
                                                                  biosynthesis pathway, including SmDXS2, SmDXR, SmHMGS,
To investigate the effect of WRKY61 overexpression on early   and SmGGPPS, were induced upon YE (Figure 4B–4F) or MeJA
terpenoid biosynthesis, we analyzed the mRNA levels of genes    treatment  (Figure 4G–4K). For example,  the expression  of
involved in terpenoid biosynthesis, such as SmHMGS, SmDXS2,   SmDXS2 was increased 1.9-fold and 4.9-fold in response to YE
SmDXR, and SmIPPI. Expression of these genes was elevated   and MeJA, respectively, and the expression of SmDXR was
in the W61(+)/CPS(− )/TS(+) lines compared with the parental   enhanced  2.5-fold and  3.9-fold by YE and MeJA  under
line CPS(− )/TS(+)#3 (Supplemental Figure 9), consistent with    the same  conditions.  Notably, SmHMGS  expression was

6     Plant Communications 7, 101830, May 11 2026


[PDF physical page 7]
Rewiring hairy root metabolism for paclitaxel/ginsenoside precursors              Plant Communications





Figure 5. Taxadiene accumulation in S. miltiorrhiza W61(+)/CPS(− )/TS(+)#1 hairy roots upon elicitor treatment.
(A) Accumulation and comparison of taxadiene in the indicated recombinant S. miltiorrhiza hairy root lines.
(B–G) RT–qPCR analysis of the expression of SmWRKY61 and genes related to diterpenoid precursor synthesis in W61(+)/CPS(− )/TS(+)#1 hairy roots
after MeJA treatment (200 μM). TS(+)#1 was used as the reference for the analysis of significance in (A). β-Actin was used as the internal reference gene.
Values represent the mean ± SD, n = 3. ***p < 0.001, *p < 0.05; n.d., not detected; ns, no significant difference (Student’s t test).


dramatically induced by MeJA at 12 h post treatment (18.4-    biosynthesis of natural plant compounds. It also aimed to estab-
fold) but returned to a 1.5-fold increase after 6 days. Similarly,     lish a biosynthetic platform for taxadiene and protopanaxadiol.
SmIPPI expression peaked at 12 h (8.9-fold) and then decreased   We successfully achieved heterologous production of these two
to 5.8-fold after 3 days with MeJA treatment. SmGGPPS expres-    key precursors in engineered S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots. Detection
sion also responded more rapidly upon MeJA treatment. Overall,    of  their accumulation, along with  verification  of TwTS and
the majority of genes were expressed at higher levels with MeJA   PnPPDS gene expression, confirmed the functionality of the
treatment than with YE treatment, correlating positively with tax-    heterologous pathway, providing preliminary evidence for the
adiene accumulation.                                                 potential of this platform in natural product development. The
                                                                         further  increase  in  taxadiene  production achieved through
To further confirm  this  elicitation  effect, we next examined     elicitation, particularly with MeJA, demonstrated its synergistic
whether  elicitation would induce taxadiene  biosynthesis  in     effect with both genome editing and transcriptional reprogram-
another bioengineered hairy root line, W61(+)/CPS(− )/TS(+)#1.    ming. This multipronged approach, which achieved 65.17 ±
Consistent with our previous observations, MeJA treatment of    5.25 mg/kg FW in batch cultivation (Figure 5A), illustrates the
this engineered hairy root line led to a substantial reduction in   power of integrating various metabolic engineering strategies to
biomass, accompanied by a dramatic increase in taxadiene con-    achieve high-level production of complex natural products in
tent to 65.17 ± 5.25 mg/kg FW (Figure 5A and Supplemental    S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots. We also performed preliminary scale-
Figure 11C). This represents a 21.6-fold enhancement over the   up experiments in a 5-l bioreactor (Supplemental Figure 12).
TS(+)#1 line, underscoring the synergistic effect of MeJA and    During the 30-day cultivation period, the CPS(− )/TS(+)#3 strain
SmWRKY61 overexpression. Moreover, the combined treatment   was inoculated into 3 l of liquid medium, ultimately achieving tax-
strongly upregulated the expression of early terpenoid biosyn-    adiene accumulation of 8.52 mg/kg FW (the taxadiene content in
thesis genes and SmWRKY61 (Figure 5B–5G), indicating a    shake flasks was 7.69 mg/kg FW). This study thus establishes a
coordinated transcriptional response.                             robust framework  for  future  metabolic  engineering  efforts,
                                                                  leveraging native precursor  flux and transcriptional bioengi-
DISCUSSION                                              neering to optimize the biosynthesis of complex natural products
                                                                using medicinal plant chassis.
Over the past decade, significant advances have been made in
engineering the biosynthesis of plant natural products through   The heterologous expression of complex plant natural products
heterologous expression in microorganisms and model plants    faces several challenges. These include the intricate interplay
(Wu et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024; Liu et al.,   among precursor supply, intermediate channeling from primary
2024; Yang et  al., 2024). However, these approaches often    metabolism,  functionalization  of downstream  products, and
encounter challenges related to precursor supply and metabolic    co-factor availability within the host organism. Thus, metabolic
efficiency. This study leveraged the medicinal plant S. miltiorrhiza    engineering is frequently used to optimize precursor supply and
hairy root system to develop a novel platform for the heterologous    functional  modification  of  downstream  products   for  the

                                                                                     Plant Communications 7, 101830, May 11 2026    7


[PDF physical page 8]
Plant Communications               Rewiring hairy root metabolism for paclitaxel/ginsenoside precursors





Figure 6. Paradigm of multi-dimensional approaches to taxadiene biosynthesis in S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots.
Step I, TwTS overexpression; step II, CRISPR–Cas9 knockout of SmCPS1; step III, SmWRKY61 overexpression; and step IV, MeJA elicitation treatment.
Upward arrows indicate increased levels of gene expression, downward arrows indicate reduced contents of products, and dashed arrows
indicate multi-step enzymatic reactions. CT, DT I, TA I, and TA IIA represent cryptotanshinone, dihydrotanshinone I, tanshinone I, and tanshinone IIA,
respectively. DXS, 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate synthase; DXR, 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase; MCT, 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol
4-phosphate cytidylyltransferase; CMK, 4-(cytidine 5’-diphospho)-2-C-methyl-D-erythritol kinase; MDS, 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 2,4-cyclodiphosphate
synthase; HDS, 4-hydroxy-3-methylbut-2-enyl-diphosphate synthase; HDR, 4-hydroxy-3-methylbut-2-enyl diphosphate reductase; IPPI, isopentenyl
diphosphate isomerase; AACT, acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase; HMGS, hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA synthase; HMGR, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-
CoA reductase; MK, mevalonate kinase; PMK, phosphomevalonate kinase; MPDC, MVA diphosphate decarboxylase; SmCPS1, copalyl diphosphate
synthase 1; and TwTS, taxadiene synthase.


bioengineered biosynthesis of complex plant products (Guo et al.,    taxadiene  biosynthesis.  This  strategy  not  only  enhanced
2013; Bureau et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023; Jiao et al., 2024; Kant    taxadiene production but also mitigated the growth inhibition
et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024). Upstream pathways, such as    observed when GGPP accumulated  in the SmCPS1  single-
the MVA/MEP pathways, in microorganisms like E. coli and S. cer-    knockout lines (Figure 2I), suggesting a successful rebalancing of
evisiae often have insufficient capacity to produce the necessary    metabolic  resources.  Our  study  highlights  the  significant
isoprenoid building blocks, isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) and    advantage of using a high-flux native plant system for engineering
dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMAPP), for biosynthesis of the di-   complex natural products.
terpenoid precursor GGPP (Moser and Pichler, 2019). Molecular
engineering  strategies  to modify  the upstream  biosynthetic    Previous studies have demonstrated that TF engineering is a
pathway have been implemented to address  this  limitation,    promising  approach  for  enhancing  metabolite  production
leading to increased production of the desired molecules. For     (Butelli et al., 2008). MeJA, a well-known elicitor of diterpenoid
example, overexpression of bottleneck enzymes  in the MEP    biosynthesis, has been extensively used to  identify MeJA-
pathway (e.g., dxs, idi, ispD, and ispF) significantly enhanced taxa-    responsive  TFs  for  bioengineering  diterpenoid  pathways
diene production in engineered E. coli (Ajikumar et al., 2010).    (Sharma et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2019; Wasternack and Strnad,
Similarly, introduction of the isopentenol utilization pathway (IUP)    2019; Zheng et  al., 2021; Li et  al., 2024). For instance, the
into S. cerevisiae led to the accumulation of IPP/DMAPP, resulting    MeJA-responsive TF ERF106 can bind directly to the promoters
in GGPP accumulation and increased terpenoid biosynthesis (Ma    of SmKSL1 and SmIDI1, key enzymes in tanshinone biosynthesis,
et al., 2023). In the model plant tobacco, co-expression of DXR,    upregulating  their  expression  and  enhancing  diterpenoid
IspH, or IDI with TS led to some improvements in taxadiene produc-    production (Sharma et al., 2019). However, to date, no TF has
tion, although DXS overexpression had the most significant effect   been successfully used to engineer Taxol biosynthesis  in a
(Li et al., 2019). Here, we leveraged the diterpenoid-rich plant    heterologous  host. Our  prior  research  identified a MeJA-
S. miltiorrhiza, with its abundance of diterpenoid precursors and di-    responsive WRKY TF, SmWRKY61, capable of stimulating diter-
terpenoids, to serve as an innovative platform for taxadiene biosyn-    penoid biosynthesis in S. miltiorrhiza (Chen et al., 2022). In this
thesis (Supplemental Figure  1). Our results demonstrate that    study, we bioengineered S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots by overex-
disruption  of  the  native  diterpenoid pathway by SmCPS1    pressing SmWRKY61, and the substantial increase in taxadiene
knockout effectively redirected GGPP flux toward heterologous    production (15.1-fold compared with TS(+)#1) upon SmWRKY61

8     Plant Communications 7, 101830, May 11 2026


[PDF physical page 9]
Rewiring hairy root metabolism for paclitaxel/ginsenoside precursors              Plant Communications

overexpression demonstrated the efficacy of transcriptional re-    expression  cassette  in  the pAMGM4723  vector  to  generate  the
programming for increasing precursor supply and overall product   pUBQ10:SmWRKY61:tNOS cassette. The Hyg resistance gene was syn-
yield. This highlights the potential of using TFs to fine-tune meta-     thesized commercially (Tsingke). Similarly, the pNOS promoter, Hyg resis-
bolic pathways for enhanced natural product biosynthesis.          tance gene, and tNOS terminator were assembled into a separate
                                                                         cassette (pNOS:Hyg:tNOS cassette). Finally, two level 1 vectors were
                                                                assembled in the level 2 vector pAGM4723, resulting in the SmWRKY61
In summary, a final taxadiene production of 65.17 ± 5.25 mg/kg
                                                                       overexpression plasmid.
FW was  achieved  in  batch  cultivation  through  a  multi-
dimensional bioengineering approach  (Figure  6). There  still    Hairy root induction and formation
remains a notable gap between the current yield and that                                                              The relevant plasmid was introduced into ATCC15834 using the electro-
achieved   through   heterologous   synthesis   in   microbial     poration method and plated on LB solid medium containing the appro-
chassis systems.  This discrepancy may be  attributable  to     priate antibiotics. Single colonies were then selected for molecular char-
the intricate regulatory networks governing plant metabolism,     acterization of the target gene (Supplemental Table 3). Positive colonies
lower  cultivation  efficiency,  and  constraints  on  biomass    were cultured until the optical density at 600 nm (OD 600) reached 0.5.
accumulation. Future  efforts  will therefore focus on  further    The bacterial culture was centrifuged, and the pellet was resuspended
optimization of the metabolic network through synthetic biology      in 1/2 MS liquid medium with 50 μM acetosyringone, then incubated in
strategies, including the combinatorial regulation of multiple     the dark for 1 h. Healthy S. miltiorrhiza leaves were cut with a razor blade
                                                                              to facilitate the introduction of the bacterial solution into the abaxial sur-
rate-limiting steps to enhance overall flux and the development
                                                                               face. The treated leaves were then placed on antibiotic-free 1/2 MS solid
of novel bioreactor systems to improve cultivation efficiency
                                                         medium for co-cultivation. After 3 days, the antibiotic concentration was
and scalability. Nonetheless, our experimental results demon-                                                                            gradually reduced until Agrobacterium was completely eliminated. Finally,
strate that S. miltiorrhiza hairy roots possess a high capacity for    recombinant hairy root lines were selected for further positive screening.
efficient integration of multi-step enzymatic pathways. They
exhibit excellent compatibility with plant-specific P450 enzyme    Fluorescence visualization analysis
systems, providing a robust foundation chassis for the biosyn-    Recombinant hairy root monocultures containing the TwTS overexpres-
thesis of high-value natural products that rely on complex oxida-     sion construct were screened for fluorescence using red fluorescent pro-
tive modifications. This work paves the way for future metabolic     tein visualization. The vector includes the DsRed gene, which allows
engineering in medicinal plants, leveraging synthetic biology     detection of fluorescence with the LUYOR-3415RG dual fluorescent pro-
and genome-editing technologies to achieve low-cost, indus-     tein viewing lamp (LUYOR). Phenotype pictures of the lines were obtained
                                                               by incubating the positive hairy root monocultures in Petri dishes for atrial-scale production of high-value plant-derived compounds.
                                                                               certain period of time and taking photographs (these were mainly used
This platform holds the greatest promise for initial application in
                                                                                      for phenotypic evaluation, such as determining the presence or absence
the small- to medium-scale production of high-value, structurally
                                                                                of red fluorescence, the degree of albinism of the hairy roots, etc.).
complex drug intermediates that are challenging to synthesize in
microbial systems. It also serves as an excellent research tool for    Determination of hairy root biomass of S. miltiorrhiza
characterizing and reconstructing the biosynthetic pathways of    The fresh hairy roots were weighed, and 0.2 g of roots was placed in trian-
plant natural products.                                                    gular flasks containing 50 ml of 6,7-V liquid medium, and the roots were
                                                                      incubated for 30 days under dark conditions at 25 ◦ C on a 110-rpm shaker.
METHODS
                                                             Generation and genotyping of CRISPR–Cas9 mutants
Plant material and growing conditions
                                                                Recombinant hairy roots containing the SmCPS1 gene-editing construct
Seedlings were grown on MS (Murashige and Skoog) agar medium in a    were screened by phenotyping and sequencing. Initially, monocultures
plant culture room, and S. miltiorrhiza and N. benthamiana plants were     that displayed a white phenotype were selected. Genomic DNA from
cultured in a greenhouse at 25 ◦ C with a 16-h light/8-h dark photoperiod.    these recombinant hairy roots was amplified using CPSyz-F/R primers
T. wallichiana plants were cultured outdoors from spring to summer.        (Supplemental Table 3), ligated into a TOPO vector, and transformed
                                                                                   into E. coli. Single colonies were picked for sequencing. Finally, allelic mu-
Strains and vector construction                                           tations in the different monoculture lines were analyzed on the basis of the
The TwTS gene was cloned from cDNA of T. wallichiana using the TS-F/R    sequencing results.
primer pair (Supplemental Table 3) and inserted into the Gateway vector
pGP-B2E. This recombinant vector was transformed into E. coli DH5α   UPLC–MS/MS analysis
(Weidi) for plasmid extraction. After verification, the pGP-B2E vector    To quantify GGPP levels in transgenic hairy roots, an appropriate amount
was subjected  to an LR  reaction  with  the overexpression  vector     of hairy root monoculture was precisely weighed, frozen in liquid nitrogen,
pK7WG2R, resulting in the final TwTS gene overexpression plasmid.       and ground. To the ground tissue, 1 ml of 80% (v/v) acetonitrile was
                                                                  added, and the mixture was subjected to low-temperature ultrasonication
To construct the SmCPS1 gene-editing plasmid, the sgRNA for the     for 10 min. It was then centrifuged at 4 ◦ C for 10 min at 13,400 g. This pro-
SmCPS1 gene was obtained from publicly available sources (Li et al.,    cess was repeated three times. The extracts were combined and evapo-
2017). The target sgRNA was then introduced into the pICSL002218A     rated using a concentrator. To the residue, 200 μl of 80% (v/v) acetonitrile
gene-editing vector using the BsaI  restriction endonuclease (NEB),    was added, and the mixture was extracted with low-temperature ultraso-
resulting in the final SmCPS1 gene-editing plasmid.                          nication for 10 min, followed by centrifugation at 4 ◦ C and 13 400 g for
                                                              5 min. The supernatant was filtered through a 0.22-μm membrane and
The Golden Gate method was used to construct the SmWRKY61 gene     transferred to an injection bottle.
overexpression plasmid (Weber et al., 2011). Specifically, the pUBQ10
promoter was cloned from the A. thaliana genome, the coding region of    The liquid-phase conditions were as follows. The column was a Waters
SmWRKY61 was amplified from S. miltiorrhiza cDNA, the tNOS terminator   ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 (1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 100 mm). The mobile phases
was amplified from the pK7WG2R vector, and then the pUBQ10 promoter,    consisted of ultra-pure water with 0.1% ammonia (phase A) and acetoni-
SmWRKY61 gene, and tNOS terminator were combined into a single       trile with 0.1% ammonia (phase B). The flow rate was set to 0.35 ml/min,

                                                                                     Plant Communications 7, 101830, May 11 2026    9


[PDF physical page 10]
Plant Communications               Rewiring hairy root metabolism for paclitaxel/ginsenoside precursors

and the column temperature was maintained at 40◦ C. The injection vol-   HPLC analysis
ume was 5 μl, and elution was performed using gradient mode (0–1 min,    To quantify tanshinone levels in transgenic hairy roots, each sample was
80% A; 1–3 min, 55% A; 3–5 min, 10% A; and 5–7.5 min, 80% A).                                                                     ◦                                                                                                        initially weighed and dried in an oven at 45 C for 3 days to remove mois-
                                                                                     ture. After drying, the sample was reweighed and transferred to a grinding
The MS conditions were as follows. Electrospray ionization (ESI) was per-    tube containing grinding beads for pulverization (20 s per cycle, repeated
formed at a temperature of 550 ◦ C with an MS voltage of 4,500 V. The ion     for 5 cycles). The ground dry sample was reweighed and transferred to an
source gas I was set to 50 psi, gas II to 60 psi, and curtain gas to 35 psi.   EP tube; 1 ml of 70% methanol was added, and the mixture was sonicated
The collision-activated dissociation parameter was set to 8. Each ion pair     for 1 h, with inversion and mixing every 20 min. Following sonication, the
was scanned using a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer, with opti-    mixture was centrifuged at 13,400 g for 10 min. The supernatant was
mized declustering potential and collision energy. The GGPP reference     collected with a syringe, filtered through a 0.22-μm membrane, and trans-
standard was obtained from Yuanye.                                         ferred to an injection bottle.

GC–MS analysis                                               The HPLC analysis was performed using a Waters SunFire C18 column.
To quantify taxadiene levels in transgenic hairy roots, the hairy roots    The mobile phases consisted of 0.02% phosphoric acid in water (A) and
were weighed accurately. One portion was dried in an oven at 45 ◦ C     acetonitrile (B), with a flow rate of 1 ml/min and a sampling volume of
for 3 days and then weighed again. The remaining portion was frozen    10 μl. The column temperature was set to 30 ◦ C, and separation was
in liquid nitrogen and ground. To this sample, 5 ml of hexane was    achieved using gradient elution mode (0–10 min, 5%–20% B; 10–
added, and the mixture was subjected to ultrasonication for 20 min. It    15 min, 20%–25% B; 15–20 min, 25% B; 20–25 min, 20%–30% B; 25–
was then centrifuged at 4 ◦ C for 10 min at 13 400 g; this process was    28 min, 30% B; 28–40 min, 30% B; 40–45 min, 45%–58% B; 45–
repeated five times. The extracts were combined and concentrated us-    58 min, 58%–60% B; 58–67 min, 58%–50% B; 67–70 min, 50%–60%
ing a concentrator. A hexane solution containing 200 ng of nonadecane    B; 70–80 min, 60%–65% B; 80–85 min, 65%–95% B; 85–95 min, 95%
standard was added to the tube with the dried sample (standard from    B; and 95–96 min, 5% B). The contents and retention times of tanshi-
Yuanye). The solution was filtered through a 0.22-μm membrane and    nones—dihydrotanshinone I, cryptotanshinone, tanshinone I, and tanshi-
then transferred to an injection bottle using a syringe. GC was per-    none IIA—in the hairy root monocultures were quantified and analyzed at
formed using an HP-5MS column (30 m × 250 μm × 0.25 μm). For    270 nm by comparison with a standard curve (standards from Yuanye).
MS, helium was used as the carrier gas with a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min.
The temperature program involved an initial hold at 80 ◦ C for 2 min, fol-    Seedling generation from hairy roots and pot planting
lowed by a temperature ramp to 200 ◦ C at a rate of 10 ◦ C/min and a final
               ◦                                                    The callus and adventitious shoot induction medium consisted of MS me-hold at 200 C for 10 min. The injector and transfer line temperatures
                     ◦              ◦                                      dium supplemented with 1 mg/l 6-benzyladenine, 0.1 mg/l naphthalenewere set to 200 C and 250 C, respectively. The column effluent was
                                                                             acetic acid, 30 g/l sucrose, and 8 g/l agar, adjusted to pH 5.8. Healthy
ionized using electron ionization at 70 eV, and mass spectra were ob-
                                                                                hairy root segments of appropriate length were placed in the induction
tained in the range of m/z 30–550. The retention time and relative con-                                                     ◦                                                         medium and cultured in the dark at 25 C for 30 days until callus formation.
tent of the target compound, taxadiene, were determined by comparing                                                                                           ◦                                                              The calli were then transferred to a light/dark cycle of 16 h/8 h at 25 C for
the characteristic ions of paclitaxel (m/z 107, 122, and 272) and the
                                                               7 days to induce the formation of green adventitious shoots. Several
peak areas of the standards.
                                                                             adventitious shoots were excised with a scalpel and transferred to rooting
                                                         medium composed of 1/2 MS, 0.2 mg/l indolebutyric acid, 30 g/l sucrose,
For quantitative analysis of miltiradiene in transgenic hairy roots, sam-                                                          ◦                                                             and 8 g/l agar (pH 5.8), and cultured at 25 C with a 16-h light/8-h dark cy-
ples were accurately weighed and extracted with 5 ml of n-hexane                                                                                cle for 15 days. Seedlings were obtained when the root length reached 2–
under ultrasonication for 20 min. The mixture was subsequently centri-                                                               3 cm. Finally, fully expanded leaves of the recombinant histocultured
fuged at 13,400 g for 10 min at 4 ◦ C, and this procedure was repeated                                                                         seedlings were collected for molecular identification of the TwTS gene
five times. The resulting supernatants were pooled, concentrated un-                                                             and the DsRed fluorescent protein gene.
der a stream of nitrogen, and filtered through a 0.22-μm membrane
before being transferred to a sample vial using a syringe. GC–MS anal-
                                                                      Deionized water was added to the verified recombinant seedlings, and the
ysis was performed on a Trace1310 series gas chromatograph inter-                                                                                     ◦                                                               caps were sealed tightly. The seedlings were incubated at 25 C under a
faced with a TSQ8000 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
                                                                    16-h light/8-h dark cycle for 3 days. The caps were then partially lifted,
Waltham, MA, USA).
                                                             and incubation continued under the same conditions for an additional
                                                               3 days. After this period, the seedlings were removed from the MS me-
Separation  was  achieved  using  a  TR-5  ms  capillary  column                                                                     dium, and any residual medium was washed from the hairy roots. The
(30 m × 0.25 mm i.d., 0.25 μm film thickness; Thermo Fisher Scientific)                                                                         seedlings were transferred to soil (soil:perlite:vermiculite = 7:1:2) and
with helium as the carrier gas at a constant flow rate of 1 ml/min. The                                                                   covered with a moisture-retaining film for 10 days. Finally, the film was
injector temperature was maintained at 280◦ C. The oven temperature                                                                 removed, and the seedlings were planted in the greenhouse under the
began at 50 ◦ C (held for 1 min), ramped to 150◦ C at 5 ◦ C/min, to 230◦ C                                                         same conditions.
at 20 ◦ C/min, and to 300 ◦ C at 30 ◦ C/min, and finally was held at 300◦ C
for 5 min. A miltiradiene standard was generously provided by Professor
                                                                 Hairy root elicitor treatment
Juan Guo (China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences).
                                                              The recombinant hairy root line was cultured in 6,7-V liquid medium. After
Quantitative fluorescence analysis                               18 days of growth, 200 μM MeJA or 25 mg/l YE was used for elicitation.
                                                              Samples were collected at 12, 24, 72, and 144 h post elicitation, with three
RNA was extracted from hairy root lines using a commercially available
                                                                                 biological replicates per sampling point.
RNA extraction kit (Vazyme), followed by cDNA synthesis with a reverse
transcription kit (AG). The cDNA was then analyzed for gene expression
using a fluorescence quantitative PCR instrument (QuantStudio 6 Flex,   LC–MS–IT–TOF
Thermo  Fisher). RT–qPCR was performed  using  the comparative    To quantify protopanaxadiol levels in transgenic hairy roots, a precise
threshold cycle (2 − ΔΔCt ) method, with β-actin as the internal reference    amount of each hairy root line was weighed, frozen, and ground in liquid
gene.  Primers used  in  this  study  are  detailed  in  Supplemental     nitrogen. One milliliter of 70% methanol was added, and the mixture
Table 3. Each sample was analyzed in three independent biological    was ultrasonicated for 1 h, with inversion and mixing every 20 min. After
replicates.                                                                      ultrasonication, the sample was centrifuged at 13,400 g for 10 min. The

10    Plant Communications 7, 101830, May 11 2026


[PDF physical page 11]
Rewiring hairy root metabolism for paclitaxel/ginsenoside precursors              Plant Communications

supernatant was then aspirated using a syringe, filtered through a 0.22-μm        story. aBIOTECH  2:289–298.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s42994-021-
membrane, and transferred to an injection vial for sampling.                  00050-5.

                                                             Bohlmann, J., and Keeling, C.I. (2008). Terpenoid biomaterials. Plant J.
Liquid chromatography (LC) was performed using a Waters ACQUITY       54:656–669. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03449.x.
UPLC BEH C18 column (1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 100 mm). The mobile phases
                                                                      Bradley, S.A., Lehka, B.J., Hansson, F.G., Adhikari, K.B., Rago, D.,
consisted of acetonitrile (phase A) and ultrapure water (phase B). The flow
                                                                 Rubaszka, P., Haidar, A.K., Chen, L., Hansen, L.G., Gudich, O.,
rate was set to 0.35 ml/min, and the column temperature was maintained
      ◦                                                                        et  al.  (2023).  Biosynthesis  of  natural  and  halogenated  plantat 40 C. The injection volume was 5 μl, and a gradient elution program was
                                                                  monoterpene indole alkaloids in yeast. Nat. Chem. Biol. 19:1551–
used: 0–5 min, 25%–55% A; 5–10 min, 55%–70% A; 10–13 min, 70%–
                                                                        1560. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-023-01430-2.
90% A; 13–20 min, 90%–100% A; 20–25 min, 100%–75% A; and 25–
27 min, 75% A.                                                    Bureau, J.A., Oliva, M.E., Dong, Y., and Ignea, C. (2023). Engineering
                                                                           yeast for the production of plant terpenoids using synthetic biology
The MS detector voltage was 1.60 kV, the nebulizing gas (N) flow rate was       approaches. Nat. Prod. Rep. 40:1822–1848. https://doi.org/10.1039/
1.5 l/min, and the drying gas (N 2) flow rate was 50 kPa. The time-of-flight      d3np00005b.
(TOF) zone force was set to 1.5 × 10− 9 Pa, and the sub-trap pressure was     Butelli, E., Titta, L., Giorgio, M., Mock, H.P., Matros, A., Peterek, S.,
1.7 × 102 Pa. The ion build-up time was 30 ms, and the precursor ion se-        Schijlen, E.G.W.M., Hall, R.D., Bovy, A.G., Luo, J., et al. (2008).
lection width was 3.0 amu. The scan range was 100–1000 for MS1 and       Enrichment of tomato  fruit with health-promoting anthocyanins by
100–500 for MS2. Ultra-high-purity gas was used for cooling and collision.       expression of select transcription factors. Nat. Biotechnol. 26:1301–
The protopanaxadiol reference standard was obtained from Yuanye.           1308. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1506.

                                                               Cao, R., Lv, B., Shao, S., Zhao, Y., Yang, M., Zuo, A., Wei, J., Dong, J.,
Statistical analysis
                                                            and Ma, P. (2024). The SmMYC2-SmMYB36 complex is involved in
We performed pairwise comparisons of each transgenic line and its corre-                                                                        methyl  jasmonate-mediated  tanshinones  biosynthesis  in  Salvia
sponding control and assessed statistical significance using a two-tailed                                                                                            miltiorrhiza. Plant J. 119:746–761. https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.16793.
unpaired Student’s t test performed with GraphPad Prism 8 software; a
                                                              Chen, Y., Wang, Y., Guo, J., Yang, J., Zhang, X., Wang, Z., Cheng, Y.,p value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
                                                                   Du, Z., Qi, Z., Huang, Y., et al. (2021). Integrated Transcriptomics and
                                                                      Proteomics  to  Reveal  Regulation Mechanism and  Evolution  of
DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY                         SmWRKY61 on Tanshinone Biosynthesis in Salvia miltiorrhiza and
Gene sequences used in this study were obtained from GenBank (https://                                                                                   Salvia castanea. Front. Plant Sci. 12:820582. https://doi.org/10.3389/
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/):  TwTS  (AY007207),  SmCPS1  (EU003997),                                                                            fpls.2021.820582.
SmWRKY61 (KM823184), and PnPPDS (GU997665). Source data are
                                                             Cheng, Y., Hong, X., Zhang, L., Yang, W., Zeng, Y., Hou, Z., Yang, Z.,also provided with this paper.
                                                            and Yang, D. (2023). Transcriptomic analysis provides insight into the
                                                                                 regulation mechanism of silver ions (Ag+) and jasmonic acid methyl
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                                                                                ester (MeJA) on secondary metabolism in the hairy roots of Salvia
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development
                                                                                          miltiorrhiza Bunge (Lamiaceae). Med Plant Biol 2:3. https://doi.org/
Program of China (2023YFA0915800 and 2024YFC3506400), the Zhejiang
                                                                    10.48130/MPB-2023-0003.
Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LMS25C020001 and
LD25H280001), the Key Project of the Central Government: Capacity    Dong, C., Qu, G., Guo, J., Wei, F., Gao, S., Sun, Z., Jin, L., Sun, X.,
Building of Sustainable Utilisation of Traditional Chinese Medicine Re-       Rochaix,  J.D.,  Miao,  Y.,  et  al.  (2022).  Rational  design  of
sources (2060302), the Scientific and Technological Innovation Project       geranylgeranyl   diphosphate   synthase   enhances   carotenoid
of CACMS (CI2023D002), and the National Natural Science Foundation       production and improves  photosynthetic  efficiency  in  Nicotiana
of China (82574523).                                                   tabacum. Sci. Bull. 67:315–327. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scib.2021.
                                                                           07.003.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS                                        Engler, C., Youles, M., Gruetzner, R., Ehnert, T.M., Werner, S., Jones,
J.L., W.L., Y.Z., and Y. Liu performed the biological experiments; L.L. and        J.D.G., Patron, N.J., and Marillonnet, S. (2014). A golden gate
F.Y. performed sample collection and chromatographic processing; W.L.,       modular cloning toolbox  for plants. ACS Synth.  Biol. 3:839–843.
Z.X., C.E.F., J.G., Z.L., B.C., and D.Y. supervised and assisted the exper-       https://doi.org/10.1021/sb4001504.
iments; J.L., B.C., and D.Y. wrote the manuscript. J.L. and W.L. contrib-    Gao, W., Hillwig, M.L., Huang, L., Cui, G., Wang, X., Kong, J., Yang, B.,
uted equally to this study.                                         and  Peters,  R.J.  (2009). A  functional  genomics  approach  to
                                                                         tanshinone biosynthesis provides stereochemical insights. Org. Lett.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION                                  11:5170–5173. https://doi.org/10.1021/ol902051v.
Supplemental information is available at Plant Communications Online.     Goddard, Z.R., Searcey, M., and Osbourn, A. (2024). Advances in
                                                                                    triterpene  drug  discovery.  Trends  Pharmacol.  Sci.  45:964–968.
Received: October 29, 2025                                                     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2024.10.003.
Revised: February 1, 2026
                                                             Guo, J., Zhou, Y.J., Hillwig, M.L., Shen, Y., Yang, L., Wang, Y., Zhang,Accepted: March 17, 2026
                                                                                       X., Liu, W., Peters, R.J., Chen, X., et al. (2013). CYP76AH1 catalyzesPublished: March 19, 2026
                                                                              turnover of miltiradiene  in tanshinones biosynthesis and enables
REFERENCES                                                         heterologous production of ferruginol in yeasts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
                                                     USA 110:12108–12113. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1218061110.
Ajikumar, P.K., Xiao, W.H., Tyo, K.E.J., Wang, Y., Simeon, F., Leonard,
   E., Mucha, O., Phon, T.H., Pfeifer, B., and Stephanopoulos, G.    Guo, L., Yao, H., Chen, W., Wang, X., Ye, P., Xu, Z., Zhang, S., and Wu,
   (2010).  Isoprenoid  pathway  optimization   for  Taxol  precursor       H. (2022). Natural products of medicinal plants: biosynthesis and
   overproduction in Escherichia coli. Science 330:70–74. https://doi.       bioengineering in post-genomic era. Hortic. Res. 9:uhac223. https://
   org/10.1126/science.1191652.                                            doi.org/10.1093/hr/uhac223.

Barja,   M.V.,  and  Rodriguez-Concepcion,  M.   (2021).   Plant    Hao, X., Pu, Z., Cao, G., You, D., Zhou, Y., Deng, C., Shi, M., Nile, S.H.,
   geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthases: every (gene) family has a      Wang, Y., Zhou, W., et al. (2020). Tanshinone and salvianolic acid

                                                                                     Plant Communications 7, 101830, May 11 2026   11


[PDF physical page 12]
Plant Communications               Rewiring hairy root metabolism for paclitaxel/ginsenoside precursors

   biosynthesis are regulated by SmMYB98 in Salvia miltiorrhiza hairy        Natl. Acad.  Sci. USA 120:e2207680120.  https://doi.org/10.1073/
   roots.  J.  Adv.  Res.  23:1–12.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2020.       pnas.2207680120.
   01.012.                                                                         Malcı, K., Santiba´ n˜ez, R., Jonguitud-Borrego, N., Santoyo-Garcia,
Hsu, C.T., Chiu, C.C., Hsiao, P.Y., Lin, C.Y., Cheng, S., Lin, Y.C., Yang,        J.H.,  Kerkhoven,  E.J.,  and  Rios-Solis,  L.  (2023).  Improved
   Y.L., Wu, F.H., Harn, H.J., Lin, S.Z., et al. (2024). Transgene-free       production of Taxol® precursors in S. cerevisiae using combinatorial
   CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene  editing  through  protoplast-to-plant         in silico design and metabolic engineering. Microb. Cell Fact. 22:243.
   regeneration enhances active compounds in Salvia miltiorrhiza. Plant       https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-023-02251-7.
   Biotechnol. J. 22:1549–1551. https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.14285.        Moser, S., and Pichler, H. (2019). Identifying and engineering the ideal
Hu, J., Qiu, S., Wang, F., Li, Q., Xiang, C.L., Di, P., Wu, Z., Jiang, R., Li,        microbial terpenoid production host. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
    J., Zeng, Z., et al. (2023). Functional divergence of CYP76AKs shapes       103:5501–5516. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-019-09892-y.
   the chemodiversity of abietane-type diterpenoids in genus Salvia. Nat.    Perez-Matas, E., Hidalgo-Martinez, D., Moyano, E., Palazon, J., and
  Commun. 14:4696. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-40401-y.             Bonfill, M. (2024). Overexpression of BAPT and DBTNBT genes in
Jiang, B., Gao, L., Wang, H., Sun, Y., Zhang, X., Ke, H., Liu, S., Ma, P.,       Taxus baccata  in  vitro cultures to enhance the biotechnological
   Liao, Q., Wang, Y., et al. (2024). Characterization and heterologous       production of paclitaxel. Plant Biotechnol. J. 22:233–247. https://doi.
   reconstitution of Taxus biosynthetic enzymes leading to baccatin III.       org/10.1111/pbi.14182.
   Science 383:622–629. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adj3484.        Sharma, A., Rather, G.A., Misra, P., Dhar, M.K., and Lattoo, S.K. (2019).
Jiao, X., Fu, X., Li, Q., Bu, J., Liu, X., Savolainen, O., Huang, L., Guo, J.,      Jasmonate responsive transcription factor WsMYC2 regulates the
   Nielsen,   J.,  and  Chen,  Y.  (2024). De  novo  production  of       biosynthesis of triterpenoid withanolides and phytosterol via key
   protoberberine and benzophenanthridine alkaloids through metabolic      pathway genes in Withania somnifera  (L.) Dunal. Plant Mol. Biol.
   engineering  of  yeast. Nat. Commun. 15:8759.  https://doi.org/10.       100:543–560. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103-019-00880-4.
   1038/s41467-024-53045-3.                                               Shi, M., Liao,  P., Nile, S.H., Georgiev,  M.I., and Kai, G. (2021).
                                                                             Biotechnological Exploration of Transformed Root Culture for Value-Kai, G., Xu, H., Zhou, C., Liao, P., Xiao, J., Luo, X., You, L., and Zhang,
                                                            Added Products. Trends Biotechnol. 39:137–149. https://doi.org/10.   L. (2011). Metabolic engineering tanshinone biosynthetic pathway in
                                                                               1016/j.tibtech.2020.06.012.   Salvia  miltiorrhiza  hairy  root  cultures. Metab. Eng. 13:319–327.
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2011.02.003.                          Singh, S., Apoorva, Saha, P., Saha, P., Rai, N., Kumari, S., and Pandey-
                                                                              Rai,  S.  (2023).  Unravelling  triterpenoid  biosynthesis  in  plants
Kant, G., Pandey, A., Hasan, A., Bux, F., Kumari, S., and Srivastava, S.
                                                                                          for  applications  in  bioengineering  and  large-scale  sustainable
   (2024). Cell factories for methylerythritol phosphate pathway mediated
                                                                             production. Ind. Crop. Prod. 199:116789. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
   terpenoid biosynthesis: An application of modern engineering towards
                                                                         indcrop.2023.116789.
   sustainability. Process Biochem. 139:146–164.  https://doi.org/10.
   1016/j.procbio.2024.01.027.                                       Sun, M., Shi, M., Wang, Y., Huang, Q., Yuan, T., Wang, Q., Wang, C.,
                                                                  Zhou, W., and Kai, G. (2019). The biosynthesis of phenolic acids is
Li, B., Cui, G., Shen, G., Zhan, Z., Huang, L., Chen, J., and Qi, X. (2017).
                                                                                      positively regulated by the JA-responsive transcription factor ERF115
   Targeted mutagenesis in the medicinal plant Salvia miltiorrhiza. Sci.
                                                                                             in Salvia  miltiorrhiza.  J. Exp. Bot. 70:243–254. https://doi.org/10.
   Rep. 7:43320. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep43320.
                                                                            1093/jxb/ery349.
Li, J., Mutanda, I., Wang, K., Yang, L., Wang, J., and Wang, Y. (2019).
                                                                         Ting, J., Yue, Z., Gege, Z., Tiao, L., Hui, W., Ru, Z., and Zhiyong, L.
   Chloroplastic metabolic engineering coupled with isoprenoid pool
                                                                                   (2024). Transcription factor PgNAC72 activates DAMMARENEDIOL
  enhancement  for  committed  taxanes  biosynthesis  in  Nicotiana
                                                       SYNTHASE expression to promote ginseng saponin biosynthesis.
   benthamiana.  Nat.  Commun.  10:4850.  https://doi.org/10.1038/
                                                                               Plant Physiol 195:2952–2969. https://doi.org/10.1093/plphys/kiae202.
   s41467-019-12879-y.
                                                         Wang, J., Lei, Z., Ma, W., Ma, W., Jiang, Y., Jiang, W., Wan, Y., Xin, F.,
Li, Y., Cao, J., Zhang, Y., Liu, Y., Gao, S., Zhang, P., Xia, W., Zhang, K.,                                                                 Zhang, W., and Jiang, M. (2024). Metabolic Engineering of Yarrowia
   Yang, X., Wang, Y., et al. (2024). The methyl jasmonate-responsive                                                                                            lipolytica for Efficient Production of Terpenoids. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.
   transcription factor SmERF106 promotes tanshinone accumulation in                                                                      63:14469–14479. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.4c02475.
   Salvia miltiorrhiza. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 214:108932. https://doi.
   org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2024.108932.                             Wang, P., Wei, W., Ye, W., Li, X., Zhao, W., Yang, C., Li, C., Yan, X., and
                                                                  Zhou, Z. (2019). Synthesizing ginsenoside Rh2 in Saccharomyces
Lin, J., Yin, X., Zeng, Y., Hong, X., Zhang, S., Cui, B., Zhu, Q., Liang, Z.,        cerevisiae cell factory at high-efficiency. Cell Discov. 5:5. https://doi.
   Xue, Z., and Yang, D. (2023). Progress and prospect: Biosynthesis of       org/10.1038/s41421-018-0075-5.
   plant natural products based on plant chassis. Biotechnol. Adv.
                                                         Wang, Z., and Peters, R.J. (2022). Tanshinones: Leading the way into   69:108266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2023.108266.
                                                                  Lamiaceae  labdane-related  diterpenoid  biosynthesis.  Curr. Opin.
Liu, J.C.T., De La Pen˜ a, R., Tocol, C., and Sattely, E.S. (2024).        Plant Biol. 66:102189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbi.2022.102189.
   Reconstitution  of  early  paclitaxel  biosynthetic  network.  Nat.
                                                                Wasternack, C., and Strnad, M. (2019). Jasmonates are signals in the
  Commun. 15:1419. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-45574-8.
                                                                             biosynthesis  of secondary metabolites  - Pathways,  transcription
Loan, T.H., Nathalie, P.-J., M, P.-L., M, B.-C., Hoa, X.D., and Eric, G.        factors and applied aspects - A brief review. N. Biotechnol. 48:1–11.
   (2016).  Hairy  root  cultures  of Panax  vietnamensis, a promising        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbt.2017.09.007.
   approach for the production of ocotillol-type ginsenosides. PCTOC
                                                             Weber, E., Engler, C., Gruetzner, R., Werner, S., and Marillonnet, S.
   126:93–103. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11240-016-0980-y.
                                                                                   (2011). A modular cloning system  for standardized assembly of
Ma, Y., Cui, G., Chen, T., Ma, X., Wang, R., Jin, B., Yang, J., Kang, L.,       multigene constructs. PLoS One 6:e16765. https://doi.org/10.1371/
   Tang, J., Lai, C., et al. (2021). Expansion within the CYP71D subfamily       journal.pone.0016765.
   drives  the  heterocyclization  of  tanshinones  synthesis  in  Salvia
                                                         Wu, Q.Y., Huang, Z.Y., Wang, J.Y., Yu, H.L., and Xu, J.H. (2022).
    miltiorrhiza. Nat. Commun. 12:685. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
                                                                           Construction  of an  Escherichia  coli  cell  factory  to  synthesize
   021-20959-1.
                                                                                taxadien-5α-ol, the key precursor of anti-cancer drug  paclitaxel.
Ma, Y., Zu, Y., Huang, S., and Stephanopoulos, G. (2023). Engineering a        Bioresour.  Bioprocess.  9:82.  https://doi.org/10.1186/s40643-022-
   universal and efficient platform for terpenoid synthesis in yeast. Proc.       00569-5.

12    Plant Communications 7, 101830, May 11 2026


[PDF physical page 13]
Rewiring hairy root metabolism for paclitaxel/ginsenoside precursors              Plant Communications

Wu, T., Kerbler, S.M., Fernie, A.R., and Zhang, Y. (2021). Plant cell       Synthetic  biology  identifies  the  minimal gene  set  required  for
   cultures as heterologous  bio-factories  for secondary  metabolite        paclitaxel biosynthesis in a plant chassis. Mol. Plant 16:1951–1961.
   production. Plant Commun. 2:100235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xplc.        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2023.10.016.
   2021.100235.
                                                                Zhao, S., Zhang, J., Tan, R., Yang, L., and Zheng, X. (2015). Enhancing
Xia, J., Lou, G., Zhang, L., Huang, Y., Yang, J., Guo, J., Qi, Z., Li, Z.,                                                                              diterpenoid concentration in Salvia miltiorrhiza hairy roots through
  Zhang, G., Xu, S., et al. (2023). Unveiling the spatial distribution and                                                                  pathway engineering with maize C1 transcription factor. J. Exp. Bot.
   molecular mechanisms of terpenoid biosynthesis in Salvia miltiorrhiza                                                                       66:7211–7226. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erv418.
  and S. grandifolia using multi-omics and DESI-MSI. Hortic. Res.
   10:uhad109. https://doi.org/10.1093/hr/uhad109.                    Zheng, H., Jing, L., Jiang, X., Pu, C., Zhao, S., Yang, J., Guo, J., Cui, G.,
                                                                   Tang,  J., Ma, Y., et  al. (2021). The ERF-VII transcription factorXu, H., Song, J., Luo, H., Zhang, Y., Li, Q., Zhu, Y., Xu, J., Li, Y., Song,
                                                        SmERF73  coordinately   regulates  tanshinone  biosynthesis   in   C., Wang, B., et al. (2016). Analysis of the Genome Sequence of the
                                                                     response  to  stress  elicitors  in  Salvia  miltiorrhiza. New  Phytol.   Medicinal Plant Salvia miltiorrhiza. Mol. Plant 9:949–952. https://doi.
                                                                      231:1940–1955. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.17463.   org/10.1016/j.molp.2016.03.010.

Yang, C., Wang, Y., Su, Z., Xiong, L., Wang, P., Lei, W., Yan, X., Ma, D.,    Zheng, H., Yao, Q., Liu, Q., Tai, B., Ye, Y., Li, L., Zhang, Y., Zhao, Y.,
  Zhao, G., and Zhou, Z. (2024). Biosynthesis of the highly oxygenated      Gao,  X.,  Liu,  S.,  et  al.  (2025).  Efficient  tanshinone  metabolic
   tetracyclic core skeleton of Taxol. Nat. Commun. 15:2339. https://doi.       engineering in Salvia miltiorrhiza through modified multiplex CRISPR/
   org/10.1038/s41467-024-46583-3.                                 Cas9 system. Chem. Eng. J. 523:168709–168947. https://doi.org/10.
                                                                             1016/j.cej.2025.168709.Zhang, S., Yang, J., Li, H., Chiang, V.L., and Fu, Y. (2021). Cooperative
   Regulation  of Flavonoid and  Lignin Biosynthesis  in  Plants.  Crit.                                                               Zhou, C., Chen, T., Gu, A., Hu, Z., Li, Y., Gong, T., Chen, J., Yang, J.,
   Rev. Plant Sci. 40:109–126. https://doi.org/10.1080/07352689.2021.      and Zhu, P. (2023). Combining protein and metabolic engineering to
   1898083.                                                                         achieve green biosynthesis of 12β-O-Glc-PPD  in Saccharomyces
Zhang, Y., Wiese, L., Fang, H., Alseekh, S., Perez de Souza, L.,        cerevisiae.  Green Chem.  25:1356–1367.  https://doi.org/10.1039/
  Scossa, F., Molloy, J., Christmann, M., and Fernie, A.R. (2023).      D2GC04380G.





                                                                                     Plant Communications 7, 101830, May 11 2026   13