
[PDF physical page 1]
                                                ORGANIC
                                                   LETTERS

      Application of an Efficient Gene Targeting             2013                                                                                  Vol. 15, No. 14
                                                                          3562–3565     System Linking Secondary Metabolites
      to their Biosynthetic Genes
       in Aspergillus terreus

          Chun-Jun Guo,† Benjamin P. Knox,‡ James F. Sanchez,† Yi-Ming Chiang,†,§
          Kenneth S. Bruno,*,‡ and Clay C. C. Wang*,†,)

           Department of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy,
             University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, United States,(UTC).         Chemical andBiological ProcessDevelopment Group, Energyand Environment Directorate,
        articles.        Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington 99352, United States,
           Graduate Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and05:36:44
at          Science, Tainan 71710, Taiwan, and Department of Chemistry, College of Letters, Arts, and        published        Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089, United States2019
12,share       bruno@pnnl.gov, clayw@usc.edu


             Received May 16, 2013Septemberlegitimately
onto                                              ABSTRACT
TECHhow
&on
ENERGYoptionsfor
BIOMASS
INST          Nonribosomal peptides (NRPs) are natural products biosynthesized by NRP synthetases. A kusA-, pyrG- mutant strain of Aspergillus terreus NIH             2624 was developed that greatly facilitated the gene targeting efficiency in this organism. Application of this tool allowed us to link four major
              types of NRP-related secondary metabolites to their responsible genes in A. terreus. In addition, an NRP affecting melanin synthesis was also
                identified in this species.QINGDAO
via                                https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines               Aspergillus terreus, the producer of lovastatin, bio-     produced by these NRPSs in A. terreus, due in large part
   See        synthesizes a number of nonribosomal peptide (NRP)-     to the lack of available tools for efficient genetic manipula-Downloaded          related natural products with diverse biological activities.      tion of this fungal species. A previous study successfully
           Examples include the antitumor metabolites asterriquinones      linked the hybrid gene ATEG_00325.1 (ftmA) to its sec-
          and butyrolactones.1 3 Analysis by Secondary Metabolite     ondary metabolite, the root toxin flavipucine.5 Recently, a
          Unique Regions Finder (SMURF)4 showed that the genome      cluster of nine genes including one NRPS gene ataP was
           sequenced A. terreus NIH 2624 strain contains 38 NRPS    shown to be responsible for acetylaranotin biosynthesis
           genes and one hybrid PKS (polyketide synthase)-NRPS      in A. terreus.6
            gene. Little is known about the secondary metabolites       In this study, several laboratory culture media includ-
                                                                         ing glucose minimal medium (GMM), yeast agar glucose
                    (1) Balibar, C. J.; Howard-Jones, A. R.; Walsh, C. T. Nat. Chem.    (YAG) medium and lactose dextrose minimal medium
                 Biol. 2007, 3, 584.                               (LCMM) were tested to identify secondary metabolites
                    (2) Kaji, A.; Saito, R.; Nomura, M.; Miyamoto, K.; Kiriyama, N.
               Anticancer Res. 1997, 17, 3675.
                    (3) Nitta, K.; Fujita, N.; Yoshimura, T.; Arai, K.; Yamamoto, Y.           (5) Gressler, M.; Zaehle, C.; Scherlach, K.; Hertweck, C.; Brock, M.
            Chem. Pharm. Bull. 1983, 31, 1528.                                  Chem. Biol. 2011, 18, 198.
                    (4) Khaldi, N.; Seifuddin, F. T.; Turner, G.; Haft, D.; Nierman,           (6) Guo, C. J.; Yeh, H. H.; Chiang, Y. M.; Sanchez, J. F.; Chang,
          W. C.; Wolfe, K. H.; Fedorova, N. D. Fungal Genet. Biol. 2010, 47, 736.       S. L.; Bruno, K. S.; Wang, C. C. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135, 7205–7213.

                10.1021/ol401384v r 2013 American Chemical Society
               Published on Web 07/10/2013


[PDF physical page 2]
biosynthesized by wild type A. terreus. HPLC-DAD-MS        Identification of the NRPS and NRPS-like genes re-
analyses allowed us to identify five major types of UV-active      sponsible for the dihydroxybenzoquinone core of 8 and
natural products including indole alkaloids (1 and 4), aster-      the indole alkaloid core of 1 and 4 was facilitated by
riquinone CT5 (8), aspulvinones (7 and 9), butyrolactones      the fact that the biosynthesis pathways of structurally
(2 and 6) and terretonins (3 and 5) from the ethyl acetate      similar compounds have been identified in A. nidulans
extract of A. terreus (Figure  1). Previous studies have     and Neosartorya fischeri, respectively. The structural simi-
reported  the  identification  of  the  polyketide  synthase      larity between terrequinone A and 8 suggests that there is a
(PKS) gene  in A.  terreus  involved  in  terretonin  bio-      cluster in A. terreus that is orthologous to the terrequinone
synthesis.7,8 Here we focused on identifying the gene clusters
that are responsible for the biosynthesis of additional natural
productsthataresynthesizedbyA.terreusonvariousgrowth
conditions. As detailed below, their structures suggest that
they are biosynthesized via an NRP or NRP-like synthesis
pathway.1,3,9
  To facilitate the rapid generation of a large number of
gene deletions we created a kusA-, pyrG- double mutant
strain of A. terreus NIH 2624. We used this strain to link
the NRPS and NRPS-like genes in A. terreus to their cor-
responding secondary metabolites. The kusA gene deletion
improves gene targeting efficiencydue to high homologous
recombination rates.5,10 To create the kusA deletion strain,
we replaced the kusA gene in the wild type strain with the
hygromycin resistance marker (hph) (Figure 2A). Next we
created a pyrG auxotrophic mutant in the kusA- back-
ground using a previous described approach.11 In brief,
we first amplified sequences from the pyrG coding region
                                                                 Figure 2. Genetic manipulation of A. terreus strains.
that were 30 base pairs apart. These two fragments were
joined using fusion PCR and the resulting amplicon
generates a small deletion within pyrG when integrated                                  A cluster (tdi cluster) in A. nidulans.1 A blast search of
through homologous recombination (Figure 2B). Trans-
                                                             the NRPS-like gene (tdiA) enabled us to locate one of its
formants that contain this construct integrated at the pyrG
                                                      homologues, encoded by the gene ATEG_00700.1 (atqA),
locus were selected on media supplemented with uracil and
                                                                in A. terreus. As for 1 and 4, we used the acetylaszonalenin
5-fluoroorotic acid (FOA). The FOA is toxic to cells that                                       NRPS in Neosartorya fischeri9 for our blast search and
contain a functional pyrG gene and therefore only the pyrG
                                              we identified ATEG_10305.1 (anaPS) as the most likely
auxotrophic mutants can grow on this media.
                                                             candidate. We created an atqA deletion strain and an
                                                anaPS deletion strain by replacing the targeted gene with
                                                             the A. fumigatus pyrG (AfpyrG) marker in a kusA-, pyrG-
                                                    background (Figure 2C). The deletants were verified by
                                                              diagnostic PCR (Table S2 and Figure S3, Supporting
                                                            Information). Examination of the secondary metabolite
                                                                    profiles of the atqA deletion strain in comparison with the
                                                           wild type strain clearly showed that compound 8 is missing
                                                                in the deletion strain and is still produced in the wild type
                                                                  strain (Figure 3). A similar comparison of the anaPS
                                                               deletion strain with the wild type strain showed the dis-
                                                       appearance of compounds 1 and 4 in the deletant strain
                                                            (Figure 3).
                                                   The identification of genes responsible for the biosynthesis
                                                          ofthecorestructuresofbutyrolactonesandaspulvinoneswas
                                                  more difficult because genes for the biosynthesis of these
                                                               types of fungal natural products were unknown prior to this
Figure 1. Natural products isolated in this study.                  study.Earlybiosynthesisstudieswerelimitedtouseoflabeled
                                                               precursors which showed that phenylalanine and tyrosine


                                                                                        (9) Yin, W. B.; Grundmann, A.; Cheng, J.; Li, S. M. J. Biol. Chem.
   (7) Guo, C.-J.; Knox, B. P.; Chiang, Y.-M.; Lo, H.-C.; Sanchez, J. F.;       2009, 284, 100.
Lee, K.-H.; Oakley, B. R.; Bruno, K. S.; Wang, C. C. C. Org. Lett. 2012,          (10) Ninomiya, Y.; Suzuki, K.; Ishii, C.; Inoue, H. Proc. Natl. Acad.
14, 5684.                                                                          Sci. U.S.A. 2004, 101, 12248–12253.
   (8) Itoh, T.; Tokunaga, K.; Radhakrishnan, E. K.; Fujii, I.; Abe, I.;          (11) Chiang, Y.-M.; Meyer, K. M.; Praseuth, M.; Baker, S. E.;
Ebizuka, Y.; Kushiro, T. Chembiochem 2012, 13, 1132–1135.               Bruno, K. S.; Wang, C. C.C. Fungal Genet. Biol. 2010, 48, 430–437.

Org. Lett., Vol. 15, No. 14, 2013                                                                                                            3563


[PDF physical page 3]
                                                             the NRPS-like genes responsible for the biosynthesis of
                                                           ralfuranone and  microperfuranone,  natural  products
                                                              that shares structural similarity with butyrolactones and
                                                           aspulvinones were reported.15,16 Our data suggest that the
                                                              biosynthetic route of butyrolactones and aspulvinones are
                                                                 similar to that of ralfuranone and microperfuranone.
                                          BLAST alignment analysis of the btyA and apvA genes
                                                                 reveals strong similarity between the proteins in which they
                                                          encode. The structures of the two final products, butyro-
                                                              lactones and aspulvinones, suggest that both BtyA and
                                         ApvA utilize the same p-hydroxyl PPA (HPPA) substrates
                                                        but undergo different cyclization mechanisms. For butyr-
                                                           olactone biosynthesis we propose that HPPA is activated
                                                  by the BtyA A domain to AMP-HPPA (Figure 4A). The
                                                               activated HPPA is then loaded to the T domain and
                                                               transferred to the TE domain. Upon loading of another
                                      HPPA unit to the T domain, the TE domain promotes the
Figure 3. HPLC traces of the wildtype and the mutants at total
                                                             enolate formation on the unit attached. Then aldol con-spectrum scan by DAD detector. *This metabolite is related
with aspulvinones according to its UV absorption spectrum but     densation establishes the carbon  carbon bond between
not isolated due to low production yield. Numbering on peaks     the two units, followed by ester cyclization, and keto  enol
corresponds to Figure 1.                                      tautomerization to yield the γ-butyrolactone core. Hydro-
                                                                             lysis, and finally esterification of the exposed carboxylic
                                                             acid group yields butyrolactone II. Two additional en-could be incorporated into butyrolactones.3,12 The use of
                                                        zymes, a prenyltransferase and an epoxidase, may be
amino acids in the pathway but lack of peptide bonds in their
                                                           involved in the tailoring modifications of butyrolactone
structures (copmounds 2, 6, 7, and 9) suggests that NRPS-
                                                                     II to give compounds 2 and 6 (Figure 4A).
like genes with A-T-TE domain structures are likely respon-
                                                    For aspulvinone biosynthesis, we propose that HPPA is
sible for the biosynthesis of these two families of natural
                                                             the substrate of ApvA and the mechanism of activatingproducts.1 The TE domain could catalyze release of the final
                                                  and loading HPPA onto the TE domain closely parallels
product by hydrolysis to the free acid or macrocyclization to
                                                              that of BtyA. The TE domain promotes the enolatean amide or ester.13 A recent study also shows that the TE
                                                        formation on the unit attached. The next step involves
domain of TdiA could catalyze a double Claisen condensa-
                                                    head to tail Claisen condensation, followed by the keto
tion to generate two carbon  carbon bonds followed by
                                                           enol tautermerization and a nucleophilic attack on thethe release of the dihydroxybenzoquinone core.1 Another
                                                         carbonyl carbon to yield the furanone partial structure. A
study reveals a TE domain of CurM, the PKS involved in
                                                       spontaneous oxidation at the β-carbon of the thioester
curacin A biosynthesis, could direct a hydrolysis coupled
                                                      might occur in aerobic condition. The TE domain then
with a decarboxylative elimination to yield a terminal olefin
                                                                catalyzes the hydrolysis of the thioester, followed bymoiety.14
                                                         spontaneousdecarboxylation, dehydroxylation and keto
  To locate the genes for the biosynthesis of butyrolactones
                                                        enol tautermerization to give the aspulvinone core
and aspulvinones biosynthesis we targeted 19 NRPS-like                                                            (Figure 4B). The structural diversity of the aspulvinones17
genes in A. terreus with the A-T-TE domain architecture or
                                                              suggests that other tailoring enzymes are involved. Since
similar for deletion. The targeted genes were individually                                                        secondary metabolite genes are usually clustered,18 we
replaced by the AfpyrG marker and verified by diagnostic
                                                     examined the genes proximal to apvA. The presumed
PCR (Figure 2C). It should be noted that using a kusA-,
                                                     enzymeproducts of these genesarepredictedtobe essential
pyrG- strain resulted in a significant improvement in gene
                                                               for fungal survival (Table S3, Supporting Information)
targeting efficiency (Table S2, Supporting Information).
                                                  and might not be involved in the tailoring modifications of
  Comparison of the secondary metabolite profiles of
                                                          aspulvinone core, suggesting that these tailoring genes for
each of the 19 NRPS-like deletion strains to the control
                                                             the aspulvinones biosynthesis may reside in a different
strain allowed us to identify the NRPS-like gene btyA
                                                             locus in the A. terreus genome.
ATEG_02815.1 as the gene responsible for the biosynthe-
                                                 One albino mutant was identified after deleting the gene
sis of the butyrolactone core of 2 and 6. The same com-
                                                       ATEG_03563.1(atmelA) (FigureS4,SupportingInformation).
parative analysis identified the NRPS-like gene ATEG_
02004.1 which we named apvA as the gene required for the
production of the aspulvinone core of 7 and 9. Recently          (15) Wackler, B.; Schneider, P.; Jacobs, J. M.; Pauly, J.; Allen, C.;
                                                                           Nett, M.; Hoffmeister, D. Chem. Biol. 2011, 18, 354.
                                                                                  (16) Yeh, H.-H.; Chiang, Y.-M.; Entwistle, R.; Ahuja, M.; Lee,
   (12) Kiriyama, N.; Nitta, K.; Sakaguchi, Y.; Taguchi, Y.; Yamamoto,      K.-H.; Bruno, K. S.; Wu, T.-K.; Oakley, B. R.; Wang, C. C. C. Appl.
Y. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 1977, 25, 2593–2601.                                  Microbiol. Biot. 2012, 96, 739.
   (13) Fischbach, M. A.; Walsh, C. T. Chem. Rev. 2006, 106, 3468.             (17) Ojima, N.; Takenaka, S.; Seto, S. Phytochemistry 1973, 12, 2527.
   (14) Gu, L.; Wang, B.; Kulkarni, A.; Gehret, J. J.; Lloyd, K. R.;          (18) Brown, D. W.; Yu, J.-H.; Kelkar, H. S.; Fernandes, M.; Nesbitt,
Gerwick, L.; Gerwick, W. H.; Wipf, P.; Hakansson, K.; Smith, J. L.;      T. C.; Keller, N. P.; Adams, T. H.; Leonard, T. J. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
Sherman, D. H. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 16033.                      U.S.A. 1996, 93, 1418.

3564                                                                                                                            Org. Lett., Vol. 15, No. 14, 2013


[PDF physical page 4]
Figure 4. Proposed biosynthesis pathway for (A) butyrolactones and (B) aspulvinones.


The albino phenotype was not identified in the aforemen-       In conclusion, we reported here the development of an
tioned mutant strains, indicating that the morphological      effective gene targeting system in A. terreus. Application of
change was not due to changes in any secondary metabo-      this tool allowed us to quickly and efficiently construct an
lites we had identified. This suggests that the NRPS-like    NRPS gene deletion library containing 21 mutants. Ana-
gene ATEG_03563.1isinvolved inconidial pigment synth-      lyses of the secondary metabolite profiles of these mutants
esis in A. terreus. Due to melanins’ large molecular size and     enabled us to link four NRPS genes in A. terreus to their
insolubility in any aqueous or organic solvent, the struc-     natural products. In our study, three families of natural
ture of natural melanin remains to be clarified.19 The     products asterriquinone CT5 (8), butyrolactones (2 and 6)
majority of melanins belong to two types, dihydroxyphe-     and aspulvinones (7 and 9) were associated with genes
nylalanin (DOPA)-melanin and dihydroxynaphthalene     encoding NRPS-like enzymes terminating with a TE do-
(DHN)-melanin.19 A. fumigatus can also produce an alter-    main and missing the canonical C domain found in NRPS
native pyomelaninvia an L-tyrosine degradation pathway.20     enzymes. Our experiments provided evidence that fungi
The LC-MS profile of the atmelA deletant strain was almost      are able to utilize similar enzymes to produce a diversity of
the same as that of wild type (Figure 3). However, it is     secondary metabolites.
possible that a different extraction condition or chromato-
graphic method might reveal the monomer substrate, which       Acknowledgment. The project described was supported
could be the first intermediate in the melanin biosynthesis,      in part by PO1GM084077 from the National Institute of
produced by AtmelA. An alternative possibility is that this     General Medical Sciences and the National Science Foun-
NRPS-like gene atmelA is involved, but not directly related,      dation- Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation-
to the melanin biosynthesis in A. terreus and thus would not    MIKS (Grant 1136903) to C.C.C.W. Research conducted at
produce the first substrate to be incorporated and con-     thePacificNorthwest NationalLaboratorywassupportedby
densed to form melanin. The product of AtmelA might      the Department of Energy, Bioenergy Technologies Office.
regulate the production of melanin via an unknown me-
chanism that needs to be further explored.                      Supporting Information Available.  General methods,
                                                compounds characterization with spectral data, and di-
   (19) Langfelder, K.; Streibel, M.; Jahn, B.; Haase, G.; Brakhage,     agnostic PCR results. This material is available free of
A. A. Fungal Genet. Biol. 2003, 38, 143.
                                                        charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.   (20) Schmaler-Ripcke, J.; Sugareva, V.; Gebhardt, P.; Winkler, R.;
Kniemeyer, O.; Heinekamp, T.; Brakhage, A. A. Appl. Environ. Micro-
biol. 2009, 75, 493.                                                The authors declare no competing financial interest.





Org. Lett., Vol. 15, No. 14, 2013                                                                                                            3565