
[PDF physical page 1]
    RESEARCH ARTICLE

Dissecting the low catalytic capability of ﬂavin-dependent
halogenases
Received for publication, September 10, 2020, and in revised form, November 11, 2020  Published, Papers in Press, November 13, 2020,
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA120.016004
Aisaraphon Phintha1,2,‡   , Kridsadakorn Prakinee2,‡   , Aritsara Jaruwat3, Narin Lawan4, Surawit Visitsatthawong2,
Chadaporn Kantiwiriyawanitch2   , Warangkhana Songsungthong3, Duangthip Trisrivirat2, Pirom Chenprakhon5   ,
Adrian Mulholland6, Karl-Heinz van Pée7, Penchit Chitnumsub3,*   , and Pimchai Chaiyen1,2,*
From the 1Department of Biochemistry and Center for Excellence in Protein and Enzyme Technology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand; 2School of Biomolecular Science and Engineering, Vidyasirimedhi Institute of Science and
Technology (VISTEC), Rayong, Thailand; 3Biomolecular Analysis and Application Research Team, National Center for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology, Klong Luang, Pathumthani, Thailand; 4Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, Thailand; 5Institute for Innovative Learning, Mahidol University, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand; 6Centre for
Computational Chemistry, School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK; 7General Biochemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and
Food Chemistry, Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany

Edited by F. Peter Guengerich


  Although ﬂavin-dependent halogenases (FDHs) are attractive     Halogenation  is extremely important  for the  agricultural,
biocatalysts, their practical applications are limited because of   pharmaceutical, and chemical industries (1). It is especially of
their low catalytic efﬁciency. Here, we investigated the reaction   importance for drug synthesis because one-third of currently
mechanisms and structures of tryptophan 6-halogenase (Thal)   produced drugs, particularly new drugs currently in clinical trials
from  Streptomyces  albogriseolus  using  stopped-ﬂow,  rapid-   are halogenated compounds  (2–9). However, by  traditional
quench ﬂow, quantum/mechanics molecular mechanics calcula-   chemical synthesis, halogenations are generally not environ-
tions, crystallography, and detection of intermediate (hypohalous   mentally friendly reactions because most of these reactions need
acid [HOX]) liberation. We found that the key ﬂavin interme-   to be carried out under harsh conditions and often involve the
diate, C4a-hydroperoxyﬂavin (C4aOOH-FAD), formed by Thal   use of toxic reagents, catalysts, and solvents. Chemical haloge-
and other FDHs (tryptophan 7-halogenase [PrnA] and trypto-   nation reactions also lack regioselectivity, resulting in many by-
phan 5-halogenase [PyrH]), can react with I−, Br−, and Cl−but   products (10–13). The use of enzymes,  i.e., halogenases, to
not F−to form C4a-hydroxyﬂavin and HOX. Our experiments   catalyze halogenation is an attractive green chemistry method
revealed that I−reacts with C4aOOH-FAD the fastest with the   because the reactions can be done under mild conditions. Hal-
lowest energy barrier and have shown for the ﬁrst time that a   ogenases discovered to date can be classiﬁed into four groups:
signiﬁcant amount of the HOX formed leaks out as free HOX.   haloperoxidases,  ﬂuorinases,  α-ketoglutarate-dependent  halo-
This leakage is probably a major cause of low product coupling   genases, and ﬂavin-dependent halogenases (FDHs) (14).
ratios in all FDHs. Site-saturation mutagenesis of Lys79 showed    FDHs belong to the class of two-component ﬂavin-depen-
that changing Lys79 to any other amino acid resulted in an   dent monooxygenases which require a reductase component
inactive enzyme. However, the levels of liberated HOX of these   to generate reduced FAD (FADH−) for a halogenase (mono-
variants are all similar, implying that Lys79 probably does not   oxygenase) component  to  catalyze  halogenation  (14–19).
form a chloramine or bromamine intermediate as previously   Several X-ray structures of FDHs have been solved (18) which
proposed. Computational calculations revealed that Lys79 has an  showed that all FDHs have two separated binding sites. While
abnormally  lower pKa compared  with  other  Lys  residues,   the FAD binding site is well conserved among different FDHs,
implying that the catalytic Lys may act as a proton donor in   a signiﬁcant difference lies in the substrate binding site which
catalysis. Analysis of new X-ray structures of Thal also explains   allows FDHs to utilize a broad range of substrates and catalyze
why premixing of FDHs with reduced ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide   halogenation at various positions (14). Therefore, most of the
generally results in abolishment of C4aOOH-FAD formation.   previous studies have been focused on enzyme engineering to
These ﬁndings reveal the hidden factors restricting FDHs capa-   alter substrate scope and regio-speciﬁcity (14, 20–26), whereas
bility which should be useful for future development of FDHs   less attention has been paid to mechanistic investigation.
applications.                                       To date, mechanistic investigation of FDHs has only been
                                                                  carried out with the reactions of tryptophan 7-halogenases
                                                   (RebH (15, 27, 28) and PrnA (29)) with only one investiga-
                                                                 tion of transient kinetics of RebH reported (27, 28). The results
                                                                  indicate that RebH can form a C4a-hydroperoxyﬂavin inter-
This article contains supporting information.                         mediate (C4aOOH-FAD) to react with Br−and Cl−(the re-
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.                                                                 actions with I−and F−were not explored) to generate a
* For correspondence: Penchit Chitnumsub, penchit@biotec.or.th; Pimchai
   Chaiyen, pimchai.chaiyen@vistec.ac.th.                                reactive halogenation species (28), hypohalous acid (HOX)

                                                                                                                                                                         J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068 1
© 2020 THE AUTHORS. Published by Elsevier Inc on behalf of American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. This is an open access article under the CC
BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).


[PDF physical page 2]
Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase

(hypobromous acid [HOBr] and hypochlorous acid [HOCl]).  pKa calculations. Unlike the mechanism previously proposed,
HOX is thought to be transferred to a second active site to   our  results do not  support  formation  of chloramine  or
react with tryptophan (27–29). Because site-directed muta-  bromamine  intermediates  but  rather  suggest  that  the
genesis of the conserved Lys to Ala (15, 30, 31) and to Arg (31)   conserved Lys likely protonates the HOX in the halogenation
resulted in inactive tryptophan halogenases, two models to   reaction. (D) Results from transient kinetics, newly crystallized
explain the mechanism of halogenation have been proposed.   structures of Thal:FADH−and Thal:FAD:AMP and molecular
In the ﬁrst model, HOX is thought to react with Lys to form   dynamics (MD) simulations could be used to explain the cause
the chloramine intermediate which acts as a halogenating   for formation of the dead-end inactive Thal:FADH-* complex.
species (27), whereas in the second model, HOX is thought to
be a  direct halogenation reagent with the conserved Lys   Results
facilitating and controlling the binding of HOX in the proper   Halogenation activity of Thal
geometry necessary for halogenation (15, 32). Interestingly,
                                               To explore whether Thal represents a halogenase which can
none of the studies since then have investigated the function of
                                                                   catalyze a reasonable halogenation reaction, multiple turnover
the conserved Lys. None of the previous studies has also
                                                                 reactions of Thal were carried out and compared with the
investigated the mechanism of HOX formation and deter-
                                                                 reactions of PrnA and PyrH. The products from the Thal re-
mined the factors controlling HOX production. Most FDHs
                                                                action were characterized by NMR spectroscopy (Fig. S2C).
are inefﬁcient because their turnovers are quite slow (kcat =
                                                 The  results  indicated  that among  the  three  halogenases0.5–3 min−1), and they can be easily inactivated (26). Despite
                                                                     investigated, Thal was the fastest halogenase (Fig. S2A). These
gram scale synthesis of halogenated tryptophan product was
                                                              data also clearly imply that most of the halogenases are not
reported for the reaction of RebH, full conversion was ob-
                                                               very  efﬁcient enzymes which  agrees  with  previous  data
tained only after 8 days (33), which is too slow to be accepted
                                                               reporting that FDHs suffer from having low kcat values (26).
for a real industrial process. Therefore, kinetic and structural
                                                               Therefore, understanding the cause of catalytic inefﬁciency in
investigation to understand mechanistic features controlling
                                                         Thal as a representative of FDHs would contribute to identi-
their halogenation are necessary for future improvement of
                                                             ﬁcation of the bottleneck in the reaction of FDHs in general.
FDHs for industrial applications.
                                                   The percentage of product halogenation in the Thal reac-
  Tryptophan  6-halogenase  or  Thal  from  Streptomyces
                                                                 tion was measured from the consumption of the substrate
albogriseolus (34, 35) represents an interesting FDH system for
                                                              (tryptophan) in single turnover reactions carried out in a
investigating the mechanisms of HOX formation and factors
                                                          rapid-quench ﬂow instrument (Experimental Procedures). The
controlling halogenation. As Thal catalyzes tryptophan halo-                                                                reaction of Thal was carried out using FADH−as a limiting
genation at the 6-position, not 7-position as in RebH or PrnA,
                                                              reagent (Fig. 1). After the ﬁrst turnover was completed (data
the results would also contribute to the understanding of a
                                                                  collected at 400  s), we found that only about 30% of the
mechanism related to halogenation of tryptophan at the 6-
                                                           tryptophan was halogenated (data not shown). The results
position. Recently, crystal structures of Thal were solved and
                                                                  indicate that the coupling ratio (product produced per sub-
the results showed that FAD and tryptophan substrates could
                                                                       strate consumed) is quite low, which is likely one of the factors
not be co-crystallized (34). This feature is different from other
                                                               explaining the catalytic inefﬁciency in Thal and in FDHs in
tryptophan halogenases such as RebH  (36), tryptophan 5-
                                                                   general. Therefore, we further explored the fates of each re-
halogenase (PyrH) (37) and PrnA (15) which could be co-
                                                                action intermediate after C4aOOH-FAD is formed.
crystallized with both FAD and tryptophan. This suggests
that protein dynamics between the ﬂavin and substrate binding
                                                          Determination of the hydrogen peroxide elimination ratiosites of Thal are strongly linked. Therefore, we set out to
                                                      from the uncoupling (nonproductive) pathinvestigate the mechanism of HOX formation and its role in
regulating the Thal reaction and used Thal as a model for   A stopped-ﬂow experiment was carried out under condi-
exploring the factors contributing to the catalytic inefﬁciency   tions  in which C4aOOH-FAD was  fully formed  (details
of FDHs in general.                                           described in Figs. S5 and S6). In the absence of halide, mixing
  In this report, the reaction of Thal was investigated with   of an anaerobic solution of FADH−with an aerobic solution of
regard to four main mechanistic issues to unravel why the   Thal resulted in reactions with kinetic traces showing two
reactions of FDHs are not very efﬁcient. (A) The mechanism of   phases (Fig. 2). The ﬁrst phase (0.02–0.15 s) showed an in-
HOX formation was  investigated  using  transient  kinetics   crease in absorbance at 380 nm with almost no change at 450
(stopped-ﬂow absorbance and ﬂuorescence and rapid-quench  nm. The second phase (0.15–100 s) showed a decrease in
ﬂow techniques) in combination with quantum/mechanics   absorbance at 380 nm which was concomitant with an increase
molecular mechanics (QM/MM) computational calculations.   in absorbance at 450 nm. Kinetic traces of the ﬁrst phase and
(B) The cause of the low product coupling ratio was investi-   second phase represent C4aOOH-FAD formation  (kobs  of
gated by measuring the leakage of the HOX intermediate using   16.52 s−1) and decay  (kobs of 0.41 s−1) to form hydrogen
an organic substrate (D-luciferin) as a halogenating target to   peroxide (H2O2) and FAD, respectively (Fig. 2).
detect free HOX. (C) The functional role of the conserved Lys    The kinetics of C4aOOH-FAD formation in the presence of
was  investigated using  site-saturation mutagenesis  studies  10 mM Br−or Cl−(the condition in which HOBr or HOCl was
along with detection of free HOX formation and theoretical  formed maximally, as explained in detail in the next section)


2   J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068


[PDF physical page 3]
                                      Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase





Figure 1. Reaction of Thal with tryptophan. Thal catalyzes halogenation of tryptophan to yield halogenated tryptophan as the product. FAD, oxidized
ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide; FADH−, reduced ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide.


                                                                   of about 20% and 55% in the case of Br−and Cl−, respectively.
                                                 The data also indicate that 80% of the C4aOOH-FAD inter-
                                                          mediate can react with Br−to form HOBr. However, our re-
                                                                        sults in the ﬁrst section (halogenation activity of Thal) indicate
                                                                  that only 30% of the tryptophans were brominated, implying
                                                                  that not all of the HOBr formed reacts with tryptophan. We
                                                                 therefore investigated the mechanisms of HOX formation by
                                             FDHs and examined their control of HOX reactivity.

                                                   Mechanism of HOX formation

                                                                               Kinetics of hypohalous acid (HOCl, HOBr, and hypoiodous acid)
                                                                formation catalyzed by Thal, PrnA, and PyrH

                                                           Because the reaction of halide ions with C4aOOH-FAD is
                                                                    crucial for the catalysis of FDHs and this reaction is not well
                                                            understood, we investigated the reactivity of halide ions with
Figure 2. Kinetic traces of the Thal reaction in the presence of halide
ions. An air-saturated solution of Thal premixed with NaCl (blue lines) or   Thal and other tryptophan halogenases (PrnA and PyrH) by
NaBr (green lines) was mixed with an anaerobic solution of FADH−. Black   monitoring the kinetics of its formation.
lines are kinetic traces without addition of halide ions. Flavin intermediates
were monitored by absorption changes at 380 nm (solid lines) and 450 nm    To monitor the kinetics of HOX formation, we monitored
(dashed lines). C4aOOH-FAD, C4a-hydroperoxyﬂavin; FADH−, reduced ﬂavin   the  transitions from C4aOOH-FAD  to C4aOH-FAD and
adenine dinucleotide.                          HOX (Fig. 3). C4aOH-FAD is a common intermediate in the
                                                                 reactions of ﬂavin-dependent monooxygenases (28, 38, 39)
                                                     and can be distinguished from C4aOOH-FAD by its strong
was the same as that in the absence of Br−or Cl−(Fig. 2), but   ﬂuorescence in several enzymes such as the ﬂavin-dependent
the kinetics of the reaction after C4aOOH-FAD formation was   dehalogenase and  2-methyl-3-hydroxypyridine  5-carboxylic
different. The reaction in the presence of halide ions showed   acid monooxygenase (38, 40, 41). Therefore, we carried out
three phases. The ﬁrst phase (0.02–0.15 s) showed an increase   similar experiments as in the previous section but instead we
in absorbance at 380 nm. The second (0.15–2.5 s) and third  measured the appearance of highly ﬂuorescent species using
phases (2.5–100 s) showed a decrease in absorbance at 380 nm   excitation wavelengths (Ex) of 380 nm and 450 nm and
and an increase in absorbance at 450 nm. The kinetics of the   monitoring emission wavelength at > 495 nm. Results in
second phase of both reactions (kobs of 1.6 s−1) were similar to   Figure 4 show a large increase in ﬂuorescence during 0.15 to
that in the absence of halide, indicating that this phase was the   2.5 s (corresponding to an observed rate constant of 1.5 s−1)
uncoupling path to elimination of H2O2 without forming   in the presence of Cl−when using Ex at 380 nm (blue solid
HOBr or HOCl. As the amplitude of this phase (absorbance    line). This ﬂuorescent species decayed during 2.5 to 100 s
450 nm) in the presence of Br−and Cl−was about 20% and   (corresponding to an observed rate constant of 0.073 s−1).
55%, respectively, the results indicate that the uncoupling path  The  data  clearly  indicate  that  the  ﬂuorescence  decay
is more prominent in the presence of Cl−compared with Br−   occurred simultaneously with the third phase of Figure 2 in
and that C4aOOH-FAD reacts more efﬁciently with Br−than  which the absorbance at 380 nm decreased and the absor-
Cl−.                                                     bance at 450 nm increased. The data in Figures 2 and 4
  The kinetics of the third phase was clearly different from the   indicate that in the presence of Cl−after C4aOOH-FAD
reaction in the absence of the halide ions. This phase was later  was formed, and the next step was formation of a highly
identiﬁed as the step of C4a-hydroxyﬂavin (C4aOH-FAD)   ﬂuorescent C4aOH-FAD species which eventually eliminates
decay after HOX formation (see the following results in the  H2O  to form oxidized FAD  (Fig.  3). The conversion  of
next section). These data indicate that even under saturating  C4aOOH-FAD to C4aOH-FAD was then used for measuring
amounts of halide, the reaction of Thal still proceeds through   rate constants of HOX formation in the reactions of various
an uncoupling path (no formation of HOX) with a frequency  FDHs.


                                                                                                                                                                         J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068 3


[PDF physical page 4]
Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase





Figure 3. Kinetic mechanisms of the Thal reaction with tryptophan. FAD refers to oxidized FAD. FADH−refers to reduced FAD. Thal:FADH-* refers to
inactive complex which cannot form C4aOOH-FAD. TRP refers to tryptophan. C4aOOH-FAD refers to C4a-hydroperoxyﬂavin. C4aOH-FAD refers to C4a-
hydroxyﬂavin. X−represents the halide ions. HOX represents hypohalous acid. In this model, TRP can bind to Thal together with a ﬂavin.



                                               To explore whether the reactivity of Thal to form HOI is only
                                                              speciﬁc to this enzyme, we also examined the reactivity of other
                                                             halogenases such as PrnA and PyrH with I−. Similar experiments
                                                                to those in Figure 4 were carried out. The results (Fig. S7) clearly
                                                    showed that PrnA and PyrH could also react with I−to form
                                           HOI and C4aOH-FAD. However, product analysis indicates
                                                                  that Thal could not catalyze iodination of tryptophan (Fig. S8),
                                                                  indicating that the factor limiting iodination of tryptophan is not
                                                   on the ﬂavin reaction site (described in more detail using crystal
                                                                 structures of Thal in the last section).

                                                                               Kinetic constants of the reaction of C4aOOH-FAD with halide to
                                                           form C4aOH-FAD and HOX

                                               To measure rate constants associated with kinetics of HOX
                                                              formation, the reactions of air-saturated solutions of Thal
Figure 4. Kinetic traces of the Thal reaction with various halide ions.   containing various concentrations of NaI, KBr, or NaCl were
Formation of C4aOH-FAD was monitored at Em > 495 nm using excitation
wavelengths of 380 nm (solid lines) and 450 nm (solid lines with circles) in the  mixed with a solution of FADH−. An increase in ﬂuorescence
presence of various halide ions (Cl−(blue), Br−(orange), I−(green), and F−(red)).   because of formation of C4aOH-FAD as described in the
Gray lines are reactions without addition of halide ion. Note that the differ-
ence in ﬂuorescence intensities was because of the difference of photo-   determination  of H2O2  elimination  section was used  for
multiplier tube voltage used for the various halide reactions. Inset shows a   analysis of kinetics of HOX formation. Plots of kobs versus
plot of the observed rate constants of C4aOH-FAD formation resulting from   halide ion concentrations (inset of Fig. 4) showed hyperbolicthe reaction of C4aOOH-FAD with halide ions (Cl−(circle), Br−(square), and I−
(triangular)) at various concentrations. C4aOOH-FAD, C4a-hydroperoxyﬂavin;   relationships which indicate that the reaction involves at least
C4aOH-FAD, C4a-hydroxyﬂavin; Em, emission wavelength.               two steps. The analysis suggests that the ﬁrst step  is the
                                                            binding of a halide to C4aOOH-FAD to form C4aOOH-
                                                FAD:X−which is then converted to yield C4aOH-FAD and
                                    HOX in the second step (Fig. 3). Kinetics of the reaction of  To explore whether other halide ions (F−, I−, and Br−) can
                                                                 halide with C4aOOH-FAD was analyzed according to a modelalso react with C4aOOH-FAD in the Thal reaction, reactions
                                                                describing a two-step reaction (Fig. 4) (42). Analysis of the dataof Thal with various halide ions were carried out. Results in
Figure 4 indicate that C4aOOH-FAD in Thal can react with I−,   in Figure 4 is summarized in Table 1. The data indicate that I−
Br−, and Cl−to form a highly ﬂuorescent C4aOH-FAD inter-  showed the fastest rate in the reaction to form C4aOH-FAD
                                                             followed by Br−and Cl−, respectively. These results could bemediate. The exception was found for F−in which a highly
ﬂuorescent ﬂavin could not be detected. These results clearly   explained using QM/MM calculations to calculate the energy
                                                                 associated with the reactions (see QM/MM results later).indicate that Thal can catalyze the reaction of C4aOOH-FAD
with I−, Br−, and Cl−to form C4aOH-FAD and hypoiodous
                                            QM/MM calculations to explain the reactivity of C4aOOH-FADacid (HOI), HOBr, and HOCl, respectively, and it is the ﬁrst
                                                                with different halide ionsevidence to show formation of HOI in the reaction of an FDH.
Previously, the reaction of RebH was only investigated in re-    To investigate the reaction mechanism of HOX formation at
gard to its ability to form HOBr and HOCl.                   a molecular and electronic level, we performed ab initio QM/


4   J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068


[PDF physical page 5]
                                      Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase

Table 1                                                       Table 2
Reactivity of halide ions with C4aOOH-FAD to form C4aOH-FAD       Potential energies of various states for HOX (X =  I, Br, or Cl) for-
                                                             mation catalyzed by Thal
 Halide ion                  Kd (mM)                      k (s−1)
 I−                             0.064 ± 0.021                     4.51 ± 0.24                                           Potential energy (kcal/mol)
 Br−                             0.40 ± 0.073                     2.54 ± 0.12     Formation of             Reactant          TS             Product
 Cl−                             0.78 ± 0.39                      1.83 ± 0.26
                                                         HOI                            0.0                   1.3              −51.8
C4aOOH-FAD, C4a-hydroperoxyﬂavin; C4aOH-FAD, C4a-hydroxyﬂavin.           HOBr                          0.0                   5.7              −39.8
                                                         HOCl                          0.0                 12.6              −28.5
MM  calculations  using  SCS-MP2/aug-cc-pvdz,  I=auc-cc-   HOBr,hypohaloushypobromousacid.      acid; HOCl, hypochlorous acid; HOI, hypoiodous acid; HOX,
pwcvdz-pp/CHARMM27   (Experimental   Procedures)   to
compare with rate constants obtained from the experimental
results. Our experiments in the previous section showed that                                                               Thal. Products were analyzed using  high-resolution mass
I−reacts with C4aOOH-FAD with the highest rate constant,                                                            spectrometry  and  Quadrupole  Time-of-Flight  (QTOF)
followed by Br−and Cl−, respectively (Table 1, Fig. 4). This                                                            (Experimental Procedures). Results in Figure 5 clearly showed
level of QM/MM theory has been shown to give accurate                                                                  that a  signiﬁcant amount  of brominated  D-luciferin was
barriers for other enzyme-catalyzed reactions (43–46). The   detected, indicating that in the wild-type enzyme reaction, free
proposed reaction mechanism of HOCl formation in FDHs is  HOBr leaks out from the active site of Thal. The leakage of
shown in Fig. S9. The overall reaction is composed of two                                    HOX is probably one of the factors which make Thal and other
steps: (i) C4aOOH-FAD-Cl formation, corresponding to Cl-                                             FDHs ineffective enzymes in general.
OO bond forming  (RCl-O2) and  (ii) HOCl  release, corre-
sponding to O1-O2 bond breakage (RO1-O2). Potential energy                                                                   Catalytic function of the conserved Lys
surfaces of SCS-MP2/aug-cc-pvdz/CHARMM27 calculations
                                                                           Investigation of the functional role of Lys79 using site-saturationfor this reaction are shown in Fig. S13. The Cl−attacks the
                                                              mutagenesis-OO- atom of C4aOOH-FAD to form C4aOOH-FAD-Cl along
the RCl-O2. Along the RO1-O2 which is the release of HOCl, the    As the conserved catalytic Lys (Lys79Thal) is present in all
O1-O2 bond  is broken. The potential energy increase was  FDHs reported and only two variants of the catalytic Lys
calculated between the reactant (0.0 kcal/mol) and the tran-   (substitution of Lys to Ala (15, 27) or Arg (31)) were reported
sition state levels, giving an activation energy of 12.6 kcal/mol.   in the past, we subsequently mutated Lys79Thal to each of the
The products were calculated to be signiﬁcantly lower in en-   other 19 amino acids using a  site-saturation mutagenesis
ergy than the reactant, −28.5 kcal/mol. Potential energy sur-   approach (Experimental Procedures) to investigate whether
faces for HOBr and HOI formation were also calculated, and   halogenation can also be achieved by other types of amino
the results are shown in Figs. S14 and S15, respectively. The   acids in this position. As the results in the previous section
calculated reaction energetics (relative potential energies of   indicate that HOX can leak out from the wild-type enzyme, we
reactants, transition state, and products) are summarized in   also wanted to explore whether changing Lys79 to other res-
Table 2. Structural and energetic details of the key species in   idues could change the level of free HOX leakage. If Lys79 can
the reaction are given in Supporting Information. The results  form the chloramine or bromamine as previously proposed,
clearly indicate that the energy barrier to HOX formation for   exchanging this residue with other amino acids would generate
the different halides can be ranked as HOCl > HOBr > HOI,   signiﬁcantly higher amounts of free HOX.
consistent with the  rate constants  of HOX formation  as     Plasmid libraries for site-saturation mutagenesis were con-
measured by stopped-ﬂow experiments (Fig. 4) as HOI >   structed and evaluated to conﬁrm that they generated all 20
HOBr > HOCl.                                       amino acids in the Lys79 position, and a total 168 clones of
                                                         Lys79 variants were tested  for  their  ability to halogenate
Investigation of hypohalous acid leakage                     tryptophan (Experimental Procedures). The  activity of the
                                                                   variants was  analyzed by  detecting  the bromotryptophan  As the percentage of product uncoupling (70%) (halogena-
                                                          product using HPLC-MS/MS. The protein production level oftion activity section) is greater than H2O2 elimination (20%)
                                                          each variant was also measured using a GFP split system (47, 48).(H2O2 elimination section), we suspected that the generated
                                                  The results showed that  all of the variants were completelyHOX might be leaked as a free halogenating reagent without
being transported through a path between the two active sites   inactive for tryptophan bromination (data not shown). These
to halogenate tryptophan. Previously, investigation of HOX   data conﬁrm that Lys79 is crucial for the Thal reaction and
                                                           cannot be replaced by another amino acid. One of the inactiveleakage was only carried out in the PrnA system using mon-
                                                                         variants, Lys79Thr, which expressed well was selected for furtherochlorodimedone for detection. In  this system, free HOX
                                                              mechanistic investigation to understand the catalytic role ofcould not be detected (15). In this current work, to investigate
                                                          Lys79 (Fig. S18).whether HOX generated by Thal is efﬁciently trapped inside
the active site or leaks out freely, we used a different method of
                                                                           Investigation of C4aOOH-FAD formation by Lys79Thrdetection. D-luciferin, a compound susceptible to bromination
by HOBr, was used  instead  of monochlorodimedone  for    To investigate whether the absence of halogenation activity
detection of HOBr leakage in multiple turnover reactions of   of Lys79Thr is due to the impairment of formation of ﬂavin


                                                                                                                                                                         J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068 5


[PDF physical page 6]
Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase





Figure 5. Detection of HOBr leakage from Thal (wild-type). HPLC-MS/MS chromatograms of the reaction without Thal (black) and the reaction in the
presence of Thal (red). Multiple turnover reactions were performed to generate HOBr. A reaction solution after removal of enzymes was incubated with D-
luciferin. Reactions were analyzed using HPLC-MS/MS. Mass spectra of bromo-D-luciferin and dibromo-D-luciferin were analyzed using HPLC-QTOF (inset).
HOBr, hypobromous acid; QTOF, Quadrupole Time-of-Flight.



                                                           Measurement of HOX leakage by Lys79Thr

                                                           Because the catalytic Lys has been proposed to react with
                                    HOX (15, 27) to form a chloramine or bromamine interme-
                                                                         diate, we investigated if this model is true by measuring the
                                                   amount of HOX leakage in Lys79Thr compared with the wild-
                                                              type enzyme (Experimental Procedures). Leakage of HOX was
                                                                  investigated using the HOBr reaction with D-luciferin. Results
                                                                   in Figure 7 showed that the Lys79Thr variant did not give any
                                                             higher yield of bromo-D-luciferin (higher amount of HOBr)
                                                          than the wild-type enzyme. The incapability of Lys79Thr to
                                                             halogenate tryptophan is thus not because of the leakage of
                                                 HOBr, as it generates a similar level of HOBr as the wild-type
                                                        enzyme. The data suggest that Lys79 probably does not form a
                                                               covalent adduct with HOBr or HOCl to form the bromamine
                                                             or chloramine intermediate as it has been proposed (Fig. 8A).
Figure 6. Kinetics of Lys79Thr reacting with oxygen. An air-saturated
                                                        Should this have been the case, the Lys79Thr variant wouldsolution of Lys79Thr (blue  lines) or wild-type (black  lines) (30 μM) was
mixed with a solution of FADH−(15 μM) using a single mixing stopped-ﬂow   have produced a higher amount of free HOBr to react with D-
spectrometer. Kinetic traces were monitored at 380 nm (solid lines) and 450   luciferin.nm (dashed lines). FADH−, reduced ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide.

                                                               Computational calculations to investigate the pKa of Lys79

                                                   As our results in the previous section imply that Lys79 does
intermediates, the ability of Lys79Thr to form C4aOOH-FAD   not form a chloramine or bromamine intermediate, this sug-
was analyzed using stopped-ﬂow spectrometry similar to the   gests that their role may be to form hydrogen bonding with
experiments carried out for the wild-type enzyme (Fig. 2).  HOX as originally proposed by van Pée et al. (29). However,
Stopped-ﬂow data in Figure 6 showed that an increase in   the participation of Lys79 in the reaction of Thal is crucial
absorbance at 380 nm (indicative of C4aOOH-FAD formation)   because results from site-saturation mutagenesis experiments
occurred similarly during the ﬁrst phase in both the Lys79Thr  showed that Lys79 cannot be replaced by any other amino
(blue lines, 0.02–0.14 s) and wild-type (black lines, 0.02–0.3 s)   acids. To investigate why all FDHs contain a strictly conserved
enzymes. These data indicate that Lys79Thr could still form   Lys as a catalytic residue, propka 3.0 (49) was used for calcu-
C4aOOH-FAD, suggesting that inactivation of Lys79Thr is not   lating the pKa of Lys residues of Thal (PDB code 7CU1) at pH
because of a loss of the ability to form ﬂavin intermediates but   7.2. The calculation results showed that the pKa values of
must be related to the tryptophan halogenation step. These   Lys79 in both subunits are abnormally lower, 7.48 (Chain A)
data conﬁrm that Lys79 has an important role in halogenation.  and 7.59 (Chain B), than other Lys residues which have typical


6   J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068


[PDF physical page 7]
                                      Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase





Figure 7. Comparing D-luciferin bromination acitivity of Lys79Thr with
wild-type Thal. Peak areas of brominated D-luciferin product of Lys79Thr
(orange), wild-type (green), and the reaction without Thal (blue).



pKa values around 9.0 to 11.0 (Table S4). This pKa value al-
lows Lys79 to be in the fully protonated state and can also act
as a proton donor during turnovers (Fig. 8B). Although Arg
has a similar chain length compared with Lys, its higher pKa
                                                                      Figure 8. Proposed reaction mechanisms of tryptophan halogenation.
compared with Lys would not promote it to act as a proton   The reaction was proposed to occur via electrophilic aromatic substitution.
donor. Therefore, our study implies that the conserved Lys in    A, in tryptophan 7-halogenase (RebH), the Walsh group proposed that
                                                                      tryptophan can be halogenated by a covalent intermediate (Lys-NH-X) (27).
FDHs may participate in the reaction by providing a proton for                                                                                             B, alternatively, HOX can directly interact with a fully protonated Lys via
HOX to increase the electrophilicity of X (Fig. 8B). Our data   hydrogen bonding (29, 32) to halogenate tryptophan. X represents I, Br, and
do not support formation of a covalent intermediate (chlora-     Cl. Our ﬁndings support mechanism B and suggest the role of Lys in pro-
                                                                           tonation of HOX. HOX, hypohalous acid.
mine) which was previously proposed for the RebH reaction
(27). Results reported here agree with the model proposed in
the theoretical study of PrnA (32) and provides more insights
into the functional roles of the conserved Lys.

Mechanisms of Thal:FADH-* inactive complex formation
   Kinetics of Thal:FADH-* inactive complex formation
  FDHs are unusal among all two-component ﬂavin-dependent
monooxygenases because premixing  of the enzymes with
FADH−can result in formation of a ﬂavin inactive complex in
which C4aOOH-FAD is not detected. This phenomenon was
ﬁrst reported for the RebH reaction (28), but the mechanism
causing it has never been investigated. Thal also has this prop-
erty because C4aOOH-FAD could not be detected from the
reaction of mixing a preformed complex of Thal:FADH−with
oxygen, unlike the reaction in which a solution of FADH−was   Figure  9. Kinetics of Thal:FADH-* inactive complex formation. An
                                                                        anaerobic solution of FADH−was premixed with an anaerobic solution of
freshly mixed with an aerobic solution of Thal (Fig. S5). This   Thal at various age times (incubation times) (0.01–30 s) in the ﬁrst mixing.
must be due to isomerization to form an inactive complex   Aerobic buffer was then added into the second mixing step. Final con-
                                                                              centrations were 128 μM oxygen, 15 μM FADH−, and 30 μM Thal. Kinetic(represented as Thal:FADH-*, see more explanation in the
                                                                                traces were monitored at 380 nm (solid lines) and 450 nm (solid lines with
structure section) (Fig. 3). Therefore, the kinetics of Thal:-     circles). The inset was a plot of absorbance decrease at 380 nm versus in-
FADH−isomerization to form an inactive complex was inves-   cubation time. FADH−, reduced ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide.
tigated by double-mixing stopped-ﬂow spectrophotometry. In
this experiment, the ﬁrst mixing setup mixed an anaerobic so-
lution of Thal with an anaerobic solution of FADH−and was    The results in Figure 9 indicate that the amount of absor-
incubated over various periods. In the second mixing, an aerobic   bance increase at 380 nm during the ﬁrst phase diminished
solution of buffer was added. The amount of C4aOOH-FAD  upon prolonged incubation. These data indicate that a binary
formed could be quantiﬁed by the increase in absorbance at  complex of active Thal:FADH−changes over time to form an
380 nm during the ﬁrst phase (0.02–0.13 s) as shown in Figure 9.   inactive  complex,  Thal:FADH-*,  which  does  not  allow


                                                                                                                                                                         J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068 7


[PDF physical page 8]
Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase

Table 3
Data collection and reﬁnement statistics for Thal structures

       Parameters                                Thal:Trp                        Thal:FAD:AMP                        Thal:FADH−

 Data Collection
  Wavelength (Å)                                       1.54                                        1.54                                        1.54
   Space group                                      P21                                     P21                                     P21
   Cell dimensions
     a, b, c (Å)                                         54.9, 118.3, 87.0                                53.6, 118.2, 82.9                                54.5, 119.3, 86.6
    β ( )                                              104.4                                      100.9                                      104.4
   Resolution (Å)                             20.75–1.95 (2.05–1.95)                     20.66–1.91 (2.01–1.91)                     20.96–2.40 (2.50–2.40)
   Total reﬂections                                  416,775                                   547,492                                   223,245
  Unique reﬂections                                 76,620                                    77,293                                    41,355
  Completeness (%)                                  97.9 (97.7)                                  99.0 (94.1)                                  98.6 (99.2)
  Redundancy                                           4.0 (2.6)                                       7.0 (4.4)                                       4.9 (3.7)
   <l/σ(l)>                                           18.0 (6.8)                                   17.1 (4.5)                                   16.7 (6.5)
   Rmerge (%)                                            5.3 (12.2)                                     7.3 (32.1)                                     6.6 (16.2)
 Reﬁnement
   Rf/Rfree(%)                                        19.16/24.87                                 17.44/22.04                                 20.74/25.89
  No. atoms
     Protein                                       8470                             8375 and 63 (tag)                             8309
    Ligand                                        30                                    76                                    106
    Water                                        855                                   731                                   395
   B-factors (Å2)
     Protein                                           15.21                                      18.01                                      23.59
    Ligand                                            12.09                                      23.87                                      19.64
    Water                                            19.51                                      24.27                                      20.78
  Average B-factor                                    15.59                                      18.56                                      23.42
  Ramachandran plot (%)
    Favored                                             89.0                                        90.7                                        89.5
    Allowed                                             10.9                                           9.1                                         10.1
     Outliers                                                0.1                                            0.1                                            0.3
   R.m.s. deviations
    Bond length (Å)                                   0.012                                      0.009                                      0.011
    Bond angle ( )                                      1.44                                        1.36                                        1.48
   PDB code                              7CU0                            7CU1                            7CU2

FAD, oxidized ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide; FADH−, reduced ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide.

formation of C4aOOH-FAD (Fig. 3). A plot of the decrease in
absorbance at 380 nm versus incubation time represents the
kinetics of the formation of the inactive complex (Fig. 9). The
data can be ﬁtted with a single exponential decay (inset of
Fig. 9), which corresponds to a rate of isomerization to form an
inactive complex as 0.41 s−1. Results in Figure 9 showed that
the shortest preincubation (0.01 s) gave the highest yield of
C4aOOH-FAD formation.

  The crystal structures of Thal:FADH−and Thal:FAD:AMP
complexes explain the mechanism of inactive complex formation

  To understand how the inactive complex forms upon pro-
longed incubation of Thal and FADH−, we solved new crystal
structures of Thal with bound FADH−or FAD. The structures
of Thal:FADH−(PDB code 7CU2) and Thal:FAD:AMP (PDB
                                                                      Figure 10. Alignment of various conformations of the ﬂavin binding
code 7CU1) were solved with two protomers per asymmetric   loop of Thal structures. Superposition of conformations of Chain A (green)
unit (asu). The overall architecture of Thal is generally very   and Chain B (white) observed in the Thal:FADH−complex (PDB code 7CU2)
                                                              deﬁned as “loose” and “tight” conformations, respectively, and Chain Asimilar to other FDHs. Details of data collection and reﬁne-                                                                                       (blue) of Thal:FAD:AMP (PDB code 7CU1) deﬁned as “open” conformation.
ment are shown in Table 3. Clear electron density for FADH−   FAD, oxidized ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide; FADH−, reduced ﬂavin adenine
was observed in both protomers. The density of the isoallox-    dinucleotide.
azine ring was not planar, conﬁrming that it is a FADH−not
FAD (Fig. S19).
  Alignment of Thal:FADH−with Thal:FAD showed different  complex  (more  details and  description  are  provided  in
conformations of Thal, especially at the loop around residues   Fig. S21). Analysis of these structures indicates that different
39 to 53 (deﬁned as the ﬂavin binding loop) which are close to   conformations accommodate different arrangements of water
the ﬂavin binding site (Fig. 10). Heterogeneity of the ﬂavin   molecules  in  the  active  site.  Interestingly,  in  the open
binding  loop  conformation was  found, shown  as  “loose   conformation, the arrangement of water molecules connects
conformation” observed in Chain A,  “tight conformation”   the active site of Thal with the bulk solvent outside (Fig. 11).
observed in Chain B of the Thal:FADH−complex, and “open    To  elucidate how  protein  dynamics  can  affect  water
conformation” observed in Chain A of the Thal:FAD:AMP   arrangement in the active site of Thal, the open conformation


8   J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068


[PDF physical page 9]
                                      Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase





Figure 11. Water networks observed in the open conformation of Chain A of Thal:FAD:AMP (PDB code 7CU1). A, residues within 4 Å of water
networks (green sphere). B, spherical display of water molecules shows water networks connecting bulk solvent to the FAD binding site. FAD, oxidized ﬂavin
adenine dinucleotide.


was selected as a starting model for MD simulations. For the   networks may lead to improper protonation status of FADH−
starting open conformation structure, Glu355 interacts with   such as either to form FADH2 which is less reactive with ox-
Cys253, Trp283, Tyr408, and W40 (water molecule) which   ygen or it may disturb a protonation process involved in PCET
also interacts with the amide backbones of Leu252 and Cys253   required for the formation of C4aOOH-FAD (Fig. 13).
(Fig. 12A). No water molecule is located above the C4a posi-
                                                                  Crystal structures of Thal: Implications for limitation oftion of the isoalloxazine ring. After 4 ns of production phase in
                                                            noniodination activityMD simulations, Glu355 displaces W40 and interacts with
amide backbones  of Leu252 and Cys253,  resulting  in  a     Because the data in the HOX formation section indicated
conformational change  in the green loop  (Fig.  12, A–B).   that Thal could form HOI, we further investigated whether
Consequently, water molecules rearrange themselves. W35,   this enzyme could catalyze iodination of tryptophan. Only
W8, and W178 form hydrogen bonds with a carbonyl group of   chlorinated and brominated but not iodinated tryptophan
Leu357, a carbonyl group of Pro356, and N5 of the isoallox-   could be detected (Fig. S8). To explore factors controlling
azine ring, respectively (Fig. 12B). Notably, W32 is now located   halogenation by Thal, we solved the structure of the Thal:TRP
close to the C4a position of the isoalloxazine ring, whereas  complex (PBD code 7CU0, 2.05–1.95 Å) which has a better
W32, W178, and W257 are located above the N1 of FAD (2.5   resolution compared with the previously reported structure
Å)  (Fig. 12C). Therefore,  it can  clearly be seen that the  (PDB code 6H44, 2.62–2.55 Å) (35).
conformation of Thal is characterized by signiﬁcant protein     Structures of Thal and various FDHs including PrnA and
dynamics which in turn  affects the arrangement of water  PyrH (15, 37) were overlaid and analyzed. Superposition of
molecules in the active site.                                 PyrH, Thal, and PrnA structures showed that the three resi-
  Previous work by the Bruice and Massey groups indicated   dues (Lys79, Glu358, and Ser359 in Thal) are found at the
that the deprotonated form of reduced ﬂavin (FADH−not  same position in all of these enzymes (Fig. S20). Moreover,
FADH2 in the case of FAD, pKa value around 6.7) is the form   the halogenation sites of the substrate are all placed next to the
that is more reactive for the oxygen activation process (50–52).   side-chain of Lys79. We noticed that the space between the
Investigation using density functional theory calculations also   tryptophan substrate and Lys79 was conﬁned by the sur-
conﬁrm this model because the anionic FADH−is the one   rounding residues in the pocket and were not large enough to
suitable to undergo proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET)  accommodate the larger sphere of the iodide species. We
to generate C4a-hydroperoxyﬂavin in the reactions of the  modeled HOI into the active site and found that the van der
oxygenase component  (C2)  of  p-hydroxyphenylacetate  3-  Waals sphere of the tryptophan does not allow this putative
hydroxylase and pyranose 2-oxidase (53, 54). As water net-  HOI to ﬁt (data not shown). The tight space between the
works in Thal connect the isoalloxazine ring of the ﬂavin to   halogenation site of tryptophan and the residues lining the
outside bulk solvents, we propose that these water networks   binding pockets would not allow HOI to be accommodated.
are important for providing a proton for the PCET process to  These data clearly explain the results in the HOX formation
stabilize formation of C4aOOH-FAD in the Thal reaction.   section which show that although HOI can be formed at the
Upon prolonged incubation of Thal with FADH−, the protein   ﬂavin site, iodination of tryptophan cannot occur because of
conformational changes and rearrangement of water molecule   the limited space in the tryptophan binding site.


                                                                                                                                                                         J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068 9


[PDF physical page 10]
Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase





Figure 12. Rearrangement of water networks resulting from protein dynamic changes. A, water network arrangements around the ﬂavin site in Chain
A of the Thal:FAD:AMP complex (PDB code 7CU1) were analyzed by MD simulations. Arrangement of water networks observed in the structure of the
Thal:FAD:AMP complex (PDB code 7CU1). B, rearrangement of water molecules and the green loop after 4 ns of the production phase performed by MD
simulation. C, close-up views of interactions of water molecules around the isoalloxazine ring after 4 ns of the production phase by MD simulations. MD,
molecular dynamics; FAD, oxidized ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide.


  Recently, the viral FDH (VirX1) was identiﬁed, and it was   Discussion
reported that it can use various halides, including I−, Br−, and                                                  Our results reported herein highlight four new key mecha-
Cl−(31). It showed iodination activity toward a 6-azaindole                                                                         nistic insights on FDHs: (A) C4aOOH-FAD formed by tryp-
substrate (31). VirX1 has 29% sequence similarity to PrnA                                                        tophan halogenases can react with I−, Br−, and Cl−to form
(8, 17). Structures of VirX1 with Thal (PDB code 7CU0) are                                                    HOI, HOBr, and HOCl, respectively. However, iodination of
similar  especially  at the FAD binding  site. Although the                                                           tryptophan cannot occur because there is not enough space to
structure of VirX1 is similar to Thal, VirX1 has a higher degree                                                   accommodate the HOI in the tryptophan binding  site. (B)
of substrate ﬂexibility and halide utilization. A key difference                                                        Using D-luciferin for detection of free HOX, we observed
between VirX1 and Thal is found in the helical lid (residue                                                               leakage of HOX from Thal, and this feature probably con-
445–466) (Fig. 14). The absence of an α-helical lid in VirX1                                                                    tributes to the low product coupling ratio of the enzyme. (C)
results in a larger substrate pocket, allowing VirX1 to use a                                                                   Site-saturation mutagenesis showed that the active site Lys is
broad range of substrates and halides including I−. Thus, the                                                           indeed crucial because none of the other 19 amino acids can
helical lid is the key factor preventing Thal catalysis of tryp-                                                                replace the function of Lys. Computational results indicate
tophan iodination.                                                                  that the active site Lys has an abnormally lower pKa compared


10   J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068


[PDF physical page 11]
                                      Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase





Figure 13. Mechanism of inactive complex formation in FDHs. A, water networks located around the ﬂavin were identiﬁed in the crystal structure of Thal.
Preincubation of Thal with FADH−under anaerobic conditions promotes conformational changes resulting in water rearrangement around the ﬂavin. These
water molecules may promote proton transfer to N1 of FADH−to produce FADH2 which is less reactive with O2 to form C4aOOH-FAD (inactive complex).
B, freshly mixing Thal with FADH−under aerobic conditions can avoid inactive complex formation. C4aOOH-FAD, C4a-hydroperoxyﬂavin; FAD, oxidized
ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide; FDHs, ﬂavin-dependent halogenases; FADH−, reduced ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide; HOX, hypohalous acid.





Figure 14. Comparison of structures of Thal (PDB code 7CU0) and VirX1 (PDB code 6QGM). A, alignment of VirX1 (purple) and Thal (gray) structures
identiﬁed the distinct α-helical (yellow) structure encompassing the Trp substrate (green stick) in Thal. B, surface representation of VirX1 aligned with Thal.


with other Lys residues, possibly allowing it to act as a proton  which C4aOOH-FAD cannot be detected. Various conforma-
donor for HOX during halogenation. (D) Stopped-ﬂow ex-   tions of newly solved Thal:FADH−(PDB code 7CU2) and
periments have shown that prolonged incubation of Thal with  Thal:FAD:AMP (PDB code 7CU1) structures combined with
FADH−leads to formation of an inactive enzyme species in MD simulations revealed that protein conformational changes



                                                                                                                                                                      J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068 11


[PDF physical page 12]
Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase

and water molecule arrangement may lead to inactive complex  more precise in controlling the protonation status of reduced
formation.                                                  ﬂavin and the PCET process than Thal which relies on water
  Our stopped-ﬂow results clearly showed that all tryptophan   networks to transfer protons.
halognases (Thal, PrnA, and PyrH) can react with all halide     In conclusion, our data have expanded the understanding of
ions (I−, Br−, and Cl−) except F−to yield the C4aOH-FAD   the mechanism of halide ion reactivity of tryptophan halo-
intermediate and a halogenating species, i.e., HOX. Rate con-   genases. Although tryptophan halogenases can form reactive
stants of the formation of the halogenating species showed that   halogenating species, HOI, HOBr, and HOCl, the enzyme can
I−gave the highest rate constant. These data are well corre-   only catalyze chlorination and bromination but not iodination
lated with the QM/MM calculations, indicating that the po-   because the space  at the tryptophan binding  site cannot
tential energy barrier to form HOX  is the lowest for the  accommodate the halogenating iodine species. We believe that
reaction of C4aOOH-FAD with  I−. Although HOI can be   future efforts to widen the substrate binding site may allow
formed at the ﬂavin site, an iodinated tryptophan could not be  some tryptophan halogenases such as Thal to catalyze the
detected as a product. This is likely because of the constrained   iodination reaction. We also found HOX leakage which might
space in the tryptophan binding site that does not accommo-   be the cause for the low catalytic inefﬁciency of FDHs in
date the larger iodide species.                                    general. Future  efforts in enzyme engineering to decrease
  The site-saturation mutagenesis and computational studies  HOX leakage may improve the halogenation activity of FDHs.
reported here can explain the mechanistic role of the catalytic  The catalytic Lys has an abnormally low pKa which allows it to
Lys. Although  all FDHs discovered to date have a  strictly   serve  as a proton donor during product formation. The
conserved Lys at their active sites, it is still unclear whether the   fundamental catalytic properties reported should be useful for
residue can form a chloramine intermediate (27) or hydrogen  improvement of halogenases to serve as green biocatalysts in
bonds with HOX (29, 32). Only site-directed mutation to Ala   the future.
(15, 27) or Arg (31) were investigated in the past. Our site-
                                                     Experimental proceduressaturation mutagenesis  results show  that  all  variants  are
inactive, indicating that the catalytic Lys is not dispensible. We   Single turnover reaction of Thal
found that the catalytic Lys is unique for its abnormal pKa     Single turnover of tryptophan bromination activity of Thal
value and has the lowest pKa compared with other Lys resi-  was carried out in a Hi-Tech Scientiﬁc Model RQF-63 rapid-
dues. We propose that this catalytic Lys may serve as a proton  quench ﬂow apparatus at 25  C. An air-saturated solution
donor to HOX (Fig. 8B). Our ﬁndings agree with the mecha-   containing Thal, NaBr, and D,L-tryptophan in 20 mM potas-
nism previously proposed that Lys does not form a chloramine  sium dihydrogen phosphate buffer pH 7.2 was mixed with an
intermediate (Fig. 8B) (29, 32).                                anaerobic solution of FADH−, and the reactions were stopped
  Kinetics and crystal structures of Thal have also shown that   at different time points by quenching the reaction with 0.4 M
the Thal structure is highly dynamic. Upon prolonged incu-   HCl. Final concentrations after quenching were 15 μM Thal,
bation, the Thal:FADH−complex can isomerize to an inactive   7.5 μM FADH−, 15 μM D,L-tryptophan, and 5 mM NaBr.
form which C4aOOH-FAD cannot be detected (Figs. S5 and   Reactions were analyzed by HPLC-MS/MS using an Eclipse
S6). This is similar to the property of RebH which could also   Plus C18 column (3.5 μm, 4.6 × 100 mm) with a gradient
form the inactive complex after prolonged incubation (28).   mobile phase of 95:5 to 20:80 of H2O:acetonitrile containing
Similar phenomena were also found in several two-component   0.1% (v/v) formic acid as an eluent at a ﬂow rate of 0.5 ml/min
ﬂavin-dependent  monooxygenases. A  dechlorinating/deni-  and monitoring for mass/charge (m/z) of tryptophan and
trating  ﬂavin-dependent  monooxygenase  (HadA)  from   bromotryptophan.  Multiple  reaction  monitoring mode  of
R. pickettii DTP0062 also shifts to form a species which is less  HPLC-MS/MS  with  positive  ion mode was  set  for  the
reactive with oxygen upon longer preincubation of FADH−   dectection.
and HadA (38). FMNH−-dependent alkanesulfonate mono-
                                                               Transient kinetics experiments investigated by stopped-ﬂowoxygenase (SsuD) from E. coli has also been reported to form
                                                            spectrometryan inactive complex when SsuD is preincubated with FMNH−
in  the  absence  of  oxygen  (55).  However, some  ﬂavin-     Rapid kinetics experiments were performed using a TgK
dependent monooxygenases, i.e., the monooxygenase compo-   Scientiﬁc model SF-61DX stopped-ﬂow in single- or double-
nent (C2) of p-hydroxyphenylacetate hydroxylase, does not   mixing mode or with a model SF-61SX stopped-ﬂow spec-
have any problem when the enzyme  is preincubated with   trophotometer in single-mixing mode. An oxygen-scrubbing
FMNH−(39). As shown in Figures 10–13 and mentioned in   solution, as previously described (39), was used for scrubbing
the Results section, Thal protein conformational changes can   trace amounts of oxygen from the apparatus to make the
cause water rearrangements which may lead to an improper   system anaerobic. Reactions were carried out in 20 mM po-
protonation status of FADH−or disrupt an arrangement which   tassium dihydrogen phosphate buffer, pH 7.2, 25  C. Trace
facilitates the PCET process for C4aOOH-FAD formation. It is  amounts of oxygen were removed from the glass tonometer by
interesting to note that enzymes which are robust in formation   evacuating air and purging the system with nitrogen gas. FAD
of C4aOOH-ﬂavin such as C2 use an  active  site residue  was reduced in a glove box (Belle Technology, Weymouth,
(His396 in C2) not water networks as a proton donor for the  UK) to obtain FADH−by titration with sodium dithionite.
PCET process. We speculate that this arrangement can be   Flavin  intermediates  were  monitored  by  UV-Visible  or


12   J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068


[PDF physical page 13]
                                      Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase

ﬂuorescence spectrometry. Apparent rate constants (kobs) were   Characterization of brominated D-luciferin products using
analyzed using Program A software (written by R. Chang,  J.  HPLC-QTOF
Chiu, J. Dinverno, and D. P. Ballou, University of Michigan).                                        A large scale reaction (6.3 ml) of D-luciferin bromination
More details for each experiment are described in Supple-                                                     was set up to characterize the products. The reaction was
mental Information.                                                        comprised of 20 μM FAD, 20 μM NAD+, 100 mM NaBr, 0.3
                                     μM C1, 25 mM HCOONa, 0.2 μM psFDH, 5 μM D-luciferin,
QM/MM calculations                                                     and 20 μM Thal (wild-type) in 20 mM potassium dihydrogen
  The reactivity of C4aOOH-FAD with different halide ions   phosphate buffer pH 7.2. Reactions were incubated for 48 h at
to form C4aOH-FAD and HOX was investigated using QM/  room temperature (22–25 C) in a dark room. Fresh enzymes
MM. The crystal structure of the Thal:FAD:AMP complex   including Thal, C1, and psFDH were added into the reaction
(PDB code 7CU1) was used  for these  calculations. The   mixtures every 4 h. Enzymes in the reaction were removed by
model setup and the QM/MM calculations are described in   centrifugation through a Microcon (10 kDa cut-off). Reactions
the Supporting Information. We applied protocols similar to   were analyzed using HPLC-QTOF.
those used previously in QM/MM investigations of other
enzyme-catalyzed reaction mechanisms (43, 44). The posi-   Site-saturation mutagenesis of Thal at Lys79
tions of hydrogen atoms in the enzyme were located using                                                            For the site-saturation mutagenesis at the Lys79 position,
the CHARMM procedure HBUILD (56). The protonation                                                      NNK-degenerate oligonucleotides were designed as showed in
states of titratable amino acid residues were chosen based on                                                          Table S2. Using PCR ampliﬁcation, Thal (wild-type) contain-
predictions from PROPKA (57). The atom types in the to-                                                               ing GFP11 tag in the pET28b vector was used as a template
pology  ﬁles  were  assigned  based  on  the CHARMM27   (47). PCR products were puriﬁed from an agarose gel, and the
parameter set (58). The system was divided into QM and MM   products were treated with DpnI and cutsmart buffer at 37 C
parts for QM/MM simulations. The QM part consisted of Cl−                                                                    for 16 h to remove the Thal (wild-type)-pET28b plasmid.
and C4aOOH-FAD with a net charge of 0 e. The model was                                                           Plasmids were transformed into BL21(DE3) competent cells by
divided into the reaction zone which is an area of 21 Å radius,                                                              the heat shock method. LB broth (900  μl) was added to
centered on the carbon atom C4a of C4aOOH-FAD molecule,                                                           transformed BL21(DE3)  cells. Cell cultures were grown at
and the buffer zone is the rest of the protein system. First, the                                                      37 C and 220 rpm for 2 h before centrifugation and discarding
energy system was minimized using Adopted Basis Newton-                                                      900 μl of supernatant. The remaining 100 μl were resuspended
Raphson  minimization  with  the AM1/CHARMM27 QM/  and spreaded onto 15 ml of LB agar containing 25 μg/ml
MM method. The system was then equilibrated with QM/   kanamycin. Cultures were further grown at 37 C for 16 h.
MM molecular dynamics  at the AM1/CHARMM27  level.                                                                   Cells were harvested by resuspending colonies using 3 ml of
MP2/6-31G(d),I=lanl2dz/CHARMM27  calculations  on  the                                                           LB, and extracted DNA was used for sequence analysis to
reaction (59–61) were performed with the QoMMMa pro-                                                                evaluate  site-saturation  libraries  (64).  Libraries which had
gram (62). The optimized structure from this ab initio QM/                                                               Qpool values of at least 0.7 were further cultured on LB agar
MM reaction modeling calculations was used for higher level                                                                    plates containing 50 μg/ml kanamycin for 16 h. A total of 168
ab initio QM/MM single point calculations using the Molpro                                                                colonies of Lys79 variants, 12 colonies of wild-type, six col-
program  (63). Energy proﬁles were calculated at the SCS-   onies of BL21(DE3) as negative controls, respectively, were
MP2/aug-cc-pvdz,I=auc-cc-pwcvdz-pp/CHARMM27     level;   cultured in 96-well plates containing TB medium with and
the SCS-MP2 method has been shown to give accurate re-                                                           without kanamycin. Cells were cultured at 37 C with shaking
sults, close to coupled cluster calculations for other enzyme-                                                                      at 50 rpm for 16 h. Cells were divided into two parts. The ﬁrst
catalyzed reactions (43–46). More details of the calculations                                                                 part was kept as a library stock by mixing each cell cuture with
are given in the Supporting Information.                                                                   glycerol to make up a ﬁnal concentration of 25% (v/v) and
                                                               stored at −80 C. The second part was used for assay of protein
Investigation of HOX leakage from Thal                                                                        level and tryptophan bromination.
  Experiments were done by performing multiple turnover    Gene expression was done by transferring 7 μl of a starter
reactions in the absence of substrate tryptophan to produce   culture into 200 μl of TB medium (3% v/v inoculation). Cells
HOX. In this study, HOBr was generated after 1.5 h of incu-   were cultured at 37 C with shaking at 50 rpm for 7 h. Then,
bation with 20 mM potassium dihydrogen phosphate buffer   isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside with a ﬁnal concen-
pH 7.2, 20 μM FAD, 20 μM NAD+, 100 mM NaBr, 0.4 μM   tration of 1 mM was added into the culture, and the temper-
ﬂavin reductase (C1), 25 mM HCOONa, 0.2 μM formate de-   ature was switched from 37 to 25  C. Cells were further
hydrogenase from Pseudomonas sp. (psFDH), and 20 μM Thal   cultured at 25 C with shaking at 50 rpm for 16 h. Cells were
at room temperature (22–25  C). Enzymes in the reaction   harvested and lysed. Lysates were centrifuged for 30 min at
were removed by centrifugation through Microcon (10 kDa  4000 rpm 4  C. The supernatants were taken for activity assay
cut-off). D-luciferin (2 μM ﬁnal concentration) was added into  and protein level analysis.
the reaction solution. After incubation for 2 h, reactions were    Gene  expression  yields  were  determined  using  high
analyzed using HPLC-diode array detector/MS and HPLC-   throughput GFP split system (47, 48). Thal was tagged with a
MS/MS.                                                      small  portion  of GFP  sequence  called  a GFP11  at  the


                                                                                                                                                                      J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068 13


[PDF physical page 14]
Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase

C-terminal (Thal-GFP11). The puriﬁed GFP1-10 (150 μl) was   Partnership grant (to P. C.) and from Vidyasirimedhi Institute of
incubated with 20 μl of supernatant at 4 C for 1 day. The   Science and Technology (VISTEC) (to K.P. and P. C.). We thank
protein  levels were determined by measuring ﬂuorescence  Ms Waraporn Pinyo and NSTDA Characterization and Testing
intensity at an emission wavelength of 530 nm using an exci-   Center (NCTC, NSTDA Thailand) for X-ray data collection on
                                                                   the single crystal X-ray diffraction D8 venture. A.  J. M. thankstation wavelength of 488 nm which resulted from the inter-
                                                  EPSRC  for  funding  (grant numbers EP/M022609/1 and  EP/
action of GFP1-10 and Thal-GFP11.
                                                             M013219/1).  This  research work was  partially  supported  by
  The supernatant (40 μl) was transferred to new 96-well                                                            Chiang Mai University (to N. L.). We also thank Ms Pornkanok
plates. A solution of 12.5 mM NaBr, 10 μM NAD+, 10 μM                                                       Pongpamorn for analyzing NMR of the products. We thank the
FAD, 22 mM HCOONa, 0.1 mM tryptophan, and 0.1 μM C1 in   Frontier  Research  Center  (FRC)  at  VISTEC  for  providing
20 mM potassium dihydrogen phosphate buffer pH 7.2 was   assistance and  facilities  for NMR and  high  resolution mass
added (50 μl) into each well. The reaction was initiated by the   spectrometry for the analysis of the products.
addition of 0.165 μM psFDH to each well, and the reactions
                                                            Author contribution—A. P. designed and conducted experiments,were incubated at 60 rpm, 25  C. After the reactions were
                                                                  analyzed results, and wrote the manuscript. K. P. conducted ex-incubated for 3 h, they were quenched with 0.2 M HCl and
                                                                periments and analyzed results. A. J. performed crystallization and
analyzed using HPLC-MS/MS with the same conditions as
                                                               X-ray structure determination. N. L. performed QM/MM calcula-
described in the single turnover reaction section.                                                                        tions and wrote the QM/MM calculations part. A. J. M. advised on
                                                                     aspects of computational modeling, simulation, and data analysis.
Crystallization of Thal                                         D. T. established gene expression and protein puriﬁcation condi-
  Crystals of Thal apoenzyme and tryptophan complexes were    tions. P. C. and K. -H. v. P. advised on data analysis. S. V. carried out
obtained from a microbatch crystallization (65) in a solution   site-saturation mutagenesis and analyzed results. C. K. and W. S.
containing 0.28 to 0.38 M NaF, 23% to 31% (w/v) PEG3350.   conducted experiments to probe HOX leakage. P. C. designed the
                                                               experiments for crystallization, analyzed, and wrote the section onThal:FAD:AMP and Thal:TRP crystals were obtained from
                                                               X-ray structures. P. C. conceived the study, analyzed results, and
soaking of apo Thal crystals into a well containing crystallizing
                                                              wrote the manuscript.
solution and FAD and Trp at a ratio of 2.2:5 mM for 7 days
and 0.8:1.6 mM for 2 days, respectively at 25  C. Thal:FADH−   Conﬂict of interest—The authors declare that they have no conﬂict
co-complex  crystals were produced  by  placing  Thal:Trp   of interest with the contents of this article.
complex crystals in a well containing crystallizing solution
                                                             Abbreviations—The abbreviations used are: C1, the ﬂavin reductasecontaining 5 mM tryptophan, 4 mM FAD, and 20% (v/v)
                                                        component   of   p-hydroxyphenylacetate   3-hydroxylase  from
glycerol at 25 C followed by the addition of Na2S2O4 powder.
                                                                   Acinetobacter baumannii; DAD, diode array detector; DMSO-d6,The crystals were harvested by ﬂash-freezing in liquid nitro-
                                                            Methyl sulfoxide-d6; FAD, oxidized ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide;
gen. Diffraction data were collected from the ﬂash frozen                                                    FADH–, reduced ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide; HCOONa, sodium
crystals on a single crystal X-ray diffraction D8 venture at the                                                                    formate; HOBr, hypobromous acid; HOCl, hypochlorous acid; HOI,
Characterization and Testing Center, National Science and   hypoiodous acid; HOX, hypohalous acid; HPLC, high-performance
Technology Development Agency, Thailand. Data processing   liquid chromatography; MS, mass spectrometry; Na2S2O4, sodium
was performed with Proteum3 software. Structural phases   dithionite; NAD+, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; PrnA, tryp-
were solved by molecular replacement using PHASER (66) in   tophan  7-halogenase  from  Pseudomonas  ﬂuorescens;  psFDH,
the CCP4 suite (67) with SttH (PDB code 5HY5) as a search   formate dehydrogenase from Pseudomonas sp.; PyrH, tryptophan 5-
model. Structure reﬁnement and building were performed   halogenase from  Streptomyces  rugosporus; QM/MM, quantum
with REFMAC5 (68) and COOT (69, 70). Parameter ﬁles of   mechanics/molecular mechanics; Thal, tryptophan 6-halogenase
FADH−for reﬁnement was generated with LIBCHECK in the   from Streptomyces albogriseolus.
CCP4 suite. The structures were validated in PROCHECK
(71). LigPlot (72) and PyMOL (https://pymol.org/) was used
for molecular graphics.                                        References
  Figures were created with ChemBioDraw Ultra (Version      1. Jeschke, P. (2009) The unique role of halogen substituents in the design of
15.1), BioRender.com, and the PyMOL Molecular graphic      modern agrochemicals. Pest Manag. Sci. 66, 10–27
System (Version 2.3.4).                                                             2. Lu, Y., Liu, Y., Xu, Z., Li, H., Liu, H., and Zhu, W. (2012) Halogen bonding
                                                                                         for rational drug design and new drug discovery. Expert Opin. Drug
                                                                                      Discov. 7, 375–383
Data availability
                                                                                               3. Lu, Y., Shi, T., Wang, Y., Yang, H., Yan, X., Luo, X., Jiang, H., and Zhu, W.
   All data are contained within the manuscript and Sup-       (2009) Halogen bonding-a novel interaction for rational drug design?  J.
porting Information. Data of X-ray structures are available at      Med. Chem. 52, 2854–2862
                                                                                               4. Marcelo Zaldini, H., Suellen Melo, T. C., Diogo Rodrigo, M. M., WalterProtein Data Bank under PDB codes indicated.
                                                                                         Filgueira de Azevedo, J., and Ana Cristina Lima, L. (2010) Halogen atoms
                                                                                        in the modern medicinal chemistry: hints for the drug design. Curr. Drug
                                                                                  Targets 11, 303–314
Acknowledgments—This  research was  ﬁnancially  supported by                                                                                               5. Shah, M. B., Liu,  J., Zhang, Q., Stout, C. D., and Halpert,  J. R. (2017)
Thailand  Science  Research  Innovation and  National Research       Halogen-π interactions in the cytochrome P450 active site: structural
Council of Thailand through grants Royal Golden Jubilee PHD/        insights into human CYP2B6 substrate selectivity. ACS Chem. Biol. 12,
0135/2557 (to A. P.), Program Management Unit-B through Global      1204–1210


14   J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068


[PDF physical page 15]
                                      Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase


 6. Wilcken, R., Liu, X., Zimmermann, M. O., Rutherford, T. J., Fersht, A. R.,    26. Andorfer, M. C., and Lewis, J. C. (2018) Understanding and improving
    Joerger, A. C., and Boeckler, F. M. (2012) Halogen-enriched fragment       the activity of ﬂavin-dependent halogenases via random and targeted
     libraries as leads for drug rescue of mutant p53. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134,       mutagenesis. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 87, 159–185
   6810–6818                                                                   27. Yeh, E., Blasiak, L. C., Koglin, A., Drennan, C. L., and Walsh, C. T. (2007)
 7. Wilcken, R., Zimmermann, M. O., Lange, A., Joerger, A. C., and Boeckler,       Chlorination by a long-lived intermediate in the mechanism of ﬂavin-
     F. M. (2013) Principles and applications of halogen bonding in medicinal       dependent halogenases. Biochemistry 46, 1284–1292
    chemistry and chemical biology. J. Med. Chem. 56, 1363–1388              28. Yeh, E., Cole, L. J., Barr, E. W., Bollinger, J. M., Ballou, D. P., and Walsh,
 8. Xu, Z., Liu, Z., Chen, T., Chen, T., Wang, Z., Tian, G., Shi, J., Wang, X.,       C. T. (2006) Flavin redox chemistry precedes substrate chlorination
    Lu, Y., Yan, X., Wang, G., Jiang, H., Chen, K., Wang, S., Xu, Y., et al.       during the reaction of the ﬂavin-dependent halogenase RebH. Biochem-
    (2011) Utilization of halogen bond in lead optimization: a case study of         istry 45, 7904–7912
    rational design of potent phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) inhibitors.    29. Flecks, S., Patallo, E. P., Zhu, X., Ernyei, A. J., Seifert, G., Schneider, A.,
       J. Med. Chem. 54, 5607–5611                                          Dong, C., Naismith, J. H., and van Pée, K.-H. (2008) New insights into the
 9. Xu, Z., Yang, Z., Liu, Y., Lu, Y., Chen, K., and Zhu, W. (2014) Halogen      mechanism of enzymatic chlorination of tryptophan. Angew. Chem. Int.
    bond: its role beyond drug-target binding afﬁnity for drug discovery and       Ed. Engl. 47, 9533–9536
    development. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 54, 69–78                                30. Mori, S., Pang, A. H., Thamban Chandrika, N., Garneau-Tsodikova, S.,
10. Alonso, F., Beletskaya, I. P., and Yus, M. (2002) Metal-mediated reductive      and Tsodikov, O. V. (2019) Unusual substrate and halide versatility of
    hydrodehalogenation of organic halides. Chem. Rev. 102, 4009–4092           phenolic halogenase PltM. Nat. Commun. 10, 1255
11. Kelly, B. C., Ikonomou, M. G., Blair, J. D., Morin, A. E., and Gobas, F. A.    31. Gkotsi, D. S., Ludewig, H., Sharma, S. V., Connolly,  J. A., Dhaliwal,  J.,
     P. C. (2007) Food web-speciﬁc biomagniﬁcation of persistent organic      Wang, Y., Unsworth, W. P., Taylor, R.  J. K., McLachlan, M. M. W.,
    pollutants. Science 317, 236                                              Shanahan, S., Naismith, J. H., and Goss, R. J. M. (2019) A marine viral
12. Prakash, G. K. S., Mathew, T., Hoole, D., Esteves, P. M., Wang, Q., Rasul,       halogenase that iodinates diverse substrates. Nat. Chem. 11, 1091–1097
    G., and Olah, G. A. (2004) N-Halosuccinimide/BF3−H2O,  efﬁcient    32. Karabencheva-Christova, T. G., Torras, J., Mulholland, A. J., Lodola, A.,
    electrophilic halogenating systems for aromatics. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126,      and Christov, C. Z. (2017) Mechanistic insights into the reaction of
   15770–15776                                                                   chlorination of tryptophan catalyzed by tryptophan 7-halogenase. Sci.
13. Xu, B., Zhu, H.-Z., Lin, Y.-L., Shen, K.-Y., Chu, W.-H., Hu, C.-Y., Tian,        Rep. 7, 17395
    K.-N., Mwakagenda, S. A., and Bi, X.-Y. (2012) formation of volatile    33. Frese, M., and Sewald, N. (2015) Enzymatic halogenation of tryptophan
    halogenated by-products during the chlorination  of Oxytetracycline.      on a gram scale. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 54, 298–301
   Water Air Soil Pollut. 223, 4429–4436                                       34. Moritzer, A.-C., and Niemann, H. H. (2019) Binding of FAD and tryp-
14. Latham,  J., Brandenburger, E., Shepherd, S. A., Menon, B. R. K., and       tophan to the tryptophan 6-halogenase Thal is negatively coupled. Protein
    Mickleﬁeld,  J. (2018) Development of halogenase enzymes for use in         Sci. 28, 2112–2118
    synthesis. Chem. Rev. 118, 232–269                                          35. Moritzer, A.-C., Minges, H., Prior, T., Frese, M., Sewald, N., and Nie-
15. Dong, C., Flecks, S., Unversucht, S., Haupt, C., van Pée, K.-H., and Nai-      mann, H. H. (2019) Structure-based switch of regioselectivity in the
    smith, J. H. (2005) Tryptophan 7-halogenase (PrnA) structure suggests a       ﬂavin-dependent tryptophan 6-halogenase Thal.  J.  Biol. Chem. 294,
   mechanism for regioselective chlorination. Science 309, 2216–2219           2529–2542
16. Keller, S., Wage, T., Hohaus, K., Hölzer, M., Eichhorn, E., and van Pée, K.-    36. Bitto, E., Huang, Y., Bingman, C. A., Singh, S., Thorson, J. S., and Phillips,
    H. (2000) Puriﬁcation and  partial characterization of tryptophan 7-       G.  N.,  Jr. (2008) The  structure  of ﬂavin-dependent tryptophan  7-
    halogenase (PrnA) from Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens. Angew. Chem. Int.       halogenase RebH. Proteins 70, 289–293
    Ed. Engl. 39, 2300–2302                                                     37. Zhu, X., De Laurentis, W., Leang, K., Herrmann, J., Ihlefeld, K., van Pée,
17. Mascotti, M. L., Juri Ayub, M., Furnham, N., Thornton, J. M., and Las-        K.-H., and Naismith, J. H. (2009) Structural insights into regioselectivity
    kowski, R. A. (2016) Chopping and changing: the evolution of the ﬂavin-        in the enzymatic chlorination of tryptophan. J. Mol. Biol. 391, 74–85
    dependent monooxygenases. J. Mol. Biol. 428, 3131–3146                   38. Pimviriyakul, P., Thotsaporn, K., Sucharitakul, J., and Chaiyen, P. (2017)
18. Agarwal, V., Miles, Z. D., Winter, J. M., Eustáquio, A. S., El Gamal, A. A.,        Kinetic mechanism  of  the  dechlorinating  ﬂavin-dependent mono-
   and Moore, B. S. (2017) Enzymatic halogenation and dehalogenation       oxygenase HadA. J. Biol. Chem. 292, 4818–4832
    reactions:  pervasive and  mechanistically  diverse. Chem.  Rev.  117,    39. Sucharitakul, J., Chaiyen, P., Entsch, B., and Ballou, D. P. (2006) Kinetic
   5619–5674                                                        mechanisms  of  the  oxygenase  from  a  two-component  enzyme,
19. Phintha, A., Prakinee,  K., and Chaiyen, P. (2020) Chapter Eleven  -       p-hydroxyphenylacetate 3-hydroxylase from acinetobacter baumannii.
    structures, mechanisms and applications of ﬂavin-dependent halogenases.             J. Biol. Chem. 281, 17044–17053
     In: Chaiyen, P., Tamanoi, F., eds. The Enzymes, Academic Press, Cam-    40. Chaiyen, P., Brissette, P., Ballou, D. P., and Massey, V. (1997) Unusual
    bridge, MA: 327–364                                               mechanism of oxygen atom transfer and product rearrangement in the
20. Belsare, K. D., Andorfer, M. C., Cardenas, F. S., Chael, J. R., Park, H. J.,         catalytic reaction of 2-Methyl-3-hydroxypyridine-5-carboxylic acid oxy-
   and Lewis,  J. C. (2017) A simple combinatorial codon mutagenesis        genase. Biochemistry 36, 8060–8070
   method for targeted protein engineering. ACS Synth. Biol. 6, 416–420      41. Chaiyen, P., Brissette, P., Ballou, D. P., and Massey, V. (1997) Reaction
21. Hartwig,  J. F. (2017) Catalyst-controlled site-selective bond activation.        of 2-Methyl-3-hydroxypyridine-5-carboxylic acid (MHPC) oxygenase
    Acc. Chem. Res. 50, 549–555                                              with  N-Methyl-5-hydroxynicotinic  acid:  studies on  the mode  of
22. Lang, A., Polnick, S., Nicke, T., William, P., Patallo, E. P., Naismith, J. H.,        binding, and protonation status of the substrate. Biochemistry 36,
   and van Pée, K.-H. (2011) Changing the regioselectivity of the tryptophan      13856–13864
    7-halogenase PrnA by site-directed mutagenesis. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.    42. Prongjit, M., Sucharitakul, J., Wongnate, T., Haltrich, D., and Chaiyen, P.
    Engl. 50, 2951–2953                                                         (2009) Kinetic mechanism of pyranose 2-oxidase from trametes multi-
23. Payne,  J. T., Poor, C. B., and Lewis,  J. C. (2015) Directed evolution of        color. Biochemistry 48, 4170–4180
   RebH for site-selective halogenation of large biologically active molecules.    43. Lawan, N., Chasing, P., Santatiwongchai, J., and Muangpil, S. (2019) QM/
    Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 54, 4226–4230                MM molecular modelling on mutation effect of chorismate synthase
24. Poor, C. B., Andorfer, M. C., and Lewis, J. C. (2014) Improving the sta-      enzyme catalysis. J. Mol. Graph. Model. 87, 250–256
     bility and catalyst lifetime of the halogenase RebH by directed evolution.    44. Lawan, N., Ranaghan, K. E., Manby, F. R., and Mulholland, A. J. (2014)
   Chembiochem 15, 1286–1289                                         Comparison of DFT and ab initio QM/MM methods for modelling re-
25. Shepherd, S. A., Karthikeyan, C., Latham, J., Struck, A.-W., Thompson,        action in chorismate synthase. Chem. Phys. Lett. 608, 380–385
   M. L., Menon, B. R. K., Styles, M. Q., Levy, C., Leys, D., and Mickleﬁeld, J.    45. Ranaghan, K. E., Morris, W. G., Masgrau, L., Senthilkumar, K., Johan-
    (2015) Extending the biocatalytic scope of regiocomplementary ﬂavin-        nissen, L. O., Scrutton, N. S., Harvey, J. N., Manby, F. R., and Mulholland,
    dependent halogenase enzymes. Chem. Sci. 6, 3454–3460                     A.  J. (2017) Ab Initio QM/MM modeling of the rate-limiting proton


                                                                                                                                                                      J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068 15


[PDF physical page 16]
Mechanisms and structures of tryptophan-6-halogenase


    transfer step in the deamination of tryptamine by aromatic amine de-    59. Mitchell, P. C. H. (2000) A Chemist’s Guide to Density Functional
    hydrogenase. J. Phys. Chem. B. 121, 9785–9798                              Theory. Wolfram Koch and Max C. Holthausen. Wiley–VCH, Wein-
46. van der Kamp, M. W., _Zurek, J., Manby, F. R., Harvey, J. N., and Mul-       heim, Germany, 2000. x + 294 pages. £70 ISBN 3-527-29918-1. Appl.
    holland, A. J. (2010) Testing high-level QM/MM methods for modeling       Organometal. Chem. 14, 745–746
   enzyme reactions: acetyl-CoA deprotonation in citrate synthase. J. Phys.    60. Hertwig, R. H., and Koch, W. (1997) On the parameterization of the local
   Chem. B. 114, 11303–11314                                                     correlation functional. What is Becke-3-LYP? Chem. Phys. Lett. 268, 345–
47. Cabantous, S., and Waldo, G. S. (2006) In vivo and in vitro protein sol-       351
     ubility assays using split GFP. Nat. Methods 3, 845–854                     61. Becke, A. D. (1993) Density-functional thermochemistry. III. The role of
48. Santos-Aberturas,  J., Dörr, M., Waldo, G. S., and Bornscheuer, U. T.        exact exchange. J. Chem. Phys. 98, 5648–5652
    (2015) In-depth high-throughput screening of protein engineering  li-    62. Harvey,   J. N.  (2004)  Spin-forbidden CO  ligand  recombination  in
    braries by split-GFP direct crude cell extract data normalization. Chem.       myoglobin. Faraday Discuss. 127, 165–177
     Biol. 22, 1406–1414                                                          63. Werner, H.-J., Knowles, P.  J., Knizia, G., Manby, F. R., and Schütz, M.
49. Olsson, M. H. M., Søndergaard, C. R., Rostkowski, M., and Jensen, J. H.       (2012) Molpro: a general-purpose quantum chemistry program package.
    (2011) PROPKA3: consistent treatment of internal and surface residues in       Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Comput. Mol. Sci. 2, 242–253
    empirical pKa predictions. J. Chem. Theor. Comput. 7, 525–537             64. Sullivan, B., Walton, A. Z., and Stewart, J. D. (2013) Library construction
50. Eberlein, G., and Bruice, T. C. (1983) The chemistry of a 1,5-diblocked      and evaluation for site saturation mutagenesis. Enzyme Microb. Technol.
    ﬂavin. 2. Proton and electron transfer steps in the reaction of dihydro-        53, 70–77
    ﬂavins with oxygen. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 105, 6685–6697                     65. Chitnumsub, P., Yuvaniyama,  J., Vanichtanankul,  J., Kamchonwongpai-
51. Bruice, T. C. (1984) Oxygen-ﬂavin chemistry. Isr. J. Chem. 24, 54–61           san, S., Walkinshaw, M. D., and Yuthavong, Y. (2004) Characterization,
52. Massey, V. (1994) Activation of molecular oxygen by ﬂavins and ﬂavo-         crystallization and  preliminary X-ray  analysis  of  bifunctional  dihy-
    proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 22459–22462                                       drofolate reductase-thymidylate synthase from Plasmodium falciparum.
53. Wongnate, T., Surawatanawong, P., Visitsatthawong, S., Sucharitakul, J.,       Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 60, 780–783
    Scrutton, N. S., and Chaiyen, P. (2014) Proton-coupled electron transfer    66. McCoy, A.  J., Grosse-Kunstleve, R. W., Adams, P. D., Winn, M. D.,
   and adduct conﬁguration are important for C4a-hydroperoxyﬂavin for-        Storoni, L. C., and Read, R. J. (2007) Phaser crystallographic software. J.
    mation and stabilization in a ﬂavoenzyme. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 241–       Appl. Crystallogr. 40, 658–674
    253                                                                           67. Winn, M. D., Ballard, C. C., Cowtan, K. D., Dodson, E.  J., Emsley, P.,
54. Visitsatthawong, S., Chenprakhon, P., Chaiyen, P., and Surawatanawong,       Evans, P. R., Keegan, R. M., Krissinel, E. B., Leslie, A. G., McCoy, A.,
     P. (2015) Mechanism of oxygen activation in a ﬂavin-dependent mono-       McNicholas, S.  J., Murshudov, G. N., Pannu, N.  S., Potterton, E. A.,
    oxygenase: a nearly barrierless formation of C4a-hydroperoxyﬂavin via        Powell, H. R., et al. (2011) Overview of the CCP4 suite and current de-
    proton-coupled electron transfer. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 9363–9374           velopments. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 67, 235–242
55. Zhan, X., Carpenter, R. A., and Ellis, H. R. (2008) Catalytic importance of    68. Murshudov, G. N., Skubak, P., Lebedev, A. A., Pannu, N. S., Steiner, R. A.,
    the substrate binding order for the FMNH2-dependent alkanesulfonate        Nicholls, R. A., Winn, M. D., Long, F., and Vagin, A. A. (2011) REFMAC5
   monooxygenase enzyme. Biochemistry 47, 2221–2230                            for the reﬁnement of macromolecular crystal structures. Acta Crystallogr.
56. Brünger, A. T., and Karplus, M. (1988) Polar hydrogen positions in     D Biol. Crystallogr. 67, 355–367
    proteins: empirical energy placement and neutron diffraction compari-    69. Emsley, P., and Cowtan, K. (2004) Coot: model-building tools for mo-
    son. Proteins 4, 148–156                                                           lecular graphics. Acta Crystallogr. D, Biol. Crystallogr. 60, 2126–2132
57. Dolinsky, T. J., Nielsen, J. E., McCammon, J. A., and Baker, N. A. (2004)    70. Emsley, P., Lohkamp, B., Scott, W. G., and Cowtan, K. (2010) Features and
   PDB2PQR: an automated pipeline for the setup of Poisson-Boltzmann       development of coot. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 66, 486–501
     electrostatics calculations. Nucleic Acids Res. 32, W665–W667              71. Laskowski, R. A., MacArthur, M. W., Moss, D. S., and Thornton, J. M.
58. MacKerell, A. D., Bashford, D., Bellott, M., Dunbrack, R. L., Evanseck, J.       (1993) PROCHECK: a program to check the stereochemical quality of
    D., Field, M. J., Fischer, S., Gao, J., Guo, H., Ha, S., Joseph-McCarthy, D.,        protein structures. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 26, 283–291
    Kuchnir, L., Kuczera, K., Lau, F. T. K., Mattos, C., et al. (1998) All-atom    72. Laskowski, R. A., and Swindells, M. B. (2011) LigPlot+: multiple ligand–
    empirical potential for molecular modeling and dynamics studies of        protein interaction diagrams for drug discovery. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 51,
    proteins. J. Phys. Chem. B. 102, 3586–3616                              2778–2786





16   J. Biol. Chem. (2021) 296 100068