
[PDF physical page 1]
Structure-guided function discovery of an NRPS-like
glycine betaine reductase for choline biosynthesis
in fungi

Yang Hai (海洋)a, Arthur M. Huangb, and Yi Tanga,b,1

aDepartment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095; and bDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095

Edited by Wilfred A. van der Donk, Howard Hughes Medical Institute and University of Illinois, Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, IL, and accepted by Editorial
Board Member Stephen J. Benkovic April 10, 2019 (received for review February 27, 2019)

Nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs) and NRPS-like enzymes   focused on a fungal CAR-like protein with an unknown function. It
have diverse functions in primary and secondary metabolisms. By     is distinguished from all other CARs due to an extra C-terminal
using a structure-guided approach, we uncovered the function of a   YdfG-like  short-chain  dehydrogenase/reductase  domain. We
NRPS-like enzyme with unusual domain architecture, catalyzing   named this protein ATRR and the corresponding gene atrr after its
two sequential two-electron reductions of glycine betaine to choline.   unusual domain architecture (A-T-R1-R2). The presence of two
Structural analysis based on the homology model suggests cation-π   fused R domains in ATRR implies that it could catalyze two con-
interactions as the major substrate specificity determinant, which was    secutive two-electron reductions of a carboxylic acid to yield an
verified using substrate analogs and inhibitors. Bioinformatic analysis    alcohol (Fig. 1B). Moreover, a genomic survey reveals that atrr
indicates this NRPS-like glycine betaine reductase is highly conserved   genes are widespread but exclusive to eukaryotes, mostly in fungi
and widespread in kingdom fungi. Genetic knockout experiments   and found in several protist and invertebrate species. In particular,
confirmed its role in choline biosynthesis and maintaining glycine  ATRR orthologs are highly conserved in kingdom fungi: Sequence
betaine homeostasis in fungi. Our findings demonstrate that the ox-    identities are greater than 60% from different species, which indi-
idative choline-glycine betaine degradation pathway can operate in a    cates a unified and conserved role of ATRR. Transcriptomics
fully reversible fashion and provide insight in understanding fungal    studies also suggest atrr genes are constitutively transcribed in dif-
choline metabolism. The use of an NRPS-like enzyme for reductive    ferent fungal species, including human opportunistic pathogen As-
choline formation is energetically efficient compared with known    pergillus fumigatus (12, 13); and rice blast fungus Magnaporthe oryzae
pathways. Our discovery also underscores the capabilities of the    (14). These features motivated us to discover and characterize its
structure-guided approach in assigning functions of uncharacterized   enzymatic activity and biological function.
multidomain proteins, which can potentially aid functional discovery
of new enzymes by genome mining.                               Results
                                                                      Bioinformatic Analysis Provides Initial Insight. We first applied the
glycine betaine reductase | NRPS-like | choline metabolism |              “genomic enzymology” strategy to obtain clues regarding the
biosynthesis | fungi                              ATRR function from the atrr genomic context since enzymes in a
                                                                 microbial metabolic pathway often are encoded by a gene cluster

    acid reductases (CARs) catalyze ATP- and NADPH-dependent    logs in fungi reveals that there are no well-defined and conservedT he nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS)-like carboxylic    (15, 16). However, comparative genomic analysis of atrr ortho-
reduction of carboxylic acids to the corresponding aldehydes (1).
These multidomain enzymes consist of a N-terminal adenylation     Significance
(A) domain, which selects and activates a carboxylic acid substrate
by adenylation, then transfers the acyl moiety to the phospho-                                                                 Oxidation of choline to glycine betaine is a major pathway for
pantetheinyl arm from the thiolation (T) domain through a thioester                                                                      choline degradation and  glycine betaine  biosynthesis.  Al-
linkage. The T domain delivers the acyl thioester to the C-terminal                                                           though this oxidative process is found in all domains of life,
thioester reductase (R) domain where the NADPH-dependent                                                         enzymes involved in the reduction of glycine betaine to choline
thioester reduction occurs (Fig. 1A). Unlike some off-loading R    have not been found. Here, we found this missing link in
domains in polyketide synthases and NRPS assembly lines, which     choline metabolism through a structure-guided function dis-
catalyze nonprocessive [2 + 2] electron reduction to over-reduce the     covery of a NRPS-like glycine betaine reductase, which cata-
aldehyde product to alcohol (2, 3), the R domains in CARs catalyze     lyzes reduction of glycine betaine to choline via the intermediate
a strict two-electron reduction, and the structural basis for such     glycine betaine aldehyde. Bioinformatic analysis suggests this
specificity was reported recently (4).                           enzyme is highly conserved and widespread in the fungal
  The members of the CAR family are functionally diverse and    kingdom, and our discovery of this reductive choline bio-
play indispensable roles in both primary and secondary metab-     synthesis pathway provides insight into fungal choline
olisms, such as the α-aminoadipate reductase Lys2, required for     metabolism.
lysine biosynthesis in fungi (5); and tyrosine reductase HqlA,
involved in biosynthesis of herquline A (Fig. 1A) (6). CARs also    Author contributions: Y.H. and Y.T. designed research; Y.H. and A.M.H. performed re-
show substantial promise as green biocatalysts for the conversion     search; Y.H. analyzed data; and Y.H. and Y.T. wrote the paper.
of aromatic or aliphatic carboxylic acids into the corresponding    The authors declare no conflict of interest.
aldehydes. Indeed, synthetic applications of CARs have been     This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. W.A.v.d.D. is a guest editor invited by the
reported for the biocatalytic synthesis of vanillin (7), preparation     Editorial Board.
of methyl branched aliphatic aldehydes (8), production of bio-     Published under the PNAS license.
fuels (9, 10), and other chemical commodities (11).                   1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: yitang@ucla.edu.
  Prominent metabolic roles of CARs and their biocatalytic     This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
potential encouraged us to discover uncharacterized members    1073/pnas.1903282116/-/DCSupplemental.
with different functions by genome mining. During this effort, we     Published online May 6, 2019.



10348–10353   | PNAS   | May 21, 2019   |  vol. 116   |  no. 21                                                    www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1903282116


[PDF physical page 2]
Fig. 1.  Comparison between typical CARs and ATRR. (A) Domain architecture of typical CARs and CAR-catalyzed reactions. (B) Domain architecture of ATRR
and the postulated reaction based on domain function.


gene neighborhoods. Even in some closely related species of the    successful predictions for enzymes of unknown function (28, 29).
same genus (e.g., Aspergillus), the genome environment of atrr  We constructed an active site homology model of ATRR-A bydiffers substantially (SI Appendix, Figs. S2 and S3). The di-   using a TycA variant (PDB entry 5N82) (21) as the template                                    BIOCHEMISTRY
versified genomic context and lack of obvious co-occurrence with   (34% sequence identity to ATRR-A) and manually replacing the
signature metabolic pathway genes prevented us from reliable   10 AA code residues with the corresponding ones in A. nidulans
functional assignment.                             ATRR-A (Fig. 2A). In comparison with the structure of the ar-
 We then focused on characterization of the A domain of ATRR    chetypical A domain PheA (17), three aromatic residues (F201,
(ATRR-A), which selects a substrate and is, therefore, the entry   W204, and W270) stood out in the ATRR-A model. These
point to ATRR catalysis. Because the substrate specificity of A   residues could potentially form an aromatic cage to bind a
domains is dictated by the amino acid residues lining the active site   quaternary ammonium group through cation-π interactions (30,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CHEMISTRY
pocket (10 AA code), deciphering this “nonribosomal code” of    31). This quaternary ammonium group can be further electro-
ATRR-A would, in theory, allow us to predict its function (17, 18).    statically stabilized by a nearby anionic residue E304. Such an
Bioinformatic analysis showed the ATRR-A has a unique 10 AA   aromatic box  is reminiscent of those observed in quaternary
code, and it is conserved among ATRR orthologs from different   ammonium moiety binding proteins, such as periplasmic betaine
fungal species (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). However, substrate prediction   binding  protein  Prox  (32);  cis-4-hydroxy-D-proline  betaine
by online servers was unsuccessful due to the lack of characterized   epimerase HpbD, and demethylase HpbJ (28); histone trime-
homologs with significant similarity (19). Closer inspection reveals    thyllysine  reader  proteins  (33); and  acetylcholine  esterase
that the highly conserved aspartate residue (D235 in PheA), which    (30, 31).
typically interacts with the substrate α-amino group via a salt bridge    We, therefore, speculated that the carboxylic acid substrate of
(20, 21), is not conserved in ATRR-A (SI Appendix, Fig. S5). Loss  ATRR could be a small betaine, such as the physiologically
of this key aspartate residue suggests that the substrate is not a   abundant carnitine, glycine betaine, etc. To test this hypothesis,
typical α-amino acid or an unusual amino acid substrate accom-   we assayed ATRR activity with a panel of naturally occurring
modated in an unprecedented fashion as in the case of ClbH-A2   betaines (Fig. 2B). Gratifyingly, rapid oxidation of NADPH was
which activates S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) (22). Indeed, most   observed only in the presence of the smallest betaine, glycine
characterized A domains without D235 equivalent residues (Asp/    betaine. Consumption of NADPH indicates that glycine betaine
Glu) are known to activate nonamino acid-type substrates, including   was reduced. In accordance with our early hypothesis about
aryl acid, keto acid, and hydroxy acid (SI Appendix, Fig. S5) (23–26).  ATRR function (Fig. 1B), the predicted corresponding two se-
Based on this prediction, we screened the CAR activity of ATRR   quential two-electron reduction product choline was indeed ac-
in vitro against a library of common carboxylic acids from primary   cumulated in the reaction mixture (SI Appendix, Fig. S9). We
metabolism as well as the 20 proteinogenic amino acids (SI Ap-   then determined the apparent steady-state kinetic constants for
pendix, Fig. S6). The Aspergillus nidulans ATRR protein (Uniprot  ATRR glycine betaine reductase activity (SI Appendix, Fig. S10
AN5318.2) was expressed from Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) and   and Table S1). The overall kcat value (∼1 s−1) is modest but
purified to homogeneity by  affinity chromatography and  size-    similar to that of previously characterized CARs (4), whereas the
exclusion chromatography (SI Appendix, Fig. S7). Apo-ATRR was  Km value (∼2 mM) matches the intracellular level of glycine
enzymatically converted to holo-form by using phosphopantetheinyl   betaine (∼3 mM) in fungi (34). Therefore, glycine betaine is a
transferase NpgA and CoA (SI Appendix, Fig. S8) (27). The re-    physiologically relevant substrate for ATRR.
ductase activity of holo-ATRR was examined by monitoring the
oxidation of NADPH at 340 nm. ATRR showed no activity toward    Mechanistic Study of ATRR. We next studied the catalytic mecha-
any of the substrates in this library.                             nism of the glycine betaine reductase function of ATRR. By
                                                                 using a hydroxylamine-trapping assay designed for testing ade-
Structure-Based Approach Predicts a Domain Substrate. We then    nylation activity (35), we confirmed that glycine betaine was in-
used a structure-based approach to gain more insight about the   deed adenylated by ATRR-A (Fig. 3A). Furthermore, similar
substrate specificity of ATRR-A, a strategy that has led to many   to all CARs, the glycine betaine reductase activity of ATRR



Hai et al.                                                                            PNAS   | May 21, 2019   |  vol. 116   |  no. 21   |  10349


[PDF physical page 3]
                                                           from R1, we introduced another mutation at R2 (G1036A) to
                                                          compromise binding of the cosubstrate NADPH. As expected,
                                                              double mutation (G1036A/Y1178F) in R2 further decreased the
                                                                aldehyde reductase activity by 4,000-fold, whereas the carboxylic acid
                                                                   reductase activity was not compromised. The role of R2 as a dedi-
                                                                  cated aldehyde reductase was also supported by the robust reduction
                                                                     of betaine aldehyde to choline using the excised stand-alone R2
                                                        domain (SI Appendix, Table S1). To summarize, the thioester re-
                                                                  ductase domain R1 strictly carries out a single two-electron reduction
                                                                     of glycine betainoyl thioester to glycine betaine aldehyde, which is
                                                                then reduced to choline at the aldehyde reductase domain R2.

                                                                    Substrate Specificity and Inhibition of ATRR. Establishing the func-
                                                                     tion of ATRR as glycine betaine reductase enabled us to further
                                                                   characterize  its substrate specificity. We  first studied ATRR
                                                                            specificity toward glycine betaine by assaying both A and car-
                                                                     boxylic acid reductase activity of ATRR against different glycine
                                                                 betaine analogs (Fig. 3 A and B). The isosteric neutral analog
                                                                  3,3-dimethylbutyrate completely abolished the activity. In con-
                                                                                 trast, the tertiary sulfonium analog sulfobetaine, which also bears
                                                           a positive charge on its head group but lacks one methyl group



Fig. 2.  Structure-based prediction of the ATRR substrate. (A) Comparison of
the homology model of A. nidulans ATRR-A domain with the structure of
PheA in complex with its cognate substrate L-phenylalanine. The conserved
salt bridges recognizing the α-carboxylate and α-amino groups are shown as
black dashes. The proposed cation-π and electrostatic interactions favoring
binding of betaine-like substrates in the ATRR A domain are shown as or-
ange and red dashes, respectively. The simplest betaine, glycine betaine, was
shown to indicate the plausible binding mode. (B) CAR activity of ATRR
against a panel of betaine substrates.


requires phosphopantetheinylation of the T domain, suggesting
the corresponding glycine betainoyl thioester intermediate  is
critical for reduction (SI Appendix, Fig. S11). We verified the
formation of this intermediate using matrix-assisted laser de-
sorption/ionization–time-of-flight mass spectrometry with the
stand-alone ATRR-T domain, which can be acylated by ATRR-
A in the presence of glycine betaine and ATP (SI Appendix, Fig.
S8). The expected on-pathway intermediate glycine betaine al-
dehyde (hydrate) was also observed during the reaction course
by continuous trapping with phenylhydrazine (SI Appendix, Fig.
S12). Direct reduction of glycine betaine aldehyde to choline by
ATRR was also observed, confirming its role as an intermediate
in the stepwise reduction (SI Appendix, Fig. S9). Kinetic assay
showed that glycine betaine aldehyde reduction by ATRR is more
efficient: The catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km = 3.0 × 104 M−1 s−1) is
66-fold greater than that of the overall carboxylic acid reduction,
whereas the turnover number (kcat = 7 s−1) is sixfold higher. Rapid
reduction of glycine betaine aldehyde shows that the aldehyde re-
duction step is not rate limiting thereby avoiding accumulation of
the reactive aldehyde species.
 We next characterized the individual function of R1 and R2
domains. To isolate the catalytic activity of the individual do-
mains, we inactivated each reductase domain by substituting the
conserved catalytic tyrosine residue with phenylalanine (Y811F
in R1 and Y1178F in R2). In agreement with our two consecutive
two-electron reductions hypothesis (Fig. 1B), mutation of R1
essentially abolished overall carboxylic acid reductase activity,
whereas aldehyde reductase activity remained intact (SI Appen-
dix, Table S1). On the contrary, mutation of R2 did not sub-     Fig. 3.  ATRR substrate specificity and inhibition studies. (A) Substrate specificity
stantially affect carboxylic acid reductase activity but resulted in    of ATRR-A profiled with different substrates. The A activity was monitored here
                                                                          with the hydroxylamine capture assay. (B) CAR activity of ATRR against a panel
the accumulation of glycine betaine aldehyde intermediate (SI
                                                                             of glycine betaine analogs. (C) Dependence of binding free energy change and
Appendix, Fig. S12). The Y1178F mutation in R2 also led to a     inhibitor disassociation constant Ki on the number of methyl groups of ammo-
greater than 150-fold loss of aldehyde reductase activity (cata-   nium inhibitors against glycine betaine reductase activity. Note that, for the
lytic efficiency). (SI Appendix, Table S1). To further confirm that    mixed inhibitor trimethylammonium ion, K’i  is not taken into account. (D)
the remaining aldehyde reductase activity was not contributed    Feedback inhibition from choline could regulate ATRR enzyme activity.



10350   |  www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1903282116                                                                                           Hai et al.


[PDF physical page 4]
compared with glycine betaine, was partially active (an order of    plays a major  role  in ATRR-A  substrate  recognition, and
magnitude slower). Such comparison clearly demonstrates that  ATRR-A favors binding of tetra-alkylated quaternary ammo-
the formal positive charge carried by the substrate is critical for   nium moiety, presumably through a combination of cation-π in-
activity and, thus, supports our predicted cation-π interactions    teractions, hydrophobic effect, and maximized van der Waals
conferred by ATRR-A during substrate recognition. The de-    interactions. Unlike ATRR-A, R2 is not potently inhibited by the
creased activity of ATRR toward sulfobetaine suggests the im-   head-group mimic tetramethylammonium ion (mixed inhibitor,
portance of the trimethyl moiety for function. The important   Ki = 5, K’i = 18  nM), suggesting the head group is not the dom-
contribution of the trimethyl moiety of glycine betaine to ATRR   inant determinant for R2 substrate specificity. Nonetheless, the
catalysis was also revealed by carboxylic acid reduction assays with                                                                       positive charge on the substrate is still essential for R2 catalysis as
dimethylglycine and monomethylglycine (sarcosine), which are                                                                 the neutral isosteric analog 3,3-dimethylbutyraldehyde (DMBA)
physiologically relevant analogs as they are intermediates in the                                                        showed a 13,500-fold loss of catalytic efficiency (SI Appendix,
glycine  betaine  degradation pathway  (36).  Progressively  de-                                                             Table S1). It is noteworthy to mention that DMBA exists mainly
creasing the number of N-methyl groups of  glycine betaine                                                                as the aldehyde form (≥65%) in aqueous solution favoring
resulted in a significant loss of carboxylic acid reductase activity:                                                                  reductase-catalyzed NADPH-dependent reduction (38), whereas
the reduction of dimethylglycine was two orders of magnitude
                                                                     glycine betaine aldehyde predominantly exists as the hydrated
slower than that of glycine betaine, whereas no reduction could be
                                                                gem-diol form (99%), which must then undergo dehydration to
observed with sarcosine (Fig. 3 A and B and SI Appendix, Table
                                                                    unveil the aldehyde functional group for reduction.
S1). Since the ammonium groups of both dimethylglycine (pKa =                                                                 Since the product choline consists of the same head group, we
9.89) and sarcosine (pKa = 10.1) were thought to be protonated                                                                next tested whether choline could act as an inhibitor competing
under our experimental condition (pH 7.5–8.0) (37), the decrease
                                                                with glycine betaine and glycine betaine aldehyde. As a result,in activity per methyl group reflects the additive contribution of
                                                                 choline was shown to be a mixed inhibitor for both glycine be-each methyl substitution to catalysis. ATRR-A was also shown to
                                                                    taine reductase and aldehyde reductase activity but more potentbe  strictly  size  selective in that β-alanine betaine and dime-
thylsulfoniopropionate, each containing one additional methylene    (Ki = 0.27, K’i = 6.7  mM) in competition against glycine betaine
group to glycine betaine and sulfobetaine, respectively, were not    in the first reduction step. Therefore, choline could act as a
substrates of ATRR (Fig. 3 A and B). Collectively, these results   feedback inhibitor to regulate ATRR enzymatic activity (Fig.
show that ATRR is highly specific to glycine betaine and such   3D). The lowered binding affinity of choline to R2 (Ki = 4 mM)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BIOCHEMISTRYspecificity is likely achieved by favoring binding of its head group    favors the release of choline after glycine betaine aldehyde re-
and distinguishing different extents of methylation.                duction to avoid direct product inhibition.
  To corroborate our findings on substrate specificity, we stud-
ied the inhibition of ATRR by using different ammonium-    Physiological Role of ATRR in Fungi. Our discovery of ATRR as a
containing inhibitors (SI Appendix, Fig. S13 and Table S2). The    glycine betaine reductase strongly indicates that it is the missing
tetramethylammonium ion, which mimics the head group of    link in choline-glycine betaine metabolism (Fig. 4). Oxidation of
glycine betaine, was found to be a potent competitive inhibitor of   choline to glycine betaine initiates the choline catabolic process.ATRR-A (Ki = 69 μM), whereas the potency decreased by three   This common choline degradation pathway has been found in all                           CHEMISTRY
orders of magnitude with dimethylammonium (Ki = 21 mM). As   domains of life, but the reverse process has only been implicated
illustrated in Fig. 3C, a monotonic increase in inhibitor affinity is    in fungi. A collection of experimental evidence, including ge-
correlated with the addition of each methyl group yielding an    netics, metabolite quantification by NMR, and radioactive la-
incremental free energy relationship: Addition of each methyl    beling studies, suggest glycine betaine can be reduced to choline
group  contributes  ∼1.7  kcal/mol  toward  inhibitor  binding.    in vivo and thereby can be an alternative source of choline for
Therefore, our results reinforced the idea that the head group    fungi (39, 40). However, the underlying biochemical mechanism





Fig. 4.  Choline-glycine betaine metabolism in fungi. DEA, dimethylethanolamine; EA, ethanolamine; MEA, monomethylethanolamine; PAPS, 3′-phos-
phoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate; PDEA, phosphatidyldimethylethanolamine; PEA, phosphatidylethanolamine; PMEA, phosphatidylmonomethylethanol-
amine; PS, phosphatidylserine; R, fatty acyl chain; THF, tetrahydrofolate.



Hai et al.                                                                            PNAS   | May 21, 2019   |  vol. 116   |  no. 21   |  10351


[PDF physical page 5]
and genetic basis have remained elusive. A plausible mechanism
for this conversion was postulated based on the reduction of L-
aspartate to L-homoserine in which the carboxy group is first
activated via phosphorylation by a kinase. This is followed by
conversion to a thioester that is reduced into aldehyde by de-
hydrogenase and then reduced to alcohol by a separate re-
ductase. The biosynthetic logic of ATRR discovered in  this
paper also uses a carboxylic activation strategy for reduction but
is more concise as all steps are performed by one enzyme, and
the key thioester intermediate is channeled through the phos-
phopantetheine arm of a T domain.
  To test whether ATRR plays a role in choline biosynthesis in
fungi, we deleted the atrr gene in both the wild-type (wt*) A.
nidulans and the A. nidulans ΔchoA strains by using the split-
marker method (SI Appendix, Figs. S14 and S15) (41). Disrup-
tion of the choA gene encoding the phosphatidylethanolamine
N-methyltransferase blocks the Bremer-Greenberg methylation
pathway from PEA and renders the Kennedy pathway from free
choline as the only option for biosynthesis of the essential
phospholipid phosphatidylcholine (PC) (Fig. 4) (40). Deletion of
the atrr gene would abolish conversion of glycine betaine to
choline, but both the Bremer-Greenberg pathway and the Ken-
nedy pathway remain functional. Accordingly, we expect no
growth defects of the Δatrr strain, whereas the ΔchoA strain     Fig. 5.  Disruption of the A. nidulans atrr gene impairs conversion of glycine
would show choline-/betaine-dependent growth. Without the    betaine to choline. (A) Growth of A. nidulans gene deletion mutants on
ability to convert glycine betaine to choline, the ΔatrrΔchoA     solid MM at 37 °C for 3 d. The medium was supplemented with different
double  knockout  strain   is  expected  to  be  truly  choline-    concentrations of glycine betaine and choline. (B) Chemical complementa-
auxotrophic even in the presence of glycine betaine. Indeed,    tion restores growth of the A. nidulans Δatrr strain at a high concentration
when cultured on solid minimal medium (MM), no major growth    of glycine betaine (1 mM).
and morphological difference was observed between the Δatrr
and the wt* strains. On the contrary, neither the ΔchoA nor the
                                                                   of ATRR in fungi, which not only can supply choline for PCΔatrrΔchoA strain was able to grow because of obstructed PC
                                                                         biosynthesis via the Kennedy pathway, but also can help to “detoxify”biosynthesis (Fig. 5A). The vegetative growth of the ΔchoA strain
can be stimulated by supplementation of either choline or glycine   high levels of glycine betaine. Therefore, our results confirmed an
betaine (2–20 μM), although full restoration of the conidiation   important physiological role of ATRR in choline and PC metabolism
requires  higher  concentrations (>100 μM).  In  contrast,  the    in A. nidulans and reveal a previously unknown effect of glycine
ΔatrrΔchoA strain exhibits choline-auxotroph character: Glycine    betaine to A. nidulans growth.
betaine can no longer replace choline to restore growth and
                                                               Discussionasexual development under the choline-limiting condition. These
results confirm that ATRR rescues the phenotype of ΔchoA by   Our study here was driven by a highly conserved NRPS-like
converting glycine betaine to choline. Therefore, ATRR mediated   enzyme in fungi with an unusual domain architecture. Successful
reduction of glycine betaine is a “shortcut” pathway to choline.     elucidation of its unknown function as glycine betaine reductase
  Unexpectedly, although no significant difference was observed    serendipitously led to the resolution of a long-standing question
between the Δatrr and the wt* strains growing at low concen-    in choline-glycine betaine metabolism, how glycine betaine was
tration (2–20 μM) of exogenous glycine betaine, the hyphae   converted back to choline. Now, our study provides the molec-
growth and conidiation of the Δatrr strain were severely impaired    ular basis: ATRR catalyzes ATP- and NAPDH-dependent re-
at high level glycine betaine (>100 μM, Fig. 5A), which indicates   ductions of glycine betaine by a catalytic mechanism similar to
ATRR function is essential to A. nidulans under such a condi-    that of well-known NRPS-dependent CARs, generating a glycine
tion. To interrogate the role of glycine betaine in the absence of   betaine aldehyde intermediate, which is further reduced at the
ATRR, we cosupplemented choline to the medium. With an   R2 domain unique to ATRR, yielding, as a final product, choline.
increasing amount of choline (>20 μM) added, the growth of the                                                             Orthologs of ATRR are found to be prevalent in fungi and ex-
Δatrr strain can be fully reverted to the normal state even in the                                                                           hibit high sequence identities with characterized A. nidulans
presence of a millimolar level of glycine betaine (Fig. 5B).                                       ATRR (SI Appendix, Figs. S2 and S3), which suggests that this
Similar but not identical results were also observed when PC and                                                                           efficient single-enzyme catalyzed reductive choline biosynthesis
L-methionine (10 mM) were cosupplemented. These chemical
                                                  may be widespread in fungi. Harboring this enzyme permits di-
complementation results suggest the impaired growth caused by
                                                                       rect  reutilization  of  endogenously  stored  glycine  betaine
the high level of exogenous glycine betaine is presumably due to
                                                        (∼3 mM) for on-demand biosynthesis of choline and cholinethe impeded Bremer-Greenberg methylation pathway, which
                                                                         derivatives, including phospholipid PC (essential role in main-again leads to deficient PC biosynthesis. High levels of methio-
                                                                     taining membrane integrity and functionality) and choline-O-nine could increase SAM biosynthesis via methionine catabo-
lism, which may further up-regulate and drive the methylation    sulfate (a mean for intracellular sulfate storage) (42). Compared
pathway  against  glycine  betaine.  In  comparison,  cosupple-   with the high metabolic cost of the de novo choline biosynthetic
mentation of L-homocysteine (as racemic L- and D-mixtures) to   pathway (the Bremer-Greenberg pathway) at the expense of
favor glycine betaine degradation did not alleviate the impaired   three consecutive methylation steps (costing 12 ATP molecules
growth of the Δatrr strain, which suggests the glycine betaine   per methylation event) (43), regeneration of choline from glycine
degradation pathway is likely not playing a major role in this   betaine  is much more  cost-effective (costing 1 ATP and 2
phenotype. Nevertheless,  inhibition of the Bremer-Greenberg  NADPH). More importantly, this shortcut pathway also acts as
methylation pathway by glycine betaine necessitates the function   an “emergency safeguard” pathway to supply choline from its



10352   |  www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1903282116                                                                                           Hai et al.


[PDF physical page 6]
“reserve form” glycine betaine for PC biosynthesis when the    universal noncovalent interaction for substrate/ligand recognition in
Bremer-Greenberg methylation pathway is obstructed.              biology (30, 31).
  Uncovering the ATRR function was rooted in understanding    To summarize, our study demonstrated that the structure-
the biochemical logic of NRPS-like CARs. We reasoned that the   guided approach can be a general strategy for functional discov-
A domain must play a gatekeeping role in selecting and acti-    ery of uncharacterized NRPS-like enzymes, and orphan NRPS
vating the carboxylic acid substrate; and identification of the   assembly lines from the ever-increasing size of genomic data,
substrate would thereby reveal the function of ATRR. Although   which may aid in the discovery of new metabolic pathways and
our initial search for the substrate, guided by the 10 AA code, was    natural products (16). In principle, such a process can be greatly
unsuccessful, a key insight of the A domain substrate specificity    facilitated by docking a library of carboxylic acid metabolites to
was provided by our interpretation of the structure-function re-   high quality homology models of A domains.
lationship based on a simple active site homology model, which
prioritized a pool of potential substrates, and the physiologically   Materials and Methods
relevant substrate glycine betaine was identified eventually by ex-    Materials and methods are summarized in SI Appendix, including SI Ap-
perimental enzymatic activity screening. Our results expanded the    pendix, Figs. S1–S16 and Tables S1–S3.
biochemistry scope of the NRPS family: ATRR-A is shown to ac-
tivate and thioesterify a betaine-type substrate; and convincing ev-   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Dr. Mengbin Chen, Dr. Matthew Jenner
idence supports our hypothesis that cation-π interactions play an    for helpful discussions, and Abigail Yohannes for helping with bioinformatic                                                                                        analysis. This work was supported by the NIH (Grant 1R35GM118056) (to
important role in substrate recognition at the A domain. Our findings     Y.T.). Y.H. is a Life Sciences Research Foundation fellow sponsored by the
support the notion that cation-π interaction is a fundamental and   Mark Foundation for Cancer Research.



 1. Winkler M (2018) Carboxylic acid reductase enzymes (CARs). Curr Opin Chem Biol 43:     22. Zha L, et al. (2017) Colibactin assembly line enzymes use S-adenosylmethionine to
    23–29.                                                                                      build a cyclopropane ring. Nat Chem Biol 13:1063–1065.
 2. Read JA, Walsh CT (2007) The lyngbyatoxin biosynthetic assembly line: Chain release     23. May JJ, Kessler N, Marahiel MA, Stubbs MT (2002) Crystal structure of DhbE, an ar-
   by four-electron reduction of a dipeptidyl thioester to the corresponding alcohol. J        chetype for aryl acid activating domains of modular nonribosomal peptide synthe-
  Am Chem Soc 129:15762–15763.                                                                   tases. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:12120–12125.
 3. Chhabra A, et al. (2012) Nonprocessive [2 + 2]e- off-loading reductase domains from     24. Balibar CJ, Howard-Jones AR, Walsh CT (2007) Terrequinone A biosynthesis through L-
    mycobacterial nonribosomal peptide synthetases. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:5681–        tryptophan oxidation, dimerization and bisprenylation. Nat Chem Biol 3:584–592.
    5686.                                                                                     25. Ames BD, Walsh CT (2010) Anthranilate-activating modules from fungal non- 4. Gahloth D, et al. (2017) Structures of carboxylic acid reductase reveal domain dy-        ribosomal peptide assembly lines. Biochemistry 49:3351–3365.                                                                                                                                                       BIOCHEMISTRY
   namics underlying catalysis. Nat Chem Biol 13:975–981.                                   26. Wackler B, et al. (2011) Ralfuranone biosynthesis in Ralstonia solanacearum suggests
 5. Ehmann DE, Gehring AM, Walsh CT (1999) Lysine biosynthesis in Saccharomyces cer-         functional divergence in the quinone synthetase family of enzymes. Chem Biol 18:
    evisiae: Mechanism of α-aminoadipate reductase (Lys2) involves posttranslational        354–360.
    phosphopantetheinylation by Lys5. Biochemistry 38:6171–6177.                          27. Hai Y, Tang Y (2018) Biosynthesis of long-chain N-acyl amide by a truncated poly-
 6. Yu X, et al. (2016) Biosynthesis of strained piperazine alkaloid: Uncovering the concise        ketide synthase-nonribosomal peptide synthetase hybrid megasynthase in fungi. J
   pathway of herquline A. J Am Chem Soc 138:13529–13532.                    Am Chem Soc 140:1271–1274.
 7. Frost JW, Li K (1998) Synthesis of vanillin from glucose. J Am Chem Soc 120:10545–     28. Hermann JC, et al. (2007) Structure-based activity prediction for an enzyme of un-
    10546.                                                               known function. Nature 448:775–779. 8. Fraatz MA, et al. (2018) Biotechnological production of methyl-branched aldehydes. J     29. Zhao S, et al. (2013) Discovery of new enzymes and metabolic pathways by using                           CHEMISTRY
    Agric Food Chem 66:2387–2392.                                                              structure and genome context. Nature 502:698–702.
 9. Akhtar MK, Turner NJ, Jones PR (2013) Carboxylic acid reductase is a versatile enzyme     30. Ma JC, Dougherty DA (1997) The cation-π interaction. Chem Rev 97:1303–1324.
    for the conversion of fatty acids into fuels and chemical commodities. Proc Natl Acad     31. Dougherty DA (2013) The cation-π interaction. Acc Chem Res 46:885–893.
     Sci USA 110:87–92.                                                                       32. Schiefner A, et al. (2004) Cation-π interactions as determinants for binding of the
10. Sheppard MJ, Kunjapur AM, Prather KLJ (2016) Modular and selective biosynthesis of        compatible solutes glycine betaine and proline betaine by the periplasmic ligand-
    gasoline-range alkanes. Metab Eng 33:28–40.                                            binding protein ProX from Escherichia coli. J Biol Chem 279:5588–5596.
11. Carroll AL, Desai SH, Atsumi S (2016) Microbial production of scent and flavor com-     33. Taverna SD, Li H, Ruthenburg AJ, Allis CD, Patel DJ (2007) How chromatin-binding
    pounds. Curr Opin Biotechnol 37:8–15.                                             modules interpret histone modifications: Lessons from professional pocket pickers.
12. Watkins TN, et al. (January 18, 2018) Comparative transcriptomics of Aspergillus fu-       Nat Struct Mol Biol 14:1025–1040.
    migatus  strains upon exposure to human airway  epithelial  cells. Microb Ge-     34. Park Y-I, Gander JE (1998) Choline derivatives involved in osmotolerance of Penicil-
    nom10.1099/mgen.0.000154.                                                           lium fellutanum. Appl Environ Microbiol 64:273–278.
13. Takahashi H, et al. (2017) Global gene expression reveals stress-responsive genes in     35. Kadi N, Challis GL (2009) Chapter 17. Siderophore biosynthesis a substrate specificity
    Aspergillus fumigatus mycelia. BMC Genomics 18:942.                                      assay for nonribosomal peptide synthetase-independent siderophore synthetases
14. Dong Y, et al. (2015) Global genome and transcriptome analyses of Magnaporthe         involving trapping of acyl-adenylate intermediates with hydroxylamine. Methods
    oryzae epidemic isolate 98-06 uncover novel effectors and pathogenicity-related       Enzymol 458:431–457.
    genes, revealing gene gain and lose dynamics in genome evolution. PLoS Pathog     36. Mori N, Sano M, Tani Y, Yama H (1980) Purification and properties of sarcosine oxidase
    11:e1004801.                                                                   from Cylindrocarpon didymium M-1. Agric Biol Chem 44:1391–1397.
15. Rokas A, Wisecaver JH, Lind AL (2018) The birth, evolution and death of metabolic     37. Rumble JR, ed (2018–2019) CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics (CRC Press, Boca
   gene clusters in fungi. Nat Rev Microbiol 16:731–744.                                      Raton, FL), 99th Ed.
16. Gerlt JA (2017) Genomic enzymology: Web tools for leveraging protein family     38. Fan F, Germann MW, Gadda G (2006) Mechanistic studies of choline oxidase with
    sequence-function space and genome context to discover novel functions. Bio-        betaine aldehyde and its isosteric analogue 3,3-dimethylbutyraldehyde. Biochemistry
    chemistry 56:4293–4308.                                                               45:1979–1986.
17. Stachelhaus T, Mootz HD, Marahiel MA (1999) The specificity-conferring code of ad-     39. Park Y-I, Buszko ML, Gander JE (1999) Glycine betaine: Reserve form of choline in
    enylation domains in nonribosomal peptide synthetases. Chem Biol 6:493–505.                 Penicillium fellutanum in low-sulfate medium. Appl Environ Microbiol 65:1340–1342.
18. Challis GL, Ravel J, Townsend CA (2000) Predictive, structure-based model of amino     40. Kacprzak MM, Lewandowska  I, Matthews RG, Paszewski A (2003) Transcriptional
    acid recognition by nonribosomal peptide synthetase adenylation domains. Chem         regulation of methionine synthase by homocysteine and choline in Aspergillus ni-
    Biol 7:211–224.                                                                             dulans. Biochem J 376:517–524.
19. Bachmann BO, Ravel J (2009) In silico prediction of microbial secondary metabolic     41. Turgeon BG, Condon B, Liu J, Zhang N (2010) Protoplast transformation of filamen-
   pathways from DNA sequence data. Methods Enzymol 458:181–217.                       tous fungi. Methods Mol Biol 638:3–19.
20. Miyanaga A, Cieslak J, Shinohara Y, Kudo F, Eguchi T (2014) The crystal structure of     42. Markham P, Robson GD, Bainbridge BW, Trinci AP (1993) Choline: Its role in the
    the adenylation enzyme VinN reveals a unique β-amino acid recognition mechanism. J       growth of filamentous fungi and the regulation of mycelial morphology. FEMS Mi-
    Biol Chem 289:31448–31457.                                                                  crobiol Rev 10:287–300.
21. Niquille DL, et al. (2018) Nonribosomal biosynthesis of backbone-modified peptides.     43. Atkinson DE (1977) Cellular Energy Metabolism and Its Regulation (Academic, New
   Nat Chem 10:282–287.                                                                      York), pp 74–75.





Hai et al.                                                                            PNAS   | May 21, 2019   |  vol. 116   |  no. 21   |  10353